w^^e 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 

Abslracls  of 

Virginia  Land  Patents  and  Grants 

1623  -1800 


NELL  MARION  NUGENT 


353.3 


c 
W 


THE  UNIVERSITY 

OF  ILLINOIS 

LIBRARY 

N204o 

VI 


.'Lams  ?iisTC?.:cAi  mm 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2012  with  funding  from 

University  of  Illinois  Urbana-Champaign 


http://www.archive.org/details/cavalierspioneerOOnuge 


In  1619,  a  year  marked  by  several  important  events  in  the 
Colony,  including  the  assembling  of  the  first  General  As- 
sembly, the  London  Company  adopted  a  "Cote  for  Virginia'". 
The  coat-of-arms  has  been  a  puzzle  and  source  of  specula- 
tion to  every  historian  and  has  been  sometimes  confused  with 
the  proper  seal  of  the  Colony  itself.  It  is  found  as  a  book 
plate  or  frontispiece  in  nearly  all  of  the  printed  acts  and 
official  proceedings  of  the  Colonial  government.  It  appears 
in  Smith's  Generall  Historie  of  Virginia,  editions  1624  and 
1632 ;  in  Beverley's  History  of  Virginia,  in  several  issues  of 
the  Virginia  Gazette,  and  in  Stow's  Survey  of  London,  pub- 
lished in  1633.  It  was  changed  slightly  from  time  to  time 
to  make  the  quarterings  agree  with  the  arms  of  the  different 
reigning  houses,  and  after  the  union  of  England  and  Scot- 
land "quartam"  succeeded  "quintum"  in  the  motto.  The 
illustration  is  from  the  title  page  of  Merchants  of  Virginia 
in  the  Virginia  State  Library  and  the  colors  were  selected 
arbitrarily. 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 

AbStratts  of 
Virginia  Land  Patents  and  Grants 

1623-1800 


IN  FIVE  VOLUMES 


Abstracted  and  Indexed  by 

Nell  Marion  Nugent 

Virginia  Land  Office 
Richmond,  Va. 


Introduction  by 

Robert  Armistead  Stewart,  Ph.D. 


Patroness 

Agnes  Bernadine  Sitterding 


VOLUME  ONE 


RICHMOND,  VA.: 

Press  of  The  Dietz  Printing  Co. 

1934 


Copyright,  1934 

BY 

NELL  MARION  NUGENT 


All  Rights  Reserved 


Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America. 


a- 


IPebtcateb 
to 
,$ne$  Bcvnabtnc  &ittetbin$ 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 


General  Foreword:    Nell  Marion  Nugent page 


Introduction:    Robert  Armistead  Stewart 

Explanation 

Abstracts: 

Patent  Book  1,  Part  I 

Patent  Book  1,  Part  II 


Patent  Book  2 

Patent  Book  3 

Patent  Book  4 

Patent  Book  5 

Greatest  Number  of  Acres  in  a  Single  Patent  (Table) 

Index  to  Introduction 

General  Index  

Addenda     


xi 
xxxv 

1 
67 
153 
227 
321 
439 

569 

571 

577 
767 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


Cover: 

The  Coat-of-Arms  on  the  cover  has  been  adopted  as  the  symbol  of  the  entire 
work  and  will  be  used  to  identify  the  five  volumes  as  typically  Virginian. 
The  escutcheon  is  quartered  with  a  ship,  scroll,  tobacco  leaf  and  dogwood 
blossom,  crested  by  the  Indian  maiden  Pocahontas.  The  supporters  represent 
a  cavalier  and  a  pioneer.    The  colors  were  selected  arbitrarily. 

Coat-of-Arms  in  Colors Frontispiece 

Maps: 

1607    and    1611 Front  endsheets 

1619 page  96 

1622 page  224 

1632 page  352 

1634   and    1652 Rear  endsheets 

Chart: 

Counties  formed  from  Shires page  xxxiv 

Halftones: 

Early  Colonial  Seals page  ix 

George  Sandys  Patent page  32 

Nicholas  Martiau  Patent pages  160-161 

Example  of  mutilated  page  in  Patent  Books page  288 

Example  of  difference  in  recordation page  448 

David  Williamson  Patent page  544 


Early  Colonial  Seals 


Seal  of  the  Virginia  Company 


Seal  of  Virginia  after  the  Restoration 


The  Seal  of  the  Supreme  Council  in  England  was  closely 
identified  with  the  settlement  in  Virginia.  The  obverse  of 
the  seal  on  the  left  is  from  The  Seals  of  Virginia  by  Edward 
S.  Evans,  and  was  taken  from  Egerton  Mss.  2,087  fo.  3  in 
the  British  Museum.  It  is  from  a  certificate  of  payment  for  a 
share  in  a  venture  to  Virginia.  The  reverse  of  the  seal  on  the 
right  has  been  retouched  to  conform  as  near  as  possible  to  the 
original  and  was  taken  from  Neill's  Virginia  Vetusta,  p.  4. 


The  lack  of  a  Seal  in  the  Colony  extended  over  the  period 
of  the  Commonwealth  and  over  part  of  the  first  year  in  the 
reign  of  Charles  II,  who  was  restored  to  the  throne  in  May. 
1660.  Less  than  a  year  later  a  new  seal  was  devised,  en- 
graved and  sent  to  the  Colony.  The  illustration  is  from 
Evans'  The  Seals  of  Virginia.  In  the  Virginia  Historical 
Society  collections  there  is  among  the  Ludwell  Mss.  a  patent, 
dated  27th  of  October,  1663,  bearing  this  seal.  Other  speci- 
mens in  the  Virginia  State  Library,  are  a  patent  granted  by 
Sir  William  Berkeley  to  Thomas  Bushrod  in  Westmoreland 
County,  dated  2nd  July,  1669,  and  a  patent  granted  by  Sir 
William  Berkeley,  dated  13th  of  March,  1667,  to  William 
Dudley  in  Lancaster. 


GENERAL  FOREWORD 

God  sifted  a  whole  nation  that  He  might 
send  His  choice  grain  into  the  Wilderness. 

NTO  the  wilderness  of  the  new  world  I  am  certain  God 
sent  the  choice  grain  of  many  nations,  and  it  is  upon  the 
fruit  of  this  planting  my  thoughts  dwell  as  I  lay  aside 
my  completed  work  for  this  first  volume.  I  wish  everyone 
interested  in  the  foundation  and  preservation  of  these 
United  States  could  stand  in  the  shadows  of  the  Old  Church  at  Jamestown 
and  the  Old  Rock  at  Plymouth  and,  gazing  seaward,  visualize  those  little 
ships  as  they  approached  the  shores  of  this  land  of  promise.  The  emotion 
I  feel  is  as  deep  and  my  appreciation  as  sincere  when  I  go  to  Plymouth 
as  when  I  stand  on  Jamestown  Island.  Consecrated  by  the  blood  of  noble 
men  and  courageous  women,  'tis  hallowed  ground.  By  whatever  name 
they  are  called — Cavalier,  Pilgrim  or  Puritan — they  were  all  Pioneers,  and 
to  those  dauntless  souls  who  made  history  in  the  memorable  years  1607 
and  1620  we  owe  a  debt  of  eternal  gratitude.  Numerous  names  and 
deeds  have  escaped  recordation,  due  in  many  instances  to  the  destruction 
of  records,  but  it  is  hoped  these  Abstracts  will,  in  a  small  measure, 
perpetuate  the  indomitable  spirit  of  these  pathfinders  of  the  sea  and  those 
who  later  blazed  trails  across  the  western  frontier — the  inspiration  and 
keynote  of  American  progress  and  independence. 

In  handling  these  old  manuscript  volumes  one  realizes  there  is  much 
of  romance  and  tragedy,  as  well  as  of  history  and  genealogy,  bound 
within  them.  There  is  evidence  of  the  ravages  of  time  and  mute  testimony 
of  mutilation  by  persons  unaware  of  their  value  and  true  significance. 
A  brief  summary  of  the  Land  Office  records  to  1800  is  as  follows: 
45  volumes  or  24,983  pages  of  Colonial  Patents;  22y2  volumes  or  8,371 
pages  of  Northern  Neck  Deeds  (issued  by  Thomas,  Lord  Fairfax,  begin- 
ning in  1690)  ;  67  volumes  or  47,769  pages  of  Commonwealth  Grants 
(beginning  in  1779)  and  ll/2  volumes  or  4,782  pages  of  Northern  Neck 


x.  General  Foreword 


Grants  subsequent  to  the  Revolutionary  War,  making  a  total  of  142 
manuscript  volumes,  representing  85,905  pages. 

Renewals  of  original  patents  by  the  Regal  Government  is  often  con- 
fusing and  the  tendency  to  accept  each  entry  as  a  new  patent  is  so 
prevalent,  attention  is  called  to  renewals,  as  cited  in  these  Abstracts,  which 
greatly  reduces  the  actual  number  of  acres  to  individuals  and  indicates 
many  conveyances  were  merely  confirmations  of  earlier  titles.  No  attempt 
will  be  made  to  approximate  the  acreage  granted  by  the  Commonwealth, 
as  overlapping  grants  create  complications,  an  explanation  of  which 
requires  the  combined  skill  and  ingenuity  of  lawyers  and  engineers. 
Alexander  Wolcott  and  Robert  Morris  were  two  of  a  great  number  to 
whom  the  State  of  Virginia,  in  the  post-Revolutionary  period,  issued 
paper  title  to  enormous  tracts  of  land.  Their  grants  range  from  1,000  to 
350,000  acres,  aggregating,  respectively,  1,012,500  and  1,590,560  acres. 
For  those  who  are  not  familiar  with  the  political  subdivisions  of  the 
State,  and  those  who  may  never  see  the  original  records,  maps  of  historical 
significance  are  used  as  end  sheets  and  inserted  in  these  volumes,  as  well 
as  photographic  reproductions  of  patents  and  grants. 

Words  cannot  express  my  appreciation  to  Miss  Sitterding,  my 
Patroness;  to  the  Honourable  George  Campbell  Peery,  Governor  of 
Virginia,  who  wrote  a  personal  letter  to  the  Clerks  of  the  various  county 
courts,  I  am  grateful  for  the  assurance  that  none  of  the  early  Patent  Books 
are  filed  in  said  courts.  To  Mr.  John  W.  Garner,  of  Falls  Church,  Dr. 
Robert  Armistead  Stewart,  Dr.  Earl  G.  Swem,  Dr.  W.  J.  Showalter, 
Dr.  Thomas  Perkins  Abernethy,  Honourable  Wilmer  L.  Hall,  State 
Librarian,  and  The  Dietz  Press  I  am  deeply  appreciative  of  their  interest 
and  co-operation. 

Richmond, 

September  1,  1934.  Nell  M.  Nugent. 


INTRODUCTION 

jN  the  series  of  volumes  of  Land  Patents  deposited  in  the 
Virginia  Land  Office  in  the  Capitol  Building,  Richmond, 
the  Commonwealth  possesses  one  of  the  great  historical 
treasures  of  America — the  record  of  land  granted  to 
"Adventurers  and  Planters"  from  overseas  and  in  the 
course  of  time  to  native-born  Virginians  and  others,  extending,  apart 
from  a  hiatus  of  two  years,  from  the  year  1624  (with  a  few  grants 
surviving  from  an  earlier  period)  to  the  opening  of  the  nineteenth  century. 
Through  the  labors  of  the  Custodian  of  the  Virginia  Land  Archives, 
Mrs.  Nell  M.  Nugent,  eminently  qualified  for  the  tremendous  task  by 
reason  of  her  early  legal  training  and  her  experience  with  court  records, 
these  invaluable  documents  are  now  made  generally  accessible  to  the 
student  of  history  and  to  the  genealogist,  in  the  form  of  abstracts  contain- 
ing all  names  of  persons  and  of  places,  dates  and  land  bounds  recorded 
therein,  with  the  inclusion  in  their  entirety  of  certain  patents  in  order  to 
exhibit  legal  formulae  of  grants  varying  with  succeeding  governments 
and  administrations.  To  this  wealth  of  material  a  comprehensive  Index 
furnishes  the  key. 

The  fruit  of  devoted  industry  and  zeal,  this  work  must  challenge 
attention  as  a  contribution  of  the  first  rank  to  the  published  historical 
documents  concerning  the  earliest  permanent  British  plantation  in  America 
and  the  Commonwealth  that  emerged  from  it. 

The  Historical  Background 

On  April  10,  1606  Letters  Patents  were  granted  by  James  the  First 
King  of  England,  &c.  to  Sir  Thomas  Gates,  Sir  George  Somers,  Knights, 
Richard  Hackluit,  Clerk,  Prebendary  of  Westminster,  Edward-Maria 
Wingfield,  and  others  *  *  *  adventurers  of  and  for  our  City  of  London 
*  *  *  for  two  several  Colonies  and  Plantations  to  be  made  in  Virginia 
and  other  parts  and  Territories  of  America.* 

♦Herring's  "Statutes  at  Large,"  Vol.  I,  p.   59. 


xii.  Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 

A  governing  body  was  established  in  England  called  "Our  Council  of 
Virginia"  with  an  approved  seal,  which  was  to  designate  the  local  Council 
in  the  colony,  And  it  was  further  decreed,  "that  all  and  every  the  persons 
being  our  subjects,  which  shall  dwell  and  inhabit  within  every  or  any  of 
the  said  several  colonies  and  plantations  and  every  of  their  children,  which 
shall  happen  to  be  born  within  any  of  the  limits  and  precincts  of  the  said 
several  colonies  and  plantations,  shall  have  and  enjoy  all  liberties,  fran- 
chises, and  immunities,  within  any  of  our  other  dominions,  to  all  intents 
and  purposes,  as  if  they  had  been  abiding  and  born,  within  the  realm  of 
England,  or  any  other  of  our  said  dominions." 

Under  the  power  of  this  charter  and  through  the  enterprise  of  the 
adventurers  resulted  the  sailing  of  the  Susan  Constant,  the  Godspeed,  and 
the  Discovery,  the  arrival  at  Jamestown  on  May  13,  1607,  and  the  plant- 
ing of  one  hundred  settlers.  Eight  or  nine  months  afterwards  came  the 
"First  Supply"  of  one  hundred  and  twenty  colonists  in  the  John  &  Francis 
and  the  Phenix,  and  in  October,  1608  arrived  the  "Second  Supply,"  the 
Mary  Margett,  with  sixty  persons  "mostly  gentlemen,  few  or  no  tradesmen 
except  some  Polanders  to  Make  Pitch,  tarre,  potashes  &c.  *  *  *" 

The  Second  Charter,*  signed  and  sealed  on  May  23,  1609,  granted  to 
the  adventurers  mentioned  in  the  First  Charter  and  to  others  the  formation 
of  "one  body  or  commonalty  perpetual,  to  be  known  as  the  Treasurer 
and  Company  of  Adventurers  of  the  City  of  London  for  the  First  Colony 
of  Virginia" — the  London  Company.  Under  this  reorganization  of  1609 
the  administration  of  local  affairs  was  delegated  to  a  governor  and  a 
Council  to  reside  in  the  Colony.  Sir  Thomas  Smythe  became  the  first 
Treasurer  of  the  Company. 

"Nominated  as  Planters  were  those  that  go  there  in  person  to  dwell 
themselves  and  Adventurers  those  who  adventure  their  mony  and  go  not 
in  person  and  both  do  make  the  members  of  one  Colony."  A  single  share 
in  the  Company  was  rated  at  twelve  pounds  ten  shillings. 

The  presidents  of  the  Virginia  council  under  the  First  Charter  were 
Edward-Maria  Wingfield,  Mathew  Scrivener,  Capt.  John  Smith,  and  George 
Percy,  son  of  the  eighth  Earl  of  Northumberland.  In  later  days  John  Rolfe, 
husband  of  Pocahontas,  voiced  an  objection  to  this  system  of  government: 
"The  beginning  of  this  plantation  was  governed  by  a  president  and  coun- 
cill,  aristocratically  and  in  this  government  happened  all  the  miserie."f 

*For  Second  Charter  see  Hening's  Statutes  at  Large,  Vol.  I,  p.  80. 
f'Genesis  of  the   United   States,"   by  Alexander   Brown,   Vol.   I,   p.   206. 


Introduction  xiii. 


Under  the  second  charter  Sir  Thomas  Gates,  who  "had  the  honour 
to  all  posterity  to  be  the  first  named  in  his  Majestys  Pattent  of  graunt  in 
Virginia,"  was  chosen  the  first  and  absolute  governor.  In  June,  1609  he 
left  England  in  a  fleet  of  seven  ships,  known  as  the  "Third  Supply," 
carrying  about  500  settlers.  The  ships  were  unhappily  scattered  by  a 
tempest,  and  Sir  Thomas'  own  vessel  wrecked  on  the  coast  of  Bermuda. 
The  other  six  ships  of  the  fleet  proceeded  to  Virginia,  and  reached  the 
settlement  in  safety.  But,  after  some  months,  all  the  colonists  were  "in  the 
extremity  of  famine"  when  "unexpected,  yet  happily  arrived  Sir  Thomas 
Gates  &  Sir  George  Somers  in  two  small  Barques,  which  they  built  in  the 
Sommer  Islands  after  the  wreake  of  the  Sea  adventure  whereon  they  set 
forth  from  Englande,  with  them  one  hundred  persons  barely  provided  of 
vittel  for  themselves." 

The  new  comers,  on  their  arrival  on  May  20,  1611,  discovered  no 
more  than  sixty  of  the  settlers  alive  "most  famished  and  at  pointe  of 
death,  of  whom  many  soon  died."  In  1609  Capt.  Smith  had  "divided 
into  three  partes  and  dispersed  about  for  their  better  releife,  The 
first  under  command  of  Captain  Francis  West  to  seat  at  the  head  of 
the  River ;  a  second  under  command  of  Captain  John  Smith,  the  President, 
at  James  Towne,  &  the  other,  with  Capt.  John  Martin  in  the  River  at 
Nansamun."* 

In  the  year  1610,  however,  Gates,  despairing  of  maintaining  the 
Colony,  resolved  with  the  consent  of  the  Council  "to  embarque  themselves 
&  this  poor  remainder  of  the  Collonye,  in  those  two  pinnaces  [in  which 
Gates  and  Somers  had  arrived]  &  two  other  small  Barques  then  in  the 
River  to  sett  saile  for  Newfoundland  where  they  might  relieve  their  wants 
&  procure  one  safer  passage  for  Englande  *  *  *  but  when  we  had  sailed 
down  the  river  about  twelve  miles  we  espied  a  boat  which  afterwards  we 
understoode  came  from  the  right  Honourable  Lord  La  Ware,  who  was 
then  arrived  at  Point  Comfort  with  three  good  shipps,  wherein  he  brought 
two  hundred  and  fifty  persons  with  some  store  of  provisions  *  *  *  Sir 
Thomas  Gates  understandinge  that  his  Lordship  was  arrived  with  a  com- 
mission from  the  Company  to  be  Governor  &  Capt  Genl  of  Virginia  and 
had  brought  men  &  provisions  for  the  subsistinge  &  advancinge  of  the 

*Breife  Declaration  of  the  Plantation  of  Virginia  duringe  the  first  twelve  yeares  when  Sir 
Thomas  Smith  was  Governor  of  the  Companie,  &  downe  to  this  present  tyme.  By  the  Ancient 
Planters   nowe   alive  in   Virginia.    Colonial   Records  of   Virginia,    pp.    69-83. 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Plantation,  he  the  very  next  day  to  the  grief e  of  all  his  Company  (only 
except  Capt.  John  Martin)  as  winde  &  weather  gave  leave,  retorned  his 
whole  company  with  charge  to  take  possession  again  of  those  poor 
ruinated  habitations  at  James  Towne." 

The  new  Governor  devoted  himself  to  directing  the  repair  and  forti- 
fication of  the  settlement,  but,  balked  by  the  Indians  in  his  plan  to  dispatch 
an  expedition  to  the  mountains  in  search  of  gold  and  silver,  he  departed, 
broken  in  health,  for  the  West  Indies,  whence  he  shortly  afterwards 
returned  to  England.  With  only  Jamestown  and  Point  Comfort  held  by 
the  settlers  Capt.  George  Percy  administered  as  deputy  governor.  About 
a  fortnight  after  De  La  Warr's  departure  arrived  in  Virginia  a  small  ship 
called  the  Hercules  with  some  thirty  persons  and  provisions. 

After  Percy  left  Virginia  on  April  22,  1612  Gates,  Dale,  Yeardley 
and  Argall  successively  held  the  post  of  deputy  governor. 

On  March  27,  1611  Sir  Thomas  Dale  left  Land's  End  for  Virginia, 
with  300  people  in  three  ships  and  three  carvels,  and  carrying  domestic 
animals  and  supplies.  In  the  judgment  of  the  London  Company  he  "not 
only  adventured  his  person  in  that  service  in  a  time  of  the  greatest 
difficulty  but  alsoe  being  at  a  great  charge  in  furthering  the  action  and 
furnishing  him  selfe,  the  Council  of  Virginia  at  their  meeting  on  the 
18th  of  this  instant  *  *  *  agree  that  his  person  shall  be  Rated  at  the 
Summe  of  Seven  hundred  pounds  and  that  he  the  said  Sr  Thomas  Dale 
his  heires  Exors.  &  Admrs.  or  assignes  shall  have  ratably  according  to  the 
said  Summe  his  &  their  full  part  of  all  such  Lands  Tenements  and 
hereditaments  as  shall  from  time  to  time  be  their  recovered  planted  and 
inhabited   (&c)    *   *  *  Feb.  25,  [1610/11]."* 

Dale,  who  served  as  deputy  governor  until  August  1,  1611,  and,  after 
Gates  left  the  Colony,  from  March,  1614  to  May,  1616,  reached  Fort 
Algernourne,  or  Point  Comfort,  on  May  22,  1611.  Having  left  James 
Davis  as  captain  of  the  fort  at  Point  Comfort,  Dale  proceeded  to  restore 
forts  Charles  and  Henry  at  the  mouth  of  Hampton  River,  and  then  went 
to  Jamestown. 

After  effecting  improvements  at  the  first  settlement  he  removed  about 
Michaelmas  with  three  hundred  persons  for  the  building  of  Henrico  Town, 
otherwise  Henricopolis  (the  present  Dutch  Gap).  During  his  adminis- 
tration  also  occurred  the  planting  of  Bermuda  Hundred,   Charles   City 


♦"Records  of  the  Virginia  Company,"   November   17,    1619.    Vol.   I,   p.   267. 


Introduction  xv. 


Hundred,  Curls,  Coxendale,  and  Shirley  Hundred.  He  undertook  the 
setting  up  of  salt  works.  But  all  his  achievements  resulted  from  submit- 
ting the  people  to  measures  of  uncommon  severity — a  species  of  martial 
law  that  found  favor  with  Sir  Thomas  Gates.  The  London  Company 
likewise  was  not  unappreciative :  "Sir  Thomas  Dale  building  upon  those 
foundacons  [laid  by  Sir  Thomas  Gates]  with  great  &  constant  severity, 
reclaymed  almost  miraculously  those  idle  and  disordered  people  and  re- 
duced them  to  labour  and  an  honest  fashion  of  life,  and  proceeding  with 
great  zeale  to  the  good  of  this  Company,  set  up  the  Common  Garden  to 
yield  them  a  standing  revennue,  placed  servants  upon  it,  as  also  upon  other 
Publique  workes  for  the  Companies  use,  Established  an  Annuall  rent  of 
Corne  for  the  ffarmers,  Of  Tribute  Corne  from  the  Barbarians,  together 
with  a  great  stock  of  Kine,  Goates,  and  other  Cattle,  being  the  goodes  of 
the  Companie  for  the  service  of  the  Publique,  which  hath  since  beene 
the  occasion  of  drawing  so  many  perticuler  Plantacons  to  seate  in  Virginia 
upon  hope  and  promise  of  plenty  of  Corne  and  Catle  to  be  lent  them 
from  the  Publique,  for  their  ease  and  benefitt  upon  their  first  arrivall, 
But  since  their  times  all  these  publique  provisions  havinge  beene  utterly 
laid  wast  by  such  meanes  as  hereafter  in  due  time  shall  appeare." 

However,  despite  all  Dale's  activities,  only  three  hundred  persons 
were  living  in  Virginia  and  his  new  town  of  Henricopolis  was  already 
falling  into  decay  at  the  time  of  his  recall  in  1616. 

According  to  the  "Breife  Declaration,"  "The  supplies  sent  out  of 
England  while  Sir  Thomas  Gates  and  Sir  Thomas  Dale  governed  were 
these:  a  small  barque  called  the  John  and  Francis,  which  brought  few 
men  and  less  victual ;  the  next  a  small  ship  called  the  Sarah,  with  the  like 
number  of  men  and  victuall,  the  next  a  ship  called  the  Tresorer,  wherein 
Captain  Samuel  Argoll,  bringinge  with  him  to  the  number  of  fiftie  good 
men,  which  ship  and  men  were  wholly  imployed  in  Trade  and  other 
services  for  relevinge  of  the  Collonye;  the  next  ship,  called  the  Elizabeth, 
and  with  about  thirteen  persons,  for  them  little  provision;  the  next  the 
same  Elizabeth  came  againe,  with  some  small  store  of  provisions  only;  in 
her  Sir  Thomas  Gates  went  for  Englande  [April,  1614],  leavinge  the 
government  with  Sir  Thomas  Dale.   *    *    * 

"At  Michaelmas  following  arrived  a  small  ship  called  the  Susan  her 
lading  (being  the  first  Magazin)  consistinge  of  some  necessarye  pro- 
visions of  clothing." 


xvi.  Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 

George  Yeardley  succeeded  to  the  deputy  governorship  and  continued 
for  a  year  "under  whom  the  Colony  lived  in  peace  and  best  plentye  that 
ever  it  was  to  that  time." 

Yeardley  was  followed  by  Samuel  Argall,  who  continued  until  April 
10,  1619.  This  period  was  marked  by  the  planting  of  the  settlements  of 
Argalls  Gift,  Martin  Brandon,  Smith's  (later  Southampton)  Hundred, 
Weyanoke,  Flower  de  Hundred,  Martins  Hundred  and  Maycock  Hundred. 

Lord  De  La  Warr  died  at  sea  on  June  7,  1618,  when  he  was  on  his 
way  to  take  over  the  control  of  the  Colony  from  Argall,  who  had  rendered 
himself  obnoxious  to  the  Virginia  Company.  Owing  to  this  fatality 
Argall  retained  his  office  until  the  arrival  of  Yeardley  from  England. 
When  he  closed  his  administration  the  "Forts,  Towns,  and  Plantations" 
in  Virginia  were  "James  Citty,  Henrico,  Charles  City  and  Hundred, 
Shirley  Hundred,  Arrahattock,  Martin  Brandon  and  Kiccoughtan,  all  of 
which  were  but  poorly  housed  and  manned." 

Yeardley  left  England  on  January  19,  1619,  but  owing  to  "sore 
weather"  did  not  reach  his  destination  until  April  19,  1619.  With  him  he 
brought  the  Instructions  of  the  London  Company  dated  November  18, 
161 8  and,  among  other  directions,  their  commission  appointing  "300 
Acres  of  Land  to  be  sett  out  for  the  Governor  so  to  ease  the  Company 
henceforward  of  all  charge  in  mayntayning  him:  1200  Acres  of  Land  to 
be  the  Common  Land  of  the  Company  vizt  three  thousand  in  each  of  the 
ifower  old  Burroughs- 1000-acres  of  Land  for  the  university  to  be  planted 
at  Henrico;  of  which  100  for  the  Colledge  for  the  conversion  of  Infidells; 
the  next  care  was  the  placing  tenants  upon  these  lands." 

In  London,  on  April  28,  little  more  than  a  week  after  Yeardley  had 
reached  Virginia  "at  a  Quarter  Court  for  Virginia  at  Sir  Thomas  Smiths 
Howse  in  Philpott  Lane"  Sir  Thomas  Smythe,  *Treasurer  since  the  for- 
mation of  the  Company,  resigned  on  the  plea  of  his  complete  occupation 
by  new  official  duties  but  in  greater  likelihood  though  the  pressure  of  two 
parties  in  the  Company  combining  to  displace  him.  Over  two  other 
contestants  Sir  Edwin  Sandys  was  elected  by  a  large  majority  to  succeed 
Smythe  as  Treasurer.  Under  the  new  control  pronounced  changes  were 
made  in  the  previous  system;  a  colonist  was  now  assigned  a  divident  of 
land  and  conceded  a  share  in  the  government. 


v  ^  .°r-  TheLanswer  of  the  General  Assembly  in  Virginia  to  a  Declaration  of  the  state  of 
the  Lolome  in  the  12  years  of  Sr  Thomas  Smiths  Government,  exhibited  by  Alderman  Johnson 
and  others     see  NeilPs  "History  of  the  Virginia  Company  of  London,"   pp.  407-411. 


Introduction  xvii. 


Among  the  projects  under  the  new  order  was  one  of  November  3, 
1619  duly  carried  into  effect,  except  in  the  matter  of  number:  "Lastly 
he  wished  that  a  fit  hundredth  might  be  sent  of  woemen,  Maides  young 
and  uncorrupt  to  make  wives  to  the  Inhabitants  and  by  that  meanes  to 
make  them  more  setled  &  lesse  moveable  *  *  *  These  women  if  they  marry 
to  the  publique  farmers,  to  be  transported  at  the  charge  of  the  Company ; 
If  otherwise,  then  those  that  take  them  to  wife  to  pay  the  said  Company 
their  charges  of  transportation." 

Shortly  after  his  arrival  Governor  Yeardley  called  a  representative 
Assembly  to  convene  at  Jamestown,  the  first  legislative  body  to  meet  on 
American  soil.  And  this  year  1619  is  also  memorable  through  the  impor- 
tation, in  a  Dutch  ship,  of  the  first  negroes  into  the  Colony. 

Not  all  Sir  George  Yeardley' s  acts  met  with  approval  by  the  Company 
in  England.  When  Mr.  Markham  noted  to  the  court  a  grant  passed  unto 
him  by  Sir  George  Yeardley  provided  with  the  seale  of  the  Colony  on  con- 
dition that  he  compounded  with  Opachankano,  and  procured  a  confir- 
mation within  two  years  from  the  Company,  the  Council  emphatically 
affirmed  that  by  the  Kings  Letters  Patents,  no  other  but  the  Company  in 
London  and  that  in  the  Quarter  Court  had  the  right  to  dispose  of  land 
in  Virginia,  and  the  Governor  of  Virginia  had  merely  the  power  of  a 
Ministerial  officer  "to  sett  out  to  every  man  his  propper  divident  either 
by  direction  from  hence,  or  to  such  as  had  acquired  it  there  by  purchase 
or  service  and  therein  cheifely  to  respect  the  auncient  Adventurers  and 
Planters,  with  authority  also  to  passe  the  said  Grants  under  the  Collonies 
Seale,  if  they  did  desire  it,  but  not  to  make  an  absolute  Graunt." 

The  Company  also  condemned  "the  very  dishonorable  compounding 
with  Opechankano  whereby  a  Sovereignty  of  that  heathen  Infidell  was 
acknowledged,  and  the  Companies  Title  thereby  much  infringed.  It  was 
also  reputed  a  fraudulent  deed  unto  the  Grauntee,  and  of  purpose  onely  to 
drawe  a  ffee  from  him,  wch  by  report  is  very  excessive,  in  that  kinde, 
there  beinge  no  lesse  than  2011  waight  of  Tobacco  or  311  in  money 
demaunded  by  the  Secretary  there  fore  every  such  private  divident  of  50: 
or  100:  acres  passed  under  the  Seale  of  the  Colony  *  *  *"* 

When  Yeardley  retired  from  the  governorship  on  November  18,  1621, 
to  become  a  member  of  the  Council  in  Virginia,  the  population  of  the 

•Records  of  the  Virginia  Company,   Vol.  II,   pp.   94-95. 


xviii.  Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 

Colony  was  estimated  at  1,200  people,  an  increase  of  about  850  since  the 
departure  of  Sir  Thomas  Dale. 

To  the  new  governor  and  captain  general,  Sir  Francis  Wyatt,  elected 
at  a  Court  of  the  London  Company  on  January  29,  1620/21,  authori- 
zation was  extended  to  govern  "as  fully  and  amply  as  any  Governor  and 
Council  resident  there  at  any  time  within  the  space  of  five  years  now  last 
past  might  performe  or  execute."  Sir  Francis  arrived  in  Virginia  in 
October,  1621,  and  with  him  came  his  brother,  the  Rev.  Haute  Wyatt, 
William  Clayborne  with  an  appointment  as  surveyor-general  of  the 
Colony,  Dr.  John  Pott,  physician-general,  and  the  Colony's  new  treasurer, 
George  Sandys,  who  was  to  compose  in  Virginia  portions  of  his  noted 
translation  of  the  "Metamorphoses"  of  Ovid. 

Sir  Francis  Wyatt's  commission  defined  the  powers  of  the  Governor 
and  Council,  and  permitted  the  people  to  choose  Burgesses  to  represent 
them  in  a  popular  Assembly.*  But  at  this  time  when  reforms  showed 
promise  of  fruitfulness  occurred  the  most  cruel  blow  that  the  Colony  had 
as  yet  experienced.  On  March  22,  1621/2  the  Indians,  under  the  leader- 
ship of  Opechancanough  (Opechankano) ,  brother  of  Powhatan,  massacred 
347  of  the  1,240  white  inhabitants  of  the  Colony.  Jamestown  and  the 
neighboring  settlements  were  only  saved  by  the  timely  warning  of  the 
Christian  Indian  Chanco.  Yet  even  after  this  "deadly  stroake  given  to 
the  great  amazement  and  mine  of  the  state"  emigration  from  England 
went  on  undeterred,  in  the  spirit  voiced  by  Mr.  Truelove  and  his  Asso- 
ciates on  July  17,  1623:  "no  whitt  discouraged  with  the  late  Massacre  of 
the  English  by  the  treacherous  Indians  they  were  resolved  to  set  forth  for 
their  Plantations."  f 

And  the  stricken  Colony  was  soon  to  have  news  of  radical  changes 
from  over  the  water.  Largely  as  an  outcome  of  the  incessant  and  violent 
attacks  by  the  former  Treasurer,  Sir  Thomas  Smythe,  allied  with  the  Earl 
of  Warwick,  upon  the  administration  of  the  London  Company  by  Sir 
Edwin  Sandys  and  the  Earl  of  Southampton,  the  Charter  of  the  Company 
was,  at  the  instance  of  the  King,  abrogated  by  the  Courts  in  June,  1624, 
and  as  a  consequence  the  administration  of  the  Colony  and  the  disposal  of 
its  land  came  under  the  immediate  control  of  the  Crown.  The  extinction  of 
the  London  Company  gave  little  satisfaction  to  Governor  Wyatt  and  other 

*For  "Ordinance  and  Constitution  of  the  Treasurer  and  Council  and  Company  in  Virginia 
for  a  Council  of  State  and  another  Council  to  be  called  the  General  Assembly  in  Virginia"  see 
Hening's   Statutes   at  Large.    Vol.    I,   p.    118. 

tRecords  of  the  Virginia  Company,  Vol.  II,  p.   93. 


Introduction  xix. 


men  of  prominence  in  Virginia,  who  expressed  their  remonstrance,  over 
their  signatures,  in  "The  Tragicall  Relacon,"  but  without  avail.  However, 
Charles  the  First,  who  ascended  the  throne  on  March  27,  1625,  issued 
his  proclamation  on  May  13  after  his  accession,  declaring  that  it  was  not 
his  purpose  to  "take  away  or  impeach  the  particular  interest  of  any  private 
planter  or  adventurer,  nor  to  alter  the  same  otherwise  than  should  be 
necessary  for  the  good  of  the  public."* 

Sir  Francis  Wyatt  continued  to  serve  as  governor  until,  at  his  own 
request,  he  was  relieved  of  his  office  in  May,  1626.  Sir  George  Yeardley 
once  more  became  governor  and  continued  until  his  death,  whereupon 
Capt.  Francis  West  succeeded  as  deputy  governor  and  held  office  until 
March  2,  1629,  when  Dr.  John  Pott,  who  had  come  to  Virginia  as  physi- 
cian-general, was  elected  by  the  Council  West's  successor.  The  next  gover- 
nor was  the  contentious  Sir  John  Harvey,  during  whose  tenure  of  office 
Kent  Island  and  the  shores  of  the  York  were  first  settled.  After  he 
had  deposed  Claiborne  from  his  office  as  secretary  of  state  on  account  of 
the  latter's  clash  with  Lord  Baltimore  Harvey  was  himself  deposed  from 
the  governorship  by  the  council,  with  the  concurrence  of  the  Assembly. 
And  Capt.  John  West  acted  as  deputy  governor  from  April  28,  1635 
until  January  19,  1637,  when  Harvey  was  restored  by  act  of  the  King,  who 
proceeded  to  take  action  against  the  Governor's  deposers  on  the  ground 
that  they  had  proceeded  as  if  by  "an  act  of  regal  authority." 

Harvey,  on  his  return  to  Jamestown,  improved  his  capital  by  the 
addition  of  about  twelve  new  houses  and  planned  towards  erecting  a 
church  and  a  statehouse  of  brick,  but  his  administration  was  not  of  suffi- 
cient duration  to  carry  all  his  plans  into  effect.  In  consequence  of  his 
persistent  mischief-making  and  tyranny  Harvey  was  removed  by  royal 
decree,  and  in  August,  1639,  Sir  Francis  Wyatt  again  became  governor  and 
continued  in  the  office  until  the  coming  of  Berkeley  in  1642. 

Sir  William  Berkeley,  commissioned  by  the  King  governor  of  Virginia 
on  April  2,  1641,  with  the  assurance  that  there  would  be  no  restoration  of 
the  charter  (a  measure  agitated  in  Wyatt' s  administration),  reached  the 
colony  in  February,  1642.  About  two  months  after  the  second  Indian 
massacre,  which  occurred  on  April  18,  1644,  Berkeley  returned  to  England, 
leaving  as  deputy  governor  his  secretary,  the  Councillor  Richard  Kemp. 

In  the  year  of  the  execution  of  King  Charles  and  the  establishment  of 


'See   "Virginia  Magazine  of  History   and  Biography,"   Vol.   II,   p.    132. 


xx.  Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 

the  Commonwealth  in  England  (1649)  appeared  the  "Perfect  Description 
of  Virginia,"  with  the  following  information:  "There  are  about  15,000 
English  in  Virginia  and  of  Negros  brought  thither  three  hundred  good 
servants.  About  29  sail  a  year  trade  with  them  and  return  home  laden  in 
March.  Most  of  the  Masters  of  Ships  and  Mariners  also  have  plantations 
there  and  houses  and  servants  *  *  *  About  a  thousand  English  are  seated 
on  the  Accomac  Shore  by  Cape  Charles  where  Captain  Yeardley  is  now 
chief  commander  (now  commonly  called  the  county  of  Northampton) 
*  *  *    There  are  twelve  counties  in  Virginia  and  20  churches." 

During  the  Civil  War  in  Britain  a  considerable  number  of  Royalists 
emigrated  to  Virginia,  which  held  steadfast  to  the  old  regime  until  the 
arrival  of  the  Parliamentary  fleet.  Then,  without  attempting  resistance, 
Virginia  agreed  to  an  accommodation.  Berkeley  retired  to  his  country  estate 
"Greenspring,"  and  on  April  30,  1652  the  Puritan  Richard  Bennett,  of 
Nansimond  County,  who  had  been  named  by  Parliament  as  one  of  the 
commissioners  to  effect  the  reduction  of  Virginia,  succeeded  to  the 
governorship. 

Edward  Digges,  the  second  governor  under  the  Commonwealth, 
administered  the  affairs  of  the  Colony  from  March  31,  1655  until  March 
13,  1658.  Digges  was  followed  by  Samuel  Mathews,  of  "Denbigh,' 
Warwick  County.  As  a  result  of  Governor  Mathews'  contention  that  the 
Council  possessed  the  authority  to  dissolve  the  Assembly,  both  Governor 
and  Council  were  deposed,  but  reinstated  on  their  agreement  to  take  an 
oath  of  recognition  of  the  popular  body.  On  the  death  of  Mathews  in 
January,  1660,  before  the  expiration  of  his  term  of  office,  the  General 
Assembly,  sensing  the  trend  of  affairs  in  England,  recalled  in  March  Sir 
William  Berkeley  to  his  former  office,  and,  on  September  20,  King  Charles 
the  Second  was  proclaimed  in  his  Dominion  of  Virginia. 

In  April,  1661/2,  on  the  departure  of  Berkeley  for  England  to  protest 
against  the  Navigation  Act,  Francis  Morryson  became  acting  governor, 
and  so  continued  until  Berkeley's  return  in  the  autumn  of  1662. 

Governmental  Divisions 

At  the  time  of  the  departure  of  Lord  De  La  Warr  from  the  Colony 
in  1610  only  James  Town  and  Point  Comfort  remained  in  the  tenure  of 
the  settlers.  Under  Gates  and  Dale  arose  new  Plantations  and  Hundreds 
(a  word  used  in  a  looser  sense  than  its  employment  in  England  as  a  county 


Introduction 


district  containing  a  court).  Parishes  also  appeared  but,  in  this  earlier 
period,  without  definite  bounds — a  region  served  by  a  minister  whose 
commission  was  to  convert  the  heathen  as  well  as  to  minister  to  the  settlers. 

A  Commissioner  of  Plantation  was  designated  as  the  governing  official 
of  each  Plantation  or  Hundred.  According  to  the  historian  Alexander 
Brown  the  four  incorporations  of  James  City,  Charles  City,  Henricus  and 
Kiccotan  (later  termed  Elizabeth  City)  date  from  the  administration  of 
Samuel  Argall.  They  were,  at  any  rate,  referred  to  as  the  "Old  Burroughs" 
as  early  as  1619. 

In  the  Assembly  of  1619,  summoned  by  Sir  George  Yeardley,  the  units 
represented  were:  Argall's  Gift,  Flowerdieu  Hundred,  Henricus,  James 
City,  Kiccowtan  (Elizabeth  City),  Lawnes  Plantation,  Martins  Hundred, 
Smythes  Hundred.  Capt.  Ward,  representative  of  his  plantation  on  the 
Eastern  Shore,  was  at  first  refused  recognition  on  the  ground  that  he  had 
planted  without  any  authority  or  commission  from  the  Treasurer  of  the 
London  Company. 

The  General  Assembly  of  March  1623/4  provided  "that  a  court  should 
be  held  once  a  month  in  Henrico  and  in  James  City,"  and  in  February, 
1631/2  the  Assembly  "Ordered  that  a  monthlie  Court  be  held  and  kept 
for  remote  parts  of  the  Collinie,  upper  parts,  Warwick  river,  Warwick- 
squeake,  Elizabeth  City,  Accomac,  and  at  James  City,  four  quarter  Courts 
yearlie." 

Plantations,  hundreds  and  parishes  had  continued  to  multiply,  and  in 
1634*  it  was  decreed  that  they  should  be  grouped  into  eight  political 
divisions,  termed  shires  (more  commonly,  counties),  namely,  James  City, 
Henrico,  Charles  City,  Elizabeth  City,  Warwick  River,  Warrisquyoake, 
Charles  River,  and  Accomac — the  first  four  evolved  from  the  "Great 
Incorporations"  of  the  same  name. 

These  eight  shires  and  other  counties  created  in  the  period  covered  by 
the  present  volume  are  presented  in  the  table  at  the  end  of  Introduction. 

Division  of  the  Land 

On  the  establishment  of  the  settlement  in  Virginia  the  London  Com- 
pany determined  that  no  land  should  be  assigned  either  to  Planters  or 
Adventurers  until  seven  years  had  elapsed,  at  the  end  of  which  time  a 
division  v/as  to  be  made  by  Commissioners. 

•Hening'a  "Statutes  at  Large,"   Vol.   I,   p.   22. 


xxii.  Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 

Sir  Edward  Sandys,  in  the  time  of  his  Treasurership,  observed  that  the 
Commodities  of  Virginia  had  three  several  sorts  of  owners;  First,  the 
Company;  second,  particular  Hundreds  and  Plantations,  belonging  to 
private  Adventurers  in  England,  as  Southampton  Hundred,  Martins 
Hundred,  and  the  like;  thirdly,  Planters  inhabiting  and  residing  in  Vir- 
ginia, which  part  he  conceived  to  be  far  the  largest  and  most  considerable. 

Grants  were  of  two  sorts:  one  to  such  as  were  adventurers  by  money 
paid  into  the  Treasury,  for  which  they  were  allowed  one  hundred  acres  of 
land  for  every  single  share  of  12  pounds  10  shillings,  and  the  other,  of 
planters,  who  were  allotted  two  shares  for  every  person  transported.  In 
the  "Great  Charter  of  Privileges  Orders  and  Laws"  of  1618  a  division  of 
lands  was  determined  on.  In  each  of  the  four  Boroughs  of  James  City 
Charles  City,  Henrico,  and  Kiccotan,  common  lands  were  to  be  set  aside 
for  the  support  of  the  magistrate,  the  church,  and  the  proposed  college. 
Adventurers  and  Planters  who  had  already  received  their  dividents  could 
have  land  laid  off  to  them  according  to  their  number  of  shares. 

And  in  the  matter  of  grants,  declaration  was  made  at  the  General 
Quarter  Court  at  London,  Nov.  18,  1619,  by  the  Treasurer,  Councill  and 
Company  that  "all  graunts  of  land  to  be  made  with  equal  favour  except 
the  differency  of  rent." 

The  "differency  of  rent" — tobacco,  capons,  merchantable  Indian 
corn — is  exemplified  in  the  abstracts  of  patents  in  the  present  volume.  A 
particularly  pointed  example  occurs  in  the  lease  to  Sergeant  James 
Hutchinson,  of  James  City  County,  Sept.  24,  1638,  "in  parcells  of  50  acres 
for  &  during  the  terme  of  21  yeares  from  Michaelmas  next  reserving  to 
the  Governor  and  the  Assembly  12  blls  of  Indian  come  &  further  pro- 
viding that  such  lessee  does  plant  and  seate  upon  such  land  at  Michaelmas 
[Sept.  29]  next  with  five  men  well  armed  at  the  least." 

The  exigency  in  the  form  of  the  rent  was  stressed  in  the  fourth  part 
of  the  Petition  to  the  Assembly  of  1619:  "that  a  sub  treasurer  be  ap- 
pointed here  (in  Virginia)  to  collect  the  rents  of  the  London  Company 
instead  of  requiring  the  impossibility  of  paying  them  in  England,  accord- 
ing to  the  letter  of  the  charter  to  exact  money  that  is  (whereof  we  have 
none  at  all  as  we  have  no  mint)  but  the  value  of  the  rent  in  com- 
modity *   *   *" 

"In  the  matter  of  tobacco  the  value  is  3  shillings  for  the  best  and 
18  pence  for  that  of  second  quality." 


Introduction  xxiii, 


In  regard  to  determining  the  bounds  of  dividents  the  arrival  of 
William  Clayborne,  surveyor  general,  in  the  Colony  did  not  put  an  end 
to  uncertainties  and  disputes. 

Among  the  "Laws  and  Orders"  of  the  General  Assembly,*  March  5, 
1623/4,  appears:  "That  every  privatt  planters  devident  shall  be  surveyed 
and  laid  out  in  several  and  the  bounds  recorded  by  the  survey ;  If  there  be 
any  pettie  difference  betwixt  neighbours  about  their  devidents  to  be 
devided  by  the  surveyor  if  of  much  importance  to  be  referred  to  the 
governor  and  counsell;  the  surveyor  to  have  10  lbs  of  tobacco  upon  every 
hundred  acres." 

But  disputes  over  bounds  and  encroachments  went  on,  as  the  Patent 
Books  and  County  records  reveal,  and  it  was  not  infrequently  the  case 
that  an  owner  would  re-patent  land  he  had  long  held  or  had  heired  in 
order  that,  with  his  land  bounds  reviewed  and  registered,  he  might  feel 
the  more  secure  in  his  possession. f 

The  Land  Patents 

The  early  land  patents  in  the  volumes  in  the  Land  Office  are  not  the 
original  entries,  but  are  transcriptions.  Book  I  (in  two  volumes),  tran- 
scribed in  the  year  1683,  is  the  work  of  the  Clerk  Edward  Harrison. 

With  the  beginning  of  the  distribution  of  land  by  patent  one  copy  of 
the  document  was  filed  in  the  records  of  the  Company  and  another  put 
in  the  possession  of  the  patentee,  who  was  to  produce  it  as  evidence  in 
case  of  dispute  as  to  ownership,  to  turn  it  over  to  the  new  owner  in  case 
of  assignment  by  deed,  and  in  the  event  of  his  death  during  possession 
the  document  passed  to  his  heirs  or  assigns. 

On  June  26,  1620,  the  Virginia  Company,  as  an  additional  safeguard, 
determined  "henceforeward  a  Duplicate  of  such  Pattents  as  are  graunted 
here  should  be  sent  to  Virginia  which  Mr.  Treasurer  said  should  all  be 
sealed  in  open  Court,  as  all  other  things  yett  had  been  during  his  time." 

For  the  official  preservation  of  patents  in  Virginia  there  seems  to  have 
been,  besides  the  entry  in  folios,  another  mode  of  disposal — by  loose 
leaves  hung  on  a  string.    See  memorandum  on  page  226. 

It  will  be  observed  that  the  patents  transcribed  are  not  presented  in 
strictly  chronological  order,  though  the  grouping  by  administrations  of 


•Heninga   "Statutes   at   Large,"    I,    120. 
•      «^n   inter.esting   and   valuable   study  of   property   rights   of   this    period    and   later   is   found 
in      Waters  of   the   State,   or   Property  in   Virginia,"   &c,   &c,   by  Judge   Alvin   T.   Embrey,   Old 
Domimon  Press,  Richmond,   Virginia,   1931. 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


governors  is  in  general  faithfully  observed.  The  earliest  extant  patent,  by 
Yeardley  to  Fairefax,  dated  February  20,  1619  [1619/20]  is  found 
on  page  109,  entered  doubtless  at  the  time  the  document  first  came  to 
the  attention  of  the  transcribing  Clerk.  The  first  entries  in  Book  I  of 
the  Land  Grants  are  records  of  the  Corporations  of  James  City  and  of 
Elizabeth  City,  dating  from  1623-24.  The  Indian  Massacre,  the  burning 
of  James  Town  by  Bacon,  or  other  fatalities  may  account  for  the  disap- 
pearance of  most  of  the  earliest  patents.  Then,  too,  such  records  as  had 
survived  had  suffered  from  the  effect  of  time,  and  perhaps  the  chirography 
of  the  first  quarter  of  the  century  offered  certain  difficulties  to  readers  of 
a  half  century  later. 

Beginning  with  the  year  1624  it  may  be  assumed  that  the  great 
majority  of  land  grants  up  to  the  period  of  the  transcription  have  been 
preserved.  But  the  record  is  certainly  not  complete — how  far  from  com- 
plete there  is  now  no  means  of  determining.  In  the  one  surviving  record 
book  of  Charles  City  County  of  the  seventeenth  century  (1655-65)  appear 
entries  of  land  grants  (with  headrights  and  acreage  but  without  indicated 
bounds)  that  escaped  inclusion  in  the  Land  Books  that  cover  that  period. 

Headrights 

The  term  headrights  in  connection  with  a  patent  for  land  has  been 
subject  to  no  little  misunderstanding.    Elucidation  is  therefore  in  order. 

For  the  purpose  of  stimulating  immigration  and  the  settlement  of  the 
Colony  the  London  Company  ordained  that  any  person  who  paid  his  own 
way  to  Virginia  should  be  assigned  50  acres  of  land  "for  his  owne 
personal  adventure,"  and  if  he  transported  "at  his  owne  cost"  one  or  more 
persons  he  should,  for  each  person  whose  passage  he  paid,  be  awarded 
fifty  acres  of  land.  There  is,  for  instance,  the  case  of  Sir  Thomas  Lunsford, 
Knight  and  Baronett,  who  on  October  24,  1650  was  granted  3,423  acres 
for  the  transportation  of  sixty-five  persons  including  himself,  members  of 
his  family,  friends,  and  servants,  many  of  whom  were  doubtless  inden- 
tured, or  bound  for  a  period  of  service. 

Among  the  headrights  are  found  persons  of  all  social  classes,  nobility 
and  gentry,  yeomanry,  indentured  servants  (some  of  good  family  and 
connection  in  England),  and  negroes.  Among  the  headrights  of  Bertram 
Hobert,  October  10,  1642,  (p.  135)  appears  the  name  of  John 
Tredescant,  the  younger,  one  of  the  first  to  advertise  the  great  natural 


Introduction  xxv. 


richness  of  America  and  to  bring  back  to  the  mother  country  concrete 
evidence  of  the  beauty  and  wealth  of  flora  in  the  new  lands  beyond  the 
sea.  And  again,  in  February  6,  1654,  (page  303)  Tredescant  (Tredeskin) 
was  a  headright  of  William  Lea,  who,  by  paying  the  naturalist's  passage, 
was  entitled  to  50  acres  of  land  in  Virginia. 

It  is  not  to  be  assumed  that  the  claim  for  land  in  consequence  of  a 
person  transported  was  made  immediately  after  the  arrival  of  the  "head- 
right"  in  the  Colony.  There  is,  for  instance,  record  of  a  patentee  awarded 
land  for  the  transportation  of  three  wives,  who,  it  is  safe  to  conclude, 
were  successive.  The  headrights  may  have  arrived  in  the  Colony  long 
before  the  patentee  had  entered  claim  for  land  thereby  due.  Nor  is  it  to 
be  assumed  that  the  headright  is  necessarily  an  immigrant.  Even  men  of 
prominence  in  the  Colony,  through  a  voyage  or  repeated  voyages  to 
England  and  return,  appear  as  "headrights"  of  friends  or  relatives,  who 
acquitted  the  cost  of  the  passage  in  order  to  obtain  the  consequent  land. 
On  page  121  in  the  photographic  reproduction  of  a  patent,  January  6, 
1639/40,  of  Capt.  Nicholas  Martian  (Martiau),  the  French  Walloon, 
who  is  the  earliest  American  ancestor  of  George  Washington,  appear 
among  the  fourteen  persons  transported  at  his  own  cost  and  charges  Capt. 
Martian  himself,  his  wife,  a  son  and  a  daughter.  On  the  other  hand  in 
a  patent  of  Councillor  George  Read  (Reade),  of  November  2,  1658  (p. 
180)  the  headrights  include  Capt.  Martiau  (Martin),  his  wife,  and  his 
daughter  Elizabeth,  whom  Col.  Reade  married. 

Sea  captains  were  especially  active  in  the  acquisition  of  land  through 
the  transportation  of  settlers,  and  they  not  infrequently  acted  conjointly 
with  London  merchants.  An  instance  in  point  is  the  case  of  William 
Barker,  who,  in  association  with  Richard  Quiney,  citizen  and  grocer  of 
London  (brother  of  Shakespeare's  son-in-law,  Thomas  Quiney)  and  John 
Sadler  (brother-in-law  of  John  Harvard,  founder  of  Harvard  College), 
patented  great  tracts  at  Brandon  and  at  Merchant's  Hope,  held  by  them 
and  their  heirs  for  nearly  a  century. 

Before  obtaining  land  for  the  transportation  of  "headrights"  the 
claimant  was  required  to  present  a  receipt  in  proof  that  the  passage  money 
was  duly  paid.  But  despite  all  precautions  fraud  and  deception  were  by 
no  means  uncommon. 

As  a  safeguard,  particularly  in  the  case  of  those  persons  who  went 
at  their  own  cost,  the  London  Company,  on  November  18,  1623,  came 


xxvi.  Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 

to  the  following  resolution  "Touching  the  registering  of  Passengers  names 
that  goe  to  Virginia  in  private  shipps  *  *  * 

"Secondly  when  a  reveiwe  shalbe  made  in  Virginia  howe  all  men  are 
possessed  of  their  lands  which  wilbe  most  necessarie  to  be  donn  in  reguard 
of  the  great  Disorder  and  Lycentiousness  which  men  there  use  in  takinge 
out  land  and  not  due  to  them  it  wilbe  a  matter  of  great  trouble  to  all 
private  Planters  that  come  not  in  the  Companies  Shipps  to  prove  that 
they  came  over  at  their  owne  charges,  and  except  they  do,  that  it  wilbe 
verie  dangerous  and  unsafe  to  the  Companie  to  make  confirmacon  of 
landes  to  them  wch  perhapps  others  have  better  right  unto."* 

Ancient  Planters 

According  to  the  Charter  of  Orders  from  Sir  Thomas  Smythe  (referred 
to  as  "the  late  Treasurer"  in  patents  in  this  book),  November  18,  1618 
the  following  provision  was  made:  "*  *  *  And  forasmuch  as  our  intent 
is  to  establish  our  equal  Plantations  whereof  we  shall  speak  afterwards  be 
reduced  into  four  cities  or  Boroughs  namely  the  chief  city  called  James 
Town,  Charles  City,  Henrico,  and  the  Borough  of  Kiccotan  [later  Eliza- 
beth City],  And  that  in  all  those  foresaid  cities  or  Boroughs  the  ancient 
adventurers  and  Planters  which  were  transported  thither  with  Intent  to 
Inhabit  at  their  own  costs  and  charges  before  the  coming  away  of  Sir 
Thomas  Dale  Knight,  and  have  so  continued  during  the  space  of  three 
years,  shall  have  upon  a  first  Division  to  be  by  us  augmented  one  hundred 
acres  of  land  for  their  personal  adventure  and  as  much  for  every  single 
share  of  twelve  pounds  ten  shillings  paid  for  such  share  allotted  and  set 
out  to  be  held  by  them  their  Heirs  and  assignes  forever. 

"And  that  for  all  such  planters  as  were  brought  thither  at  the  Com- 
pany's charge  to  Inhabit  there  before  the  coming  away  of  the  said  Sir 
Thomas  Dale  after  their  time  of  service  to  the  Company  on  the  common 
Land  agreed  shall  be  expired  there  be  set  out  one  hundred  acres  of  Land 
for  each  of  their  Heirs  and  assigns  for  ever  paying  for  every  fifty  acres 
the  yearly  fee  Rent  of  one  shilling  to  the  said  Treasurer  and  company 
and  their  successors  at  one  entire  payment  on  the  feast  day  of  Saint 
Michaels  the  Archangel  forever.  And  in  regard  that  by  the  singular 
Industry  and  virtue  of  the  said  Sir  Thomas  Dale  the  former  Difficulties 
and  Dangers  were  in  greatest  part  overcome  to  the  great  ease  and  security 

*Records  of  the  Virginia  Company,"   Vol.   I,    373. 


Introduction  xxvii. 


of  such  as  have  been  since  that  time  transported  thither,  we  do  therefore 
hereby  ordain  that  all  such  persons  as  since  the  coming  away  of  the  said 
Sir  Thomas  Dale  have  at  their  own  charges  been  transported  thither  to 
Inhabit  and  so  continued  as  aforesaid  there  be  allotted  and  set  out  at  first 
Division  fifty  acres  of  Land  to  them  and  their  Heirs  forever  from  their 
Personal  adventure  paying  a  fee  rent  of  one  Shilling  yearly  in  manner 
aforesaid  and  that  all  persons  which  since  the  going  away  of  the  said 
Sir  Thomas  Dale  have  been  transported  thither  at  the  company's  charges 
or  which  hereafter  shall  be  so  transported  be  placed  as  Tenants  on  the 
company's  lands  for  the  term  of  seven  years  to  occupy  the  same  to  the  half 
part  of  the  profits  as  is  above  said." 

Those  who  had  worked  on  the  Company's  land  had  had  their  dis- 
appointments:   "A  little  before  the  departure  of  Sir  Thomas  Gates  many 
of  the  Ancient  planters   (by  the  instigation  of  Sir  Thomas  Dale),  upon 
promise  of  an  absolute  freedome  after  three  yeares  more  to  be  expired 
(having  most  of  them  served  the  Colenye  six  or  seven  yeares  in  that 
general  slavery)  were  yet  contented  to  serve  in  the  buildinge  of  Charles 
City  and  Hundred  with  very  little  allowance  of  clothinge  and  victuals." 
But  Ancient  Planters  were  to  have  immunities  as  well  as  rewards,  as 
appears  from  the  Laws  &  Orders  of  the  General  Assembly,  March  5, 
1623/4:    "That  all  the  old  planters  that  were  here  before  or  came  in  at 
the  coming  of  Sir  Thomas  Gates  they  and  their  posterity  shall  be  exempted 
from  their  personal  service  to  the  warr  and  any  public  charge    (church 
duties  excepted  that  belong  particularly  to  their  persons    (not  including 
their  families)   except  such  as  shall  be  employed  to  command  in  chief." 
In  compliance  with  the  Charter  of  Orders  Sir  George  Yeardley,  in 
1619,  made  without  doubt  a  number  of  grants  to  "Ancient  Planters,"  of 
which  only  one  is  now  extant — that  to  William  Fairefax,  (see  page  109). 
A  copy  of  a  bill  of  adventure,  dated  July  15,  1608,  in  consideration  of  the 
payment  of  12  lbs.  10  shillings,  to  Henry  Dawkes  is  cited  in  connection 
with  a  patent  to  his  son  William  Dawkes  "of  Verinas."     (See  page  15). 
The  following  list  includes  those  who  are  known  to  have  come  to 
Virginia  before  the  close  of  the  year  1616,  survived  the  massacre,  appear 
in  the  Muster  of   1624/5   as  then   living  in  Virginia,   and   to  most  of 
whom   the   term   "Ancient   Planter"   may  with   justification   be   applied. 
Certain    "Ancient   Planters" — Samuel   Jordan,    for   instance — had,    at 
the  time  the  Muster  was  taken,  recently  died.     (See  page  226) . 


xxviii.  Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Ancient  Planters 

1607 

John  Dodds.  In  the  Susan  Constant,  April,  1607,  Aged  36.  Mentioned  in  the 
"Journal  of  the  Council  and  General  Court"*,   p.   165,  Jan.   11,   1626/7. 

John  Laydon  (Leyden),  Aged  44.  In  the  Susan  Constant.  He  married  Ann  Burras, 
Mrs.  Forrest's  maid,  who  came  in  the  Second  Supply  (the  Mary  Margrett), 

1608.  This  marriage  was  the  first  solemnized  in  English  America.  "John 
Leyden  *  *  *  Ancient  Planter,"  patent,  Dec.  2,  1628,  p.  18.  See  also 
patent,  May  5,  1636,  p.  38"  due  for  the  per.  adventure  of  himselfe  &  his 
wife,    being   Ancient    Planters,    before    the   govmt    of    Sir   Thomas    Dale." 

1608 

Henery  Bagwell  (Robt.  Bagwell's  Muster).  Aged  35.  In  the  Deliverance,  1608. 
Mentioned  in  the  JCGC,  p.  180. 

Nathaniel  Cawsey  (Causey),  of  Causey's  Care.  In  the  First  Supply,  1608  (The 
Muster  states  "In  the  Phenix  in  1607"),  Thomasine  his  wife  in  the  Lyon  in 

1609.  Nathaniel  Cawsey  was  Burgess  in  1623-4  for  Jordans  Journey,  and 
Convention,   1625.    See  patent  of  John  Cawsy,  Feb.  7,  1634. 

Phettiplace  Close  (Clause),  Came  to  Virginia  in  the  Starr.  "Ancient  Planter," 
patent,  Dec.  2,  1628,  p.  11,  See  also  p.  10.  Burgess  "Denby,  and  to  Waters 
Creek,"  in  1632;  Mulberry  Island,  1629. 

Francis  Chapman.    In  the  Starr. 

Raleigh  Crawshaw,  Member  of  the  London  Company,  Came  to  Virginia  in  1608, 
"Of  Kicoughtan,  Ancient  Planter  who  hath  remained  in  this  country  fifteen 
years    compleat    and    performed    many   worthy    services    to    the    Colony," 
patent,  Dec.  12,  1625,  p.  2. 

Henry  Dawkes.  "An  Antient  Planter,"  For  his  Bill  of  Adventure,  12  lbs.  10  shill., 
July  14,  1608,  see  patent  of  his  son  William  Dawkes,  "of  Verinas,"  Sept. 
7,  1632,  p.  15. 

Thomas  Godby.  Aged  36.  In  the  Deliverance,  1608.  "An  Ancient  Planter,"  patent, 
Dec.  1,  1624,  p.  5. 
For  an  account  of  his  killing  see  JCGC,  March  1628,  pp.  190-191. 

Capt.  Thomas  Graves.  Came  to  Virginia  in  the  Mary  &  Margrett  in  1608.  Burgess, 
Smythes  Hundred,  in  1619.  Capt.  Thomas  Grayes  commissioned  to  command 
the  Plantation  of  Accomack,  8  Feb.,  1629,  JCGC,  p.  165,  Thomas  Graies, 
"Ancient  Planter"  patent,  March  14,  1628,  p.   13. 

Thomas  Gray,  "an  Ancient  Planter  at  or  before  the  time  of  Sir  Thomas  Dale," 
patent,  Aug.  27,  1635,  p.  31. 

William  Julian.  Aged  43.  In  the  Hercules  in  1608,  "Yeoman  &  ancient  Planter, 
of  Kiccoughtan,"  Patent,  Sept.  20,  1624,  p.  5. 

*From  this  point  "The  Journal  of  the  Council  and  General  Court  will  be  indicated  by 
the  abbreviation  "JCGC."  The  age  entered  after  a  planter's  name  in  the  Muster  of  1624/5 
shows  his  age  at  the  time  of  the  Muster  and  not  at  the  time  of  his  arrival  in  Virginia. 


Introduction  xxix. 


"Ancient"  Thomas  Savage,  Came  in  the  John  and  Francis  in  1608,  at  the  age  of  13. 
Wife  Hannah,  patent,  Dec.  12,  1627,  p.  9.  Her  husband  referred  to  as 
"late  of  Accomac"  in  patent,  Aug.  24,  1635,  p.  30. 

Richard  Taylor.  Aged  50.  In  the  Mary  Margrett,  Sept.,  1608.  Member  Conven- 
tion, 1625;  burgess,  1627/8. 

Lt.  Edward  Waters,  of  Elizabeth  City,  Gent.    Aged  40.    In  the  Patience  in  1608. 
Patents,  Aug.  14,  1624,  p.  4  and  Oct.  20,  1628,  p.  12. 
Member  Convention  1625;  burgess,  1627/8. 

Robert  Wright.  Aged  44.  Came  in  1608  "An  old  planter,"  patent,  Sept.  11, 
1626,  p.  8,  "sawyer  *  *  *  moved  to  James  City,"  see  JCGC,  p.  137. 

1609 

Wm.  Baker.    In  the  Jonathan,  1609. 

Reynold  Booth.    Aged  32.    In  the  Hercules,  1609. 

John   Chandler    (servant   of  Thos.   Willoby).    Aged    24.    In   the   Hercules,    1609- 

Thos.  Gates.    In  the  Swan,  1609. 

Elizabeth  Joones  (servant  of  Thomas  Dunthorne).  Aged  30.  In  the  Patience,  1609. 

Robert  Partin.  Aged  36.  In  the  Blessinge,  in  June  1609.  Patent,  Nov.  24,  1639, 
p.  76.    Wife  Margaret  mentioned  in  JCGC,  p.  150. 

John  Powell,  of  Newport  News,  "Yeoman  &  Ancient  Planter,"  patent,  Sept.  20, 
1624,  p.  5.  In  the  Swallow,  1609-  Burgess,  Sept.  1632  "From  Water's 
Creek  to  Marie's  Mount." 

Sir  George  Yeardley,  Kt.  Governor.  In  the  Deliverance,  1609.  Temperance,  Lady 
Yeardley.    In  the  Faulcon,  1608. 

1610 

William  Askew.    Aged  30.    In  the  Prosperous  in  May,  1610. 

William  Bayley,  of  West  Shirley  Hundred.    Aged  41.    In  the  Prosperous. 

Richard  Biggs.  Aged  41.  On  the  Swann  in  August,  1610.  Member  of  the  Con- 
vention, 1625.  In  JCGC,  referred  to  as  "of  West  &  Shirley  hundred  late 
deceased";  wife  Sarah;  son  Richard. 

William  Bouldin  (Boulding),  of  Elizabeth  City.  Came  in  1610,  with  his  wife 
Mary;  "Yeoman  &  Ancient  Planter,"  patent  Jan.  20,  1628;  Mary  Bouldin 
"An  Antient  Planter,"  patent  Jan.  12,  1625/6,  p.  6.  Thomas  Boulding. 
In  the  Swan,  1610.    Aged  40.    Patent,  Sept.  27,  1638,  p.  98. 

Richard  Boulton.    Aged  28.    In  the  Mary  &  James,  1610. 

Henry  Coltman.    Aged  30.    In  the  Noah,  August,  1610. 
William  Coxe.    Age  26.    In  the  Godspeed. 

Elizabeth  Dunthorne.  Aged  38.  In  the  Tryall,  1610.  "an  old  planter,  wife  oi 
Thomas  Dunthorne,  of  Kiccoughtan  in  the  Corporation  of  Elizabeth  City  " 
patent,  Sept.  20,  1624,  p.  6.  Will  of  Elizabeth  Dunthorne  probated  31 
Oct.,  1626,  JCGC,  p.  123. 


xxx.  Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


John  Fludd  (Flood),  Gent.,  of  James  City.  Came  in  the  Swan  in  1610.  Burgess 
for  Flower  Dew  Hundred  in  1629/30;  for  Westover  and  Flower  Dewe 
Hundred,  1631/2  and  1632;  and  for  James  City  in  1642/3,  1648,  1652, 
1653/4.  Captain  and  later  Colonel.  "John  Flood,  an  ancient  planter,"  7 
June,  1680,  p.  227,  Vol.  II. 

Thomas  Garnett.  In  the  Swan,  1610.  Servant  of  Capt.  Wm.  Powell.  See  "Journal 
of  the  House  of  Burgesses,"  I.,  p.  12. 

Robert  and  Susan  Greenleafe.  In  a  patent  of  Thomas  Markham,  p.  54  "right  of 
his  wife  Susan  the  relict  of  Robert  Greenleafe  *  *  *  being  an  antient 
planter  before  the  govt  of  Sir  Thomas  Dale." 

Robert  Greenleafe.    Aged  43.    In  the  Tryall,    1610.    Mentioned   in  JCGC, 
Jan.  9,  1626/7,  p.  129. 

Samuel  Jordan,  of  Jordans  Journey,  Charles  City,  Gent,  "who  hath  abode  ten  yeares 
complete,"  as  stated  on  Dec.  21,  1620.  See  Land  Book  VIII.,  p.  125.  He 
represented  Charles  City  in  the  Assembly  of  1619.  Referred  to  in  JCGC, 
Sept.  12,  1625,  p.  76. 

Sisley  (Cicely)   Jordan.    In  the  Swan  of  August  1610.    Widow  of  Samuel  Jordan 
at  time  of  the  Muster  of  1624/5. 
She  afterwards  married  Councillor  Wm.  Farrar. 

Albiano  Lupo,  Gent,  "Ancient  Planter  and  of  Kiccoughtan,"  patent,  Sept.  1,  1624, 
p.  5.    Will  probated  Oct.  9,  1626,  see  JCGC.    Age  40.    In  the  Swann. 

John  Lytefoote,  of  James  City,  Yeoman  "who  came  in  the  Seaventure  with  Sir 
Thomas  Gates,"  patent,  Aug.  14,  1624,  p.  5.  He  left  his  estate  to  Wm. 
Spencer  by  a  noncupative  will,  see  JCGC,  Jan.  21,  1628/9. 

Alexander    Mountney,    of    Kiccoughtan    "Yeoman    and    Ancient    Planter,"    patent, 
Sept.  20,  1624. 
Aged  33.    In  the  Mary  James,  1610.    Of  Pierceys  Hundred  in  1624-5. 

Capt.  William  Pierce.  In  1623,  captain  of  Governor  Wyatt's  guard  and  lt.-gov. 
of  James  City.  Prepared  in  1629,  in  England  "A  Relation  of  the  Present 
State  of  the  Colony  of  Virginia,  by  Capt.  William  Perse,  an  ancient  planter 
of  twenty  years  standing  there."  Capt.  Pierce  came  with  Sir  Thomas  Gates. 
Appointed  to  the  Council  in  1631.  Member  of  the  Convention,  1625. 
Patent,  Dec.  16,  1645,  p.  149.  His  daughter  Jane  was  the  third  wife  of 
John  Rolfe. 

John  Proctor,  of  Proctor's  Creek.  In  the  Seaventure.  Wife  Mrs.  Alice  Proctor, 
allowed  administration  of  her  husband's  estate,  July  3,  1627,  JCGC,  p.  150. 

Samuel  Sharpe.  In  the  Seaventure  with  Sir  Thomas  Gates.  Burgess  for  Charles 
City  in  1619,  and  for  the  "Neck  of  Land"  (Sergeant  Sharp)  in  1629. 

John  Sleight.    Aged  42.    In  the  Tryal,  1610. 

Thomas  Stepney.    Aged  35.    In  the  Swan,  1610. 

John  Taylor.  In  the  Swan,  1610.  "Of  Newport  News,  Yeoman  &  Ancient 
Planter,"  patent,  Sept.  10,  1624,  p.  5  "In  Court,  28  Nov.,  1633  *  *  *  his 
whole  devident  *  *  *  granted  him  to  take  it  up  where  hee  shall  find 
covenient."  In  JCGC,  p.  73,  is  found  deposition  of  a  John  Taylor,  aged 
37,  date  June  23,  1625. 


Introduction  xxxi. 


William  Tucker,  Aged  36.  In  the  Mary  and  James,  1610.  Member  of  the  London 
Company  in  1620.  Burgess,  1623/4.  Appointed  to  the  Council,  1626.  Con- 
vention, 1625.  Patent  to  "Capt.  Wm.  Tucker  Esq.  of  Council  of  State," 
June  1,  1633,  p.  16;  July  14,  1626,  p.  27.  Many  references  in  JCGC. 
Will,  London,  Feb.  17,  1644. 

Amyle  Wayne,  Aged  30,  In  the  Swan,  August,  1610. 

Capt.  Francis  West.  Aged  36.  In  the  Mary  Ann  Margett  in  1610.  Brother  of 
Thomas  Lord  De  La  Warr.  Councillor.  Deputy  Governor  from  Nov.  17, 
1627  to  March  5,  1629-  Referred  to  as  "late  deceased"  in  a  patent  of 
Nicholas  Reynold,  Dec.  25,  1636.    West  came  first  in  1608. 

Thomas  Willoby  (Willoughby).  Came  to  Virginia  in  1610,  aged  9.  Lt.  and 
Capt.  Commissioner  for  Elizabeth  City,  and  in  1639  presiding  justice  of 
Lower  Norfolk.  Burgess,  1627/8;  Upper  Part  of  Elizabeth  Ctiy,  1629/30; 
1631/2.  Appointed  to  the  Council  in  1639-  A  number  of  patents  issued  in 
his  name.  In  Lower  Norfolk  Co.,  Aug.  16,  1658,  a  commission  of  adminis- 
tration was  granted  to  Mr.  Tho.  Willoughby  on  the  estate  of  his  father 
Capt.  Tho.  Willoughby,  deceased  in  England. 

1611 

Ensign  Isaak  Chaplaine,  of  Chaplaine's  Choice.  In  the  Starr.  Burgess,  1623/4; 
member  of  the  Convention,  1625.  In  JCGC,  under  date  of  Dec.  8,  1628, 
"John  Chaplaine  of  Chaplaines  choice  shall  have  a  commission  of  adminis- 
tration *  *  *  goods  of  Ensigne  Isaak  Chaplaine  *  *  *  supposed  to  be 
cast  away  upon  the  sea." 

John  Downeman.  Aged  33.  In  the  John  and  Francis.  Member  of  the  Convention, 
1625.    Justice  and  Burgess,  Elizabeth  City,  1629. 

William  Fairefax,  "An  Ancient  Planter  *  *  *  who  hath  remained  8  yeares  in  the 
Country  *  *  *  Margery  his  wife  an  old  planter,"  patent,  Feb.  20,  1619/20, 
p.  109. 

Robert  Fisher.    In  the  Elsabeth. 

John  Gundry,  of  Elizabeth  City,  Labourer,  "an  old  planter  who  hath  remained  8 
yeares  compleatt  in  this  country  to  the  Company  upon  the  common  land  the 
full  time  of  his  service,"  patent,  Dec.  6,  1628.  Aged  33.  In  the  Starr. 
Mary  Gundry,  in  the  George,  1616. 

Oliver  Jenkines,  of  Warwicksqueeke  "His  personal  advanture  in  the  Shipp  Starr, 
at  the  first  coming  of  Sir  Thomas  Dale,"  patent,  Aug.  26,  1635.  Jenkines' 
wife  is  mention  in  JCGC,  Sept.  17,  1627,  p.  132. 

William  Morgan  alias  Brookes.  Aged  30.  In  the  Starr.  See  patent  of  John 
Powell,  p.  89  and  patent,  Aug.,  1642,  p.  131. 

William  Perry.  Came  to  Virginia  in  1611.  Burgess,  1627/8;  "Paces  Paines  and 
Smythe  Island,"  1629/30;  "Capt  Perry's  down  to  Hogg  Island,  1631-2." 
Councillor.  Will,  Aug.  5,  1637,  see  patent  of  Henry  Perry,  p.  128.  Izabella 
Perry  (Capt.  Perry's  wife),  "An  Ancient  Planter,"  patent  Nov.  30,  1628, 
p.  10,  widow  of  Richard  Pace,  "Ancient  Planter." 

Miles  Prickett.  Aged  36.  In  the  Starr.  Named  in  a  patent  of  Robert  Salford, 
Sept.  20,  1624,  p.  5,  and  in  a  patent  of  Ensign  Thos.  Willoughby,  Nov.  17, 
1628,  p.  10. 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Mr.  Robert  Salford.  Aged  56.  In  the  John  and  Francis  in  1611.  Wife  Joane  "an 
antient  planter."  2In  the  Elizabeth,  1611,  John  Salford  in  the  George,  1616. 
Aged  24.  Patent,  Dec.  1,  1624,  "his  sister  Sarah  deed,  an  Ancient  Planter," 
p.  4.  "Mr.  Salford"  was  a  Commissioner  of  the  Eliz.  City  Court,  See  JCGC, 
Aug.,  1626. 

John  Smith,  Burrows  Hill.  James  City,  In  the  Elizabeth,  1611.  On  Jan.  12, 
1625/6  a  John  Smith  paid  his  rent  in  the  form  of  "2  Kapones"  to  Mr. 
John  Burrows,  see  JCGC,  p.  89. 

John  Smith,  Planter,  of  Warwicksqueake,  "his  personal  adventure  in  the  Shipp 
the  Starr  at  the  first  comeing  of  Sir  Thomas  Dale,  patent,  Aug.  26,  1633,  p.  17. 
(Note. — A  John  Smythe  was  Burgess  for  Pace's  Paines  in  1629.) 

Thomas  Sully    (Sulley),  Yeoman   "being  an  Ancient  Planter,"   of  Elizabeth  City, 
patent,  Nov.  30,  1628,  p.  10. 
Aged  36,  In  the  Swan,  1611. 

1612 

Adam  Dixon,  Yeoman,  patent,  Sept.  8,  1627,  p.  8.  Master  Caulker,  Came  in  1612. 
See  "Records  of  the  Virginia  Company,"  Vol.  II,  p.  43,  Wife  Agnes  and 
daughter  Elizabeth  mentioned  in  JCGC,  p.  103. 

Pharoah  (Farrar)  Flinton,  Gent.  "An  Ancient  Planter  of  Kiccoughtan,"  patent. 
Dec.  1,  1624,  p.  4.  Aged  36.  In  the  Elizabeth.  Joane  Flinton,  in  the 
Elizabeth. 

From  the  "Records  of  the  Virginia  Company,"  Vol.  II,  p.  16  it  appears 
that  Flinton,  "a  Surgion,"  appeaaled  for  restoration  of  lands  given  him  by 
Sir  George  Yeardley.  In  a  patent  of  Richard  Johnson,  Isle  of  Wight 
County,  March  13,  1641,  p.  128,  Flinton  is  mentioned. 

1613 

John  Claye,  of  Charles  City.  In  the  Treasurer,  1613.  "an  old  planter  before  the 
govt  of  Sir  Thomas  Dale,"  patent,  July  13,  1635,  p.  27. 

Susan  Collins  (wife  of  John  Collins),  In  the  Treasurer,  1613.  Mentioned  in 
JCGC,  June  4,  1627,  p.  149. 

John  Hatton,  Aged  26.    In  the  Treasurer,  1613.  v 

Thomas  Lane.    Aged  30,    In  the  Treasurer,  1613. 

Francis  Mason,  Aged  40,  In  the  John  and  Francis,  1613,  with  wife  Anne  and 
daughter  Anne.  Lt.  Francis  Mason,  patent  Aug,  31,  1642,  p.  134;  Sept. 
29,  1643,  p.  151. 

Christopher  Safford.    In  the  Treasurer,  1613. 

Henery  Williams.    In  the  Treasurer,  1613. 

1614 

Theophilus  Beriston.    Aged  23.    In  the  Treasurer. 

1615 

William  Burchitt.  Aged  25.  In  the  Susan,  1615.  Servant  of  Capt.  Epes,  Eastern 
Shore. 

Henery  Turner.    In  the  John  and  Francis,  1615. 


Introduction  xxxiii. 


1616 

John  Banum  (Bainham),  of  the  County  of  Elizabeth  City,  Aged  54.  In  the 
Susan,  1616.  Patent  p.  4,  Will  mentioned  in  JCGC,  Feb.  9,  1628/9,  p.  185; 
widow  Elizabeth.  His  daughter  and  heir,  Mary  Baynham  married  Richard 
Tisdale.  See  patent  of  Thomas  Taylor  ,Oct.  25,  1645.  p.  925,  See  also 
mention  of  Sergeant  Richard  Tisdale  in  patent  of  Edward  Sparshott,  Charles 
City  County,  25  July,  1638  p.  581. 

Francis  Cole.    Aged  27.    In  the  Susan. 

Clement  Evand  (servant  of  Susan  Bush).    Aged  30.    In  the  Edwin,  1616. 

Thomas  Farmer.    Aged  30.    In  the  Tryall,  1616. 

William  Gany,  of  Elizabeth  City,  Aged  33.    In  the  George,  1616. 

Nicholas  Hodgskines.  Aged  27.  In  the  Edwin,  161 6.  (Hoskines),  Yeoman,  of 
Accomac,  patent,  Feb.  3,  1626/7,  p. 

Elizabeth  Lupo.    In  the  George. 

Cornelius  Maye,  Aged  23.    In  the  Providence,  1616. 

Susan  Old,  "Cozen  of  Richard  Biggs."    Aged  10.    In  the  Mary  gold. 

William  Parker.  Aged  20.  In  the  Charles,  1616.  For  a  William  Parker  of 
"Merry  Point"  see  JCGC,  March,  1628,  p.  190. 

Mr.  Abraham  Piercey  (Percy),  "Cape-merchant,"  Came  in  the  Susan  in  1616. 
Burgess,  1622;  councillor,  1624.  Died  about  16  Jan,  1628,  JCGC,  p.  165, 
He  married  Frances,  widow  of  Capt.  Nathaniel  West.  His  daughter,  Mrs. 
Elizabeth  Stevens,  patent,  Sept.  28,  1637,  p.  484. 

William  Sparkes.    Aged  24.    In  the  Susan,  1616. 

Thomas  Spelman,  Aged  24,  In  the  George,  161 6.  "Gent,  of  Kiccoughtan,''  Dec. 
1,  1624,  p. Died  in  Truro,  Cornwall  circa  1627. 

Thomas  Turner,  "Cozen  of  Richard  Biggs."    Aged  11.    In  the  Mary  gold. 

Thomas  Thornbury.    Aged  20.    In  the  George,  161 6. 
Richard  Yonge.    Aged  36.    In  the  George,  1616. 

Ancient  Planters,  the  Exact  Year  of  Whose  Coming 
Cannot  Be  Determined 

Lt.  Giles  Allington,  of  Kiccoughtan.  "Ancient  Planter,"  patent,  Dec.  1  1625,  p.  4. 
A  commission  of  administration  on  the  estate  of  Lt.  Allington  was  granted 
to  Capt.  Robert  Felgate,  8  June  (?),  1629.  See  "Journal  of  the  Council 
and  General  Court  of  Virginia,"  p.  197. 

William  Andrews,  Planter,  of  Accomac,  Came  before  1616.  Patent,  March  14, 
1628,  p.  13  and  June  25,  1635,  p.  23.  Lt.  Col.  Eastern  Shore  militia. 
Will,  Feb.  20,  1654. 

Thomas  Bagwell,  "an  Ancient  Planter,"  patent,  May  12,  1638,  p.  87.  Burgess  for 
Pasbehay  in  the  Corporation  of  James  City,  in  1629. 


xxxiv.  Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 

Cheney  Boyes  (Boyse),  of  Charles  City,  "an  Ancient  planter  before  the  time  of 
Sir  Thomas  Dale,"  patents  May  31,  1636,  p.  40  and  p.  68.  Burgess  for 
Shirley  Hundred  Island,  1629  and  1632. 

Thomas  Baywell,  "a  planter  in  the  time  of  the  govt,  of  Sir  Thomas  Dale."  patent, 
Nov.  7,  1635,  p.  32. 

William  Capps.  "Ancient  Planter."  Represented  Kicotan  in  the  Assembly  of 
1619.    Member  of  the  Council,  1627. 

Edward  Clarke,  "an  Antient  Planter  in  the  time  of  the  govt  of  Sir  Thomas  Dale," 
see  patent  of  Nathaniel  Clarke,  p.  49. 

James  Davis,  Gent.  Came  to  Virginia  before  1616  as  did  his  wife  Rachel.  He 
died  before  March  6,  1633.  "an  Ancient  Planter,"  See  patent  of  his  son 
Thomas  Davis,  of  Warwicksqueaiak,  March  6,  1635. 

Mary  Flint  "ancient  planter,  now  wife  of  Thomas  Flint  Gent,  of  Warwick  River," 
patent  March  14,  1628. 

Edward  Grendon.    Came  before  1616.    Named  in  a  patent  of  George  Sandys,  p.  4, 
Burgess  for  "Ye  Plantations  over  against  James  City,"  1823/4. 
For  reference  to  the  will  of  Mr.  Edward  Grendon,  deed,  see  JCGC,  p.  179. 
.     Dec.  9,  1628. 

Capt.  Thomas  Harris.    Aged  38,    In  the  Prosperous  in  May  .    "An  Antient 

planter  and  Adventurer  in  the  time  of  Sir  Thomas  Dale  his  Government." 
Burgess,  Henrico,  1623/4  ,1639,  1646,  1652,  1653,  1656/7. 

Bartholomew  Hospkins,  "An  Ancient  Planter  whoe  came  over  into  this  Country 
before  the  departure  of  Sir  Thomas  Dale,"  patent,  Nov.  3,  1624,  p.  7. 
Burgess,  Lower  Norfolk  County,  1649,  March  1651/2,  1652,  1654,  1655/6. 

John  Johnson,  of  James  City,  "Yeoman  and  Ancient  Planter,"  patent,  Jan.  12, 
1624/5,  p.  4.    Named  in  Travis  Patent,  Jan.  25,  1637/8,  p.  83. 

William  Lansden  "Yeoman  &  Old  Planter,"  of  Kiccaughtan,  in  the  Corporation  of 
Elizabeth  City,  patent,  June  5,  1624,  p.  46. 

Francis  Paul.  See  patent  of  Thomas  Paule,  of  James  City,  May  25,  1637,  p.  58. 
"His  late  father  Francis  Paule  as  being  an  Ancient  planter  in  the  time  of 
Sir  Thomas  Dale  his  govt." 

Martha  Key  "Ancient  Planter,"  patent  Dec.  2,  1628,  p.  10.  Thomas  Key  "Antient 
Planter,"    In  the  Prosperous,  June  1619.    Burgess  for  Denbigh,   1629/30. 

John  Ward,  "an  ancient  Planter  in  the  time  of  Sir  Thomas  Dale,"    See  patent  of 
James  Place,  June  1,  1636,  p.  52    "in  right  of  his  wife  Elizabeth."    Patenr 
March  21,  1635,  p.  19. 
Capt.  Ward  represented  Capt.  Ward's  plantation  in  the  Assembly  of  1619. 

Henry  Williams,  "an  Ancient  planter  in  the  time  of  Sir  Thomas  Dale."  Patent, 
Accomack  Co.,  Sept.  6,  1636,  p.  375. 

Robert  Armistead  Stewart,  Ph.  D. 


James  City  County   James  City  Co. 


.Surry  (first  mention,  Nov.  25, 
1652:    Hen.  I,*   373.) 


Henrico  County- 


Charles  City  County  (enlarged  in  1637)  — 


Elizabeth  City  County    .  .. Elizabeth  City  Co. 


.New  Norfolk  County 
(Formed  in  1636  from 
the  portion  of  Eliza-" 
beth  City  Co.  on  the 
south  side  of  the 
river.) 


Lower  Co.  o 
1637  (Later 
Norfolk  Co. 
247.) 


-Upper  County 
1637      (Later 
Norfolk      Co. 
changed     to 
[Nansimum] 
321. 


Warwick  River  County  (Termed,  in  several  land  patents  of  1635,  Denbigh  Co., 
after  the  parish  of  that  name.  Name  changed  to  Warwick 
County  in  March,  1642/3.    Hen.  I,  249.) 


Warrosquyoake  County   (Name  changed  to  Isle  of  Wight  County  early  in   1637. 
Hen.  I,  228.) 


Charles  River  County  (Name  changed  to  York  County. 
in  March,  1642/3.  Hen.  I,  240.) 


Accawmack  County  (Name  changed  to  Northampton,. 
March,    1642/3.    Hen.    I,    249.) 


— AccomacCo. 

(formed    in 

1663). 

Northum 
(Formed 
and    othe 
Neck    of 
Rappahar 
Potomac 

Northampton 

Hen.     I, 

(The  present 

Northum 

Northampton 

curs  in  I 

County  form- 

1644-5,  I 

ed  in  1663.) 

♦Herring's  Statutes  at  Large. 

For  a  complete  study,  with  charts,  of  the  formation  of  Counties  in  Virginia  see  "Bulletin 
of  the  Virginia  State  Library."  Vol.  9,  Nos.  1,  2  and  3.  Virginia  Counties;  Those  Resulting 
from  Virginia  Legislation.    By   Morgan   Poitiaux  Robinson,    Archivist.    Richmond,    1916. 


ew  Norfolk, 
med  Lower 
en.    I,     228, 


few  Norfolk, 
med  Upper 
and  name 
>emond  Co. 
542.  Hen.  I, 


.York 


-Gloucester  Co. 
(Mentioned  Nov. 
25,  1652.  Hen.  I, 
374.) 


-New  Kent  Co.  (Formed 
from  upper  part  of  York 
Co.  in  1654.  Hen.  I, 
387-8.) 


nd  County. 
i  Chickoun 
irts  of  the 
d  between 
:  River  and 
,Oct.  1648, 
?.)  Name 
nd  first  oc- 
^ct  of  Feb., 
I,  294). 


-Lancaster  Co.*  (Formed, 
from       Northumberland 
and     York;     first     men- 
tioned in  extant  records, 
Jan.  1,  1651/2. )f 

Northumberland  Co. 


-[Old]  Rappahannock  Co. 
(Hen.  I,  427.  Dec,  1656; 
petition  of  the  inhabitanta 
of  the  lower  part  of  Lan- 
caster Co.  to  retain  the 
name  of  Lancaster:  upper 
part  to  be  named  Rappa- 
hannock.) 


-Lancaster  Co. 


Westmoreland  Co 

(Formed  from  North- 
umberland Co.;  Bounds 
given,  July,  1653,  Hen. 
1,  381). 


.Westmoreland  Co. 


.n.  **A  Palent  B^ok  HI»   P-    128  is  found  a  grant  to  Isaac 
alias  Gloucester,  Oct.   10,   1652. 


Stafford  County 

(Formed    from    Westmoreland    Co. 

First  mentioned,  Oct.  1666,  Hen.  II 

239). 

Richardson,   iand  in   Lancaster  Co. 


XLIl!Sp!  is''.11"1"    ^    Fl0>d    W-    SydDO^,    Vir(,ima    Ma'Ja*"lc    of    History    and    Biography,    Vol. 


Explanation  xxxv. 


EXPLANATION 

* — Indicates  the  omission  or  partial  list  of  headrights. 

(Names  are  given  when  they  appear.) 

A.,  Acs Acres 

Chs Chains 

CI.,  Clk Cierk 

Co County 

Cr Creek 

Ct Court 

Devdt Devident 

Ely.,  Ewd.,  E.most Easterly,   Eastward,   Eastermost 

Esqr Esquire 

Genl.,  Generll General 

Gent Gentleman 

Govr Governor 

Mrs Mistress    (not  always  a  married  woman) 

N.,  Nly.,  Nwd North,  Northerly,  and  so  forth 

P.,  Per Pole;  Perches 

Pers Persons 

Per.  adv Personal  adventure 

Riv River 

R Rod;  Rood. 

S.,  Sly.,  Swd South,  Southerly,  Southward 

Servt Servant 

Sw Swamp 

Trans Transportation 

W,  Wwd.,  Wly West,  Westward,  Westerly 

(    ) — Indicate  more  than  one  spelling  in  the  same  record. 
? — Indicates  uncertainty. 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Patent  Book  No.  1 


PART  I. 

By  the  Govern0'  and  Cap1  Gener11  of  Virginia 

To  all  to  whome  these  psents  shall  come  greeting  in  our  Lord  God  Everlasting 
Know  yee  that  I  Sr  Francis  Wyatt  Kt.  Governor  and  Capt.  Generll.  of  Virginia  by 
Vertue  of  the  great  Charter  of  orders  and  lawes  concluded  on  in  a  Generll.  quarter 
Court  by  the  Treasurer  Councell  and  Company  of  Adventurers  for  this  first 
Southerne  Colony  of  Virginia  according  to  the  authoritie  graunted  them  by  his 
Majtie.  under  his  great  Seale  and  by  them  dated  at  London  the  Eighteenth  day  of 
November  One  Thowsand  six  hundred  &  Eighteene  and  directed  to  the  Governor 
and  Councell  of  State  here  resident  doe  wth  the  approbacon  and  consent  of  the 
same  Councell  whoe  are  joyned  in  Commission  wth  mee  give  and  graunt  unto 
Georg  Sandys  Esqr.  and  Treasurer  in  Virginia  and  to  his  heires  and  assignes  for 
ever  in  the  nature  and  quallity  of  his  first  devident  to  bee  augmented  and  doubled 
by  the  Company  to  him  his  said  heires  or  assignes  when  hee  or  they  shall  once 
sufficiently  have  peopled  and  planted  the  same  three  hundred  acres  of  Land  scituate 
&  being  on  the  other  side  of  the  river  opposite  agt.  James  Citty  and  abutting 
Westward  on  the  land  of  John  Baineham  and  Eastward  on  the  land  of  Edward 
Grindon  of  both  which  devidents  hee  is  now  actually  possessed  &c.  *  *  *  One 
hundred  acres  of  the  same  being  for  a  bill  of  Adventure  of  twelve  pownds  tenn 
shillings  and  the  other  twoe  hundred  in  the  right  of  his  transportation  into  this 
Country  of  fower  servants  &c.  *  *  *  To  have  and  to  hold  the  said  three  hundred 
acres  of  Land  wth  the  apptennces  and  wth  his  due  share  of  all  mines  and  Mineralls 
therein  conteyned  and  wth  all  rights  and  priviledges  of  hunting  fishing  fowling  and 
others  wthin  the  p(re)cincts  and  upon  the  borders  of  the  same  Land  to  the  sole 
and  p(ro)per  use  benifitt  and  behoof e  of  him  the  said  Georg  Sandys  his  said 
heires  or  assignes  for  ever  in  as  larg  and  ample  manner  to  all  intents  and  purposes 
as  is  expressed  in  the  said  great  Charter  or  by  consequence  may  bee  justly  Collected 
out  of  the  same  or  out  of  his  Majties.  Letters  Patterns  whereon  it  is  grounded. 
Yeilding  and  paying  to  the  said  Treasurer  and  Company  and  to  their  Successors 
for  ever  yearely  at  the  feast  of  St.  Michaell  the  Archangell  for  every  fifty  acres  of 
his  said  devident  the  fee  rent  of  one  shilling  Provided  that  the  said  three  hundred 
acres  doe  extend  in  a  right  line  along  the  banke  of  the  said  river  not  above  one 
hundred  &  fifty  pole  at  sixteene  foote  and  a  halfe  the  pole.  In  Witness  whereof 
I  have  to  these  psents  sett  my  hand  and  the  Great  seale  of  the  Colony.  Given  at 
James  Citty  the  fowerth  day  of  December  in  the  yeares  of  the  raignes  of  our 
Soveraigne  Lord  James  by  the  Grace  of  God  King,  Defender  of  the  Faith  &c. 
Vizt,  Angl.  the  twoe  and  twentieth  Scot,  fifty  Eight  Anno  Domini  one  Thowsand 
Six  hundred  twenty  fower  Col:  Virga.  Eighteenth.     (P.  B.   1,  p.   12). 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


By  Sir  Francis  Wyatt 

RICHARD  STEPHENS,  3  score  rods, 
Dated  1623,  Page  1.  James  City.  "For 
his  better  conveniens  &c.  that  others 
may  be  the  more  encouraged  by  his 
example  to  build  and  enclose  some 
ground  about  their  howses  for  gardin- 
ing,  etc.,"  scituate  &  being  about  a  con- 
venient dwelling  house  which  he  has 
lately  builded  &  erected  in  James  Citty, 
the  which  land  lyeth  S.  upon  the  Way 
along  the  great  River,  E.  upon  land  of 
Capt.    Ralph    Hamor,    W.    on    land    of 

Jaxon,  &c.    (Record  badly  multi- 

lated).  Fee  Rent:  2  Shillings,  six  pence 
to  the  Treasurer  &  Company  &  their 
Successors,  yearly  on  the  feast  of  Saint 
Michael  the  Archangell. 

THOMAS  HOTHERSALL,  Gent,  of 
Paspehay,  200  acs.  as  his  first  devident; 
at  Blunt  Point,  adj.  Cornelius  May.  Jan. 
26,  1621,  p.  1.  100  acs.  for  the  personal 
right  of  himself  &  Francis,  his  wife,  & 
100  acs.  for  transportation  out  of  Eng- 
land of  2  of  his  children:  Richard  & 
Mary.  Fee  Rent:  1  Shill.  for  every  50 
acs.  to  the  Treasurer  &  Co.,  yearly  on 
the  feast  of  St.  Michaell,  the  Archangell. 
(Record  mutilated.) 

CAPT.  RAWLEIGH  CRAWSHAW, 

Gent,  of  Kiccoughtan,  an  Ancient 
Planter  who  hath  remained  in  this  coun- 
ty 15  years  complete  &  performed  many 
worthy  services  to  the  Colony,  500  acs. 
near  Old  Point  Comfort;  (date  miss- 
ing), p.  2.  For  his  per.  adv.  &  trans, 
out  of  England  of  his  servt.  (blank)  & 
his  wife,  whoe  came  in  the  Bona  Nova 
in  1620  &  25  Lbs.  adventured  &c.  (Note: 
The  first  pages  of  this  volume  are 
badly  mutilated  and  partially  illegible.) 

Note:  Pages  3  and  4  of  Patent  Book 
No.  1  are  missing.  The  following  ab- 
stracts were  taken  from  the  James  City 
Index  to  Patents;  with  the  exception  of 
John  Blow. 

SIR  GEORG  YEARDLY,  Knt.,  7 
Acs.  1  Rood,  within  the  precincts  of 
James  Citty  &  abutteth  Nly.  upon  the 
back  river  &  Sly.  upon  the  ground  of 
Capt.  Roger  Smith.    2  Dec.  1624,  p.  3. 


JOHN  BLOW,  150  acs.,  page  3. 
(From  General  Index  to  Patents,  which 
gives  no  further  information.) 

CAPT.  ROGER  SMITH,  Dec.  

1624,  p.  4.  In  the  precincts  of  James 
Citty,  butting  Swd.  upon  the  pale  of 
the  Governments  garden  &  Nwd.  upon 
ground  of  Sir  Georg  Yeardly.  This  par- 
cell  of  ground  is  devided  into  two 
peeces  by  the  highway  which  parteth  it, 
the  said  highway  being  about  three  pole 
broad  the  Westeme  side  toward  the 
parke  is  28  po.  The  remainder  being 
96  acs.  is  taken  up  at  Archers  Hope  by 
order  of  Court  the  12  Dec.  1625. 

RALPH  HAMOR,  ESQ.,  1^  acres, 
Aug.  14,  1624,  Page  5.  One  of  the 
Councell  of  State,  "for  the  better  con- 
venience and  more  comoditie  of  his 
howse  by  him  erected  and  builded  in 
the  New  Towne  within  the  precincts  of 
James  City,"  adj.  Georg  Menefey,  Rich- 
ard Stephens  &  John  Chew.  This 
ground  was  laid  out  by  mee  William 
Clayborne  it  lacketh  about  14  po.  of 
one  acre  and  a  halfe. 


GEORG  MENEFY,  Merchant,  for  the 
better  convenience  of  his  howse  by  him 
now  erected  &  builded  in  the  New 
Towne  within  the  precincts  of  James 
Citty,  3  Roode  &  20  pole  of  ground, 
lying  about  the  said  howse,  abutting 
Wwd.  upon  the  highway  parting  it  from 
Capt.  Ralph  Hamor,  Edw.  upon  Capt. 
John  Harvie,  Swd.  upon  the  high  way 
close  to  the  banke  of  the  maine  river, 
Nwd.  upon  the  bounds  belonging  to 
the  back  streete;  parte  of  his  first  devdt. 
of  50  acs.,  due  unto  himselfe  whoe 
came  in  the  Samuell  1622  haveing  beene 
in  this  country  almost  3  yeares.  Fee 
Rent:  2  pence  yearely  on  the  feast  of 
St.  Michaell  the  Archangell.  4  Feb. 
1624,  page  6.  This  ground  laid  out  by 
Willi.  Clayborne. 

CAPT.  JOHN  HARVY,  6^  acres, 
Jan.  12,  1624,  Page  7.  Within  the  pre- 
cincts of  James  City  "for  the  more 
comoditie  of  his  howses  and  building 
and  the  better  conveniency  of  gardining 
and  planting  of  sundry  fruits  and  trees," 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


in  the  New  Towne,  adj.  Mr.  Georg 
Menefye  and  opposite  Dr.  Pott.  Part  of 
his  first  devident  due  for  the  trans,  of 
John  Simnell  in  the  Southampton  in 
1624.  Fee  Rent:  2  pence.  Ground 
laid  out  by  Willi.  Clayborne. 

JOHN  CHEW,  1  R.  9  poles,  p.  7. 
Aug.  14,  1624.  Merchant.  For  the 
better  convenience  of  his  howse  builded 
in  the  New  Towne  within  precincts  of 
James  City,  adj.  N.  upon  the  backstreet, 
S.  upon  Rich.  Stephens  &  E.  upon  Capt. 
Hamor.    Fee  Rent:    1   peny. 

JOHN  POTT,  Esqr.,  3  acres.  Aug.  11, 
1624,  p.  8.  Doctor  of  Physicks  and  one 
of  the  Councel  of  State.  Lying  about 
his  howse  in  the  backstreete  being  part 
of  his  first  devident  for  his  personal 
adventure.  Renewed  Sept.  20,  1628. 
Land  laid  out  by  Wm.  Clayborne.  Fee 
Rent:   3  pence. 

WILLIAM  SPENCER,  Yeoman  & 
Ancient  Planter,  12  acs.  James  City, 
Aug  14,  1624.  Part  of  his  first  devi- 
dent within  the  island,  towards  Goose 
Hill,  near  land  of  Sir  Thos.  Dale  & 
John  Lytefoote.  Due  for  his  personal 
adv.  Land  measured  by  Wm.  Clayborne. 
Fee  Rent:  3  pence.  Marginal  Note: 
"which  is  to  bee  abated  out  of  his  devi- 
dend  at  Spencers  hole."    Page  9. 

JOHN  LYTEFOOTE,  12  acres,  Aug. 
14,  1624,  Page  10.  An  old  planter  who 
came  over  in  the  Sea  Venture  with  Sir 
Thomas  Gates  "and  hath  abode  hitherto 
in  this  country."  Within  the  island  of 
James  City,  towards  Goose  Hill,  near 
the  land  of  Wm.  Spencer.  Being  part 
of  his  first  devident  of  100  acs.  measured 
by  Wm.  Clayborne.    Fee  Rent:  3  pence. 

THOMAS  PASSMORE,  Carpenter,  12 
acs.  within  the  corporation  of  James 
City,  adj.  Mary  Holland  Aug:  14,  1624, 
p.  10.  Part  of  his  first  devident  and 
for  trans,  of  his  servant  John  Buck- 
master  who  came  in  the  great  Hopewell 
in  1623.  Fee  Rent:  3  pence.  Ground 
measured  by  Willi.  Clayborne. 

MARY  HOLLAND,  12  acres,  Aug. 
14,    1624,    Page    11.    Wife   of   Gabriel 


Holland,  of  the  Island  of  James  City, 
Yeoman.  Latelv  in  the  occupation  of 
Wm.  Pinke  alias  Wm.  Jonas,  deed.,  her 
former  husband,  who  at  his  death  gave 
her  his  devident  of  100  acres  of  which 
sd.  12  acs.  is  a  part,  adj.  Nathaniel 
Hutt  &  Thos.  Passmore.  Fee  Rent:  3 
pence.    Measured  by  Wm.  Clayborne. 

GEORG  SANDYS,  ESQR.,  Treasurer 
of  Virginia,  300  acs.,  Dec.  4,  1624,  p. 
12.  Opposite  James  City  and  adj. 
Westward  on  land  of  John  Baineham 
&  Eastward  on  Edw.  Grindon  "of  both 
which  devidents  he  is  now  actually 
possessed."  100  acs.  being  for  a  bill  of 
adv.  of  12  lbs.  10  s.  and  the  other  in 
right  of  trans,  of  4  servants:  William 
Right,  William  Heynes,  Jr.,  William 
Smith  &  Georg  Gurr,  all  of  whom  came 
from  the  Sumer  Island  in  the  Tyger  in 
1621.  Marginal  Note:  "Except  for  his 
bill  of  adventure  of  12  Lb.  10  s." 
Note:  I  measured  for  Mr.  Georg  San- 
dys at  his  plantacon  over  the  water  650 
acs.  (vizt)  200  acs.  for  Mr.  Bainhams 
devdt.  the  above  named  300  acs.  for  sd. 
Mr.  Sandys  &  150  acs.  more  for  devdt 
of  Edward  Grindon  by  the  water  side 
in  a  right  line  it  conteyneth  320  pole 
which  is  just  1  mile  &  soe  it  runneth 
up  into  the  woods  on  all  sides  square 
1   mile. — Willi.  Clayborne. 

THOMAS  SULLY,  of  the  Neck  of 
Land  in  the  Corp.  of  James  Citty,  Yeo- 
man &  old  planter,  6  acs.,  Aug.  14, 
1624,  p.  12.  Within  the  island  of  James 
Citty,  E.  upon  Blockhowse  feild  cleared 
in  the  time  of  the  government  of  Sir 
Thomas  Gates,  extending  towards  the 
new  blockhowse  lately  built.  Part  of 
his  first  devident  for  his  personal  ad- 
venture. 

ENSIGNE  JOHN  UTYE,  Gent,  of 
Hogg  Island.  100  acs.,  Nov.  3,  1624, 
p.  14.  Situated  on  the  other  side  of 
the  river  against  James  City  Wwd.  upon 
the  maine  Riv.,  near  mouth  of  Chip- 
poakes  Cr.,  Ewd.  upon  the  maine  land, 
Swd.  upon  the  first  branch  of  sd.  Cr. 
etc.  Trans,  out  of  England  of  2  servts: 
Wm.  Burt  &  Wm.  Stocker,  in  the  Bon- 
ny Besse  in  1623.  Fee  Rent:  1  Shill.  for 
every  50  acs. 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


JOHN  JOHNSON,  Yeoman,  and 
ancient  planter  of  James  City,  100  acres, 
Jan.  12,  1624,  p.  15.  His  first  personal 
divident,  whereof  15  acs.  is  situated  on 
E.  side  of  the  island  towards  Ensigne 
Wm.  Spencer,  deed.,  Wwd.  upon  a 
marsh  neare  adj.,  Nwd.  upon  the  backe 
river,  etc.  &  85  acs.  Swd.  upon  a  small 
br.  of  Archers  Hope  Cr.  parting  the 
same  from  the  maine  devdt.  of  Ensigne 
William  Spencer,  Nwd.  upon  another 
br.  of  sd.  Cr.,  Ewd.  upon  Archers  Hope 
Cr.  &  Wwd.  upon  a  swamp  on  the  back 
of  sd.  land.  Fee  Rent:  1  Shill.  for  every 
50  acs.  Note:  The  former  pattent 
granted  by  Sir  Georg  Yeardly  is  to  bee 
accounted  void. 

GEORG  SANDYS,  ESQR.  &  Treas. 
of  Va.,  400  acs.  in  the  precincts  of 
Archers  Hope  in  the  Corporation  of 
James  Citty,  4  Dec.  1624,  p.  16.  Abut- 
ting Wwd.  upon  land  of  Lt.  John  Jef- 
ferson, Ewd.  upon  the  ponds  deviding 
it  from  land  of  Martins  hundred,  Swd. 
upon  the  maine  river  &  Nwd.  upon  the 
maine  land.  50  acs.  for  his  personal 
adventure  in  the  George  in  1621  &  350 
acs.  for  trans,  of  7  servants:  Phoebus 
Hopkins,  Edward  Eastwood,  Martin 
Turner,  John  Stone,  whoe  came  with 
him  in  the  said  Georg,  &  John  Need- 
ham,  Thomas  Knowler,  &  Henry  Wood 
whoe  came  from  the  Sumer  Islands  in 
the  Tyger  in  1621.  Fee  Rent:  1  Shill. 
for  every  50  acs.  yearly  etc. 

JOHN  BAINHAM,  300  acres,  Dec. 
1,  1624,  Page  17.  Gent.,  of  Kiccough- 
tan,  in  Eliz.  City  Corp.,  as  his  first  devi- 
dent.  About  3  miles  up  the  main  creek 
between  Haxoms  Gaole  and  Blunt  Point, 
adj.  Capt.  Samuel  Mathews  &  Wm. 
Clayborne.  100  acs.  due  for  the  trans. 
of  John  Bainham,  his  son,  deceased, 
who  came  in  the  Charles  in  1621,  &  Robt. 
Draper,  in  the  Jacob  in  1624;  200  acs. 
for  trans,  of  4  servants:  John  Hogskins, 
John  Mott,  Sr.,  John  Mott,  Jr.  and  John 
Dansye,  Jr.,  son  of  John  Dansye,  dee'd., 
in  the  George  in  1621,  at  the  cost  of 
Mr.  Georg  Sandys.  Note:  This  pattent 
renewed  in  the  name  of  Thomas  Taylor 
23  Oct.  1643  &  50  acs.  added.  Test: 
Sam.  Abbot,  Clk. 

EDWARD     WATERS,     Gent.,     100 


acres,  Aug.  14,  1624,  Page  18.  Eliz. 
City,  about  two  miles  below  Blunt 
Point,  Edw.  upon  Waters  Cr.,  adj.  land 
of  Peircivall  Ibbison.  Due  for  trans,  out 
of  England  of  Edw.  Bryan,  in  the  Bona 
Nova,  1620,  &  William  Arnall,  in  the 
Seaflower,  1621,  2  servants,  whose 
passage  he  defrayed  to  Mr.  Thomas 
Hamor. 

RICHARD  TREE,  50  acres,  Aug.  14, 
1624,  Page  19.  Carpenter,  of  James 
City,  who  came  to  this  country  with 
Master  Abraham  Percye,  Cape  Mer- 
chant, in  the  George,  as  a  free  man. 
Adj.  Edw.  Grindall  &  Richard  Craven, 
etc.,  Wwd.  &  Nwd.  neare  unto  the 
highway  leading  to  black  point  Sec.  His 
first  per.  devdt. 

MAURICE  TOMPSON,  150  acres, 
4  March  1621,  Page  20.  Gent.,  a 
new  planter,  who  first  having  trans, 
himself  out  of  England  has  remained 
now  4  years  in  this  country.  Bet.  New- 
port News  &  Blunt  Point.  100  acs.  for 
trans,  of:  Georg  Tompson  &  John 
Bembridge,  out  of  England  &  50  acs. 
for  his  own  per.  adv. 

JOHN  SALFORD,  of  Kiccoughtan, 
in  the  Corp.  of  Eliz.  Citty,  Yeoman,  1 
Dec.  1624,  p.  21.  100  acs.  between 
Blunt  point  &  Newport  News,  abutting 
Wwd.  upon  land  of  Morris  Tompson 
&c,  unto  land  of  Pharoah  Flinton  &c. 
Said  land  claimed  as  heire  unto  Sarah 
Salford,  his  sister,  deed.,  an  Ancient 
Planter,  as  being  due  for  her  personal 
devident. 

PHAROAH  FLINTON,  Gent.,  an 
Ancient  Planter  of  Kiccoughton,  150 
in  the  Corp  of  Eliz.  City,  Dec.  1,  1624, 
p.  22.  Bet.  Newport  News  &  Blunt 
Point,  adj.  John  Salford  &  Lt  Giles 
Allington.  Due  for  his  personal  right 
and  for  trans,  out  of  England  of  Hugh 
Hall,  who  came  in  the  Margarett  and 
John  in   1623. 

LT.  GILES  ALLINGTON,  Gent.,  of 
Kiccoughtan  in  the  Corp.  of  Eliz.  Citty, 
an  Ancient  Planter,  100  acs.  1  Dec. 
1624,  p.  23.  Bet.  Newport  Newes  & 
Blunt  point,  abutting  Wwd.  upon  land 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


of  Pharoah  Flinton  &c.  unto  land  of 
William    Bentley    &c.    His    first    devdt. 

WILLIAM  BENTLEY,  50  acres,  Dec. 
1,  1624,  Page  24.  In  the  Corp.  of  Eliza- 
beth City,  a  new  planter  who  came  to 
this  country  at  his  own  charges  in  the 
Jacob  in  1624.  As  his  first  divident, 
between  Newport  News  &  Blunt  Point, 
adj.  Giles  Allington  &  Thos.   Godbye. 

THOMAS  GODBYE,  of  Kiccough- 
tan,  in  the  Corp.  of  Eliz.  Citty,  Yeoman 
&  an  Ancient  Planter,  1  Dec.  1624,  p. 
25.  100  acs.,  bet.  Newport  Newes  & 
Blunt  Pt.,  abutting  Wwd.  upon  land  of 
William  Bentlye  &c.  For  his  first  per. 
devdt. 

JOHN  TAYLOR,  of  Newport  Newes, 
Yeoman,  &  Ancient  Planter,  50  acs., 
being  one  halfe  of  his  first  devdt.,  in 
the  Parish  of  Kiccoughtan  in  the  Corp. 
of  Eliz.  Citty,  20  Sept.  1624,  p.  26. 
Ewd.  upon  land  of  John  Powell,  Wwd. 
upon  a  swamp  limiting  the  same  from 
the  land  of  Francis  Michaell,  Swd.  up- 
on the  greate  river  &  Nwd.  upon  the 
maine  land.  Note:  This  pattern  re- 
signed in  Court  28  Nov.  1633  &  his 
whole  devdt.  for  his  owne  person,  being 
an  old  planter,  100  acs.  was  granted 
him  to  take  it  up  where  hee  shall  find 
convenient;  50  acs.  more  granted  for 
his  wife  Rebecca  Ravening,  whoe  came 
in  the  Bonny  Besse  about  1623  "and  as 
hee  saith  paid  her  owne  passage  which 
hee  is  to  make  proof e  of." 

JOHN  POWELL,  of  Newports 
Newes,  Yeoman  &  Ancient  Planter, 
150  acs.  within  the  Corp.  of  Eliz. 
Citty,  20  Sept.  1624,  p.  27.  Ewd. 
upon  a  greene  Sw.  parting  it  from  land 
of  Capt.  William  Tucker,  Wwd.  upon 
land  of  John  Taylor  &c.  100  acs.  in 
his  owne  per.  right  &  50  for  his  servant 
Thomas  Practer  (or  Proctor)  whome  he 
bought  of  Capt.  Richard  Shepperd  "hee 
came  over  in  the  Mary  Providence 
1623." 

CAPT.    WILLIAM    TUCKER,    now 

Commander  of  Kiccoughtan,  150  acs. 
within  the  Corp.  of  Eliz.  Citty,  20  Sept. 
1624,  p.  29.  Ewd.  upon  land  of  Rich- 
ard Boulton,   Wwd.   upon  a  great   Sw. 


parting  it  from  land  of  John  Powell 
&c.  For  his  first  devdt.,  &  trans,  out  of 
England  at  his  owne  charges  of  Georg 
Tompson,  Paule  Tompson  &  William 
Tompson  "his  wives  bretheren." 

ROBERT  SALFORD,  Yeoman,  of 
Kiccoughtan,  in  the  Corp.  of  Eliz.  Citty, 
100  acs.  20  Sept.  1624,  p.  30.  "For 
terme  of  his  life  and  the  Revertion  to 
John  Salford  his  sonn  after  his  decease" 
&c.  Lying  within  the  mouth  of  Sal- 
fords  Cr.,  bounded  Ely.  by  the  maine 
br.  parting  it  from  land  of  Miles 
Prickett,  Wly.  by  land  of  the  sd.  Robert 
his  father,  &c,  which  land  he  claymeth 
in  the  right  of  his  wife  Joane,  dec'd., 
an  Ancient  planter,  by  the  Curtisye  of 
England  during  his  lifetime  &  after- 
wards to  descend  unto  the  sd.  John, 
his  sonn  by  the  sd.  Joane. 

JOHN  BUSH,  of  Kiccoughtan,  300 
acres,  Dec.  1,  1624,  Page  31.  Gent., 
who  came  to  this  country  in  the  Nep- 
tune in  1618.  Lying  within  the  parish 
of  Kiccoughtan  in  Elizabeth  City  Corp., 
adj.  Lt.  Albino  Lupo,  Wm.  Julian  & 
Wm.  Prickett.  For  the  trans,  out  of 
England  of  his  wife,  Elizabeth,  his  2  chil- 
dren Elizabeth  &  Mary,  who  all  came  in 
the  Guift  in  1619,  and  100  acs.  for 
trans,  of  2  servts:  Thomas  Hand  and 
Wm.   Parker,   in   the   Charles   in    1621. 

WILLIAM  JULIAN,  150  acres,  p. 
32,  Sept.  20,  1624.  Yeoman  &  ancient 
planter,  of  Kiccoughtan,  Eliz.  City.  His 
first  divident,  adj.  John  Bush.  For  his 
own  personal  right  and  trans,  out  of 
England  of  Nicholas  Abbott  who  came 
in  the  William  &  Thomas  in  1621. 

LIEUT.  ALBIANO  LUPO,  350  acres, 
Sept.  1,  1624,  Page  33.  Gent.,  and  an- 
cient planter  of  Kiccoughtan  in  the  cor- 
poration of  Elizabeth  City.  By  a  small 
branch  dividing  this  from  the  land  of 
his  wife  Elizabeth  Lupo,  near  land  of 
John  Bush.  For  his  personal  adventure 
and  the  trans,  out  of  England  of  5 
Servts:  John  Slaughter  &  John  Hayes 
who  came  in  the  George  in  1617,  Hester 
Wheeler  in  the  George  in  1619,  Daniel 
Palmer  in  the  Warwick  in  1621,  whose 
passage  he  defrayed  unto  John  Down- 
ham,   of  the  parish  of  Kiccoughtan,  & 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Elizabeth  Hayden  in  the  London  Mer- 
chant in  1620. 

ELIZABETH  LUPO,  wife  of  Albiano 
Lupo,  Gent.,  of  Kiccoughtan,  in  the 
Corp.  of  Eliz.  Citty,  50  acs.,  20  Sept. 
1624,  p.  34.  Swd.  upon  the  broad  creek 
by  the  old  pines,  Ewd.  upon  a  br.  of 
same  dividing  it  from  land  of  her  hus- 
band. Due  by  order  of  Court  out  of 
England. 

THOMAS  SPILMAN,  Gent.,  of  Kic- 
coughtan, in  the  Corp.  of  Eliz.  Citty, 
50  acs.  1  Dec.  1624,  p.  35.  Wwd.  up- 
on the  broad  creek  parting  it  from  land 
of  Lt.  Albiano  Lupo,  E.  on  land  of 
Edward  Hill,  dec'd.,  S.  upon  the  maine 
river  &  N.  upon  the  maine  land.  For 
his  personal  right,  having  come  over  at 
his  own  cost  in  the  George  in  1617. 

ALEXANDER  MOUNTNEY,  of 
Kiccoughtan,  in  the  Corp.  of  Eliz.  Citty, 
Yeoman  &  Ancient  Planter,  100  acs., 
20  Sept.  1624,  p.  37.  W.  upon  land  of 
Edward  Hill,  E.  upon  William  Cole, 
now  in  the  tenure  of  Capt.  Thomas 
Davis,  S.  upon  the  maine  river  &  N. 
upon  the  maine  land  For  his  first  per. 
devdt. 

ELIZABETH  DUNTHORNE,  an  old 
planter,  wife  of  Thomas  Dunthorne,  of 
Kiccoughtan,  in  the  Corp.  of  Eliz.  Citty, 
Yeoman.  100  acs.  N.  upon  a  creek  divid- 
ing this  from  land  of  William  Gainye,  S. 
upon  the  great  river,  E.  upon  a  sandy 
point  lying  out  of  the  mouth  of  South- 
ampton Riv.  &  W.  upon  Church  Cr., 
dividing  this  from  the  Gleab  land.  20 
Sept.  1624,  p.  38.  For  her  first  per. 
devdt. 

WILLIAM  GAINYE,  Marriner,  of 
Kiccoughtan,  in  the  Corp.  of  Eliz.  Citty, 
12  Jan.  1624,  p.  39-  200  acs.  Ewd.  up- 
on the  harbour  of  Southampton  Riv.,  W. 
upon  the  maine  land  unto  the  head  of  the 
Church  Cr.,  S.  upon  a  Cr.  parting  this 
from  land  of  Elizabeth  Dunthorne  &  N. 
upon  a  Cr.  parting  this  from  land  of 
William  Gapps.  200  acs.,  50  acs.  for 
his  per.  right  whoe  came  over  in  the 
Treasurer  at  his  owne  cost  in  1617  & 
for  trans,  out  of  England  of  3  servants: 
John    Shippey    (or    Sippey),    &    John 


Cooper,  whoe  came  in  the  Treasurer 
with  himselfe  &  Robert  Browne  whose 
passage  hee  defrayed  for  to  Mr.  Robert 
Gire  out  of  the  Marrigold  1618. 

WILLIAM  LANSDEN,  Yeoman  & 
an  Old  Planter,  of  Kiccaughtan,  in  the 
Corp.  of  Eliz.  City,  100  acs.,  3  June 
1624,  p.  40.  Upon  W.  side  of  South- 
ampton Riv.,  Ewd.  upon  same,  W.  upon 
the  maine  land  &  N.  upon  a  creek 
dividing  it  from  land  of  William  Clay- 
borne,  gent  &c.    For  his  first  per.  devdt. 

WILLIAM  CLAYBORNE,  Gent.,  of 
James  City,  150  acs.  in  the  Corp.  of 
Eliz.  City,  3  June  1624,  p.  41.  Divided 
into  2  parcels:  50  acs.  N.  on  land  of 
John  Gunnery,  S.  to  a  Cr.  parting  this  & 
land  of  William  Lansden,  E.  upon 
Southampton  Riv.  &  W.  upon  the  maine 
land;  100  acs.  adj.  on  the  other  side  of 
sd.  Lansden,  extending  Swd.  to  a  Cr. 
which  devideth  it  from  land  of  Wil- 
liam Capps,  h.  upon  sd.  Riv.  &  W. 
upon  the  maine  land.  Due  for  trans. 
out  of  England  at  his  own  costs  of  3 
servts:  William  Harris  in  the  Georg 
1621,  William  Morris  &  John  Pipps  in 
the  Tyger  1621. 

MARY  BOULDIN,  an  Ancient  Plan- 
ter, wife  of  Thomas  Bouldin,  100  acs. 
aboute  V/z  mi.  up  Southampton  Riv.  in 
the  Corp.  of  Eliz.  Citty,  12  Jan.  1624, 
p.  42.  Nwd.  upon  land  of  Thomas 
Bouldin,  her  husband,  S.  upon  the  Deep 
Cr.,  E.  upon  sd.  Riv.  &  W.  upon  the 
maine   land.    For   her   first   per.   devdt. 

THOMAS  BOULDIN,  of  Eliz.  Citty, 
Yeoman  &  Ancient  Planter,  200  acs. 
aboute  V/z  mi.  up  Southampton  Riv., 
20  Jan.  1624,  p.  43.  E.  upon  sd.  Riv., 
W.  upon  the  maine  land,  &  S.  upon  land 
of  Mary,  his  wife.  100  acs.  for  his  per. 
right  &  100  acs.  in  the  right  of  Rich- 
ard Birchett,  an  old  planter,  which  hee 
hath  given,  graunted  &c.  unto  sd.  Tho- 
mas as  by  indenture  betwixt  them  dated 
19  Jan.  1619. 

PETER  ARUNDELL,  Gent.,  of  Buck 
Roe  in  the  Corp.  of  Eliz.  Citty,  200 
acs.,  8  Nov.  1624,  p.  44.  Upon  the 
back  river,  abutting  N.  upon  same,  S. 
upon  the  maine  land  tending  towards 
the  head  of  Southampton  Riv.,  &  E.  up- 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


on  a  Cr.  parting  it  from  land  of  Bartho- 
lomew Hoskins.  Said  200  acs.  hee  clay- 
meth  for  2  shares  as  parte  of  a  bill  of 
adventure  of  287  Lbs.  10  Shillings 
dated  4  Oct.  1617,  signed  David  Wat- 
kins     Cash.    (Cashier  ?). 

BARTHOLOMEW  HOSKINS,  of 
Buck  Roe,  in  the  Corp.  of  Eliz.  Citty, 
an  Ancient  Planter  whoe  came  over  in- 
to this  country  before  the  departure  of 
Sir  Thomas  Dale,  100  acs.,  3  Nov. 
1624,  p.  45.  N.  upon  the  backe  river, 
S.  upon  the  maine  land  &  W.  upon  a 
cr.  dividing  same  from  land  of  Peter 
Arundell,  gent.    For  his  first  per.  devdt. 

JOHN  SIPSEY  (Sypsey),  Yeoman, 
of  Kiccoughtan,  250  acs.,  2  Sept.  1624, 
p.  46.  S.  side  of  the  river  over  against 
Kiccoughtan,  abutting  N.  E.  upon  a  Cr. 


parting  it  from  land  of  Capt.  William 
Tucker,  S.  W.  along  the  river  to  land 
of  Lt.  John  Cheesman  &c,  S.  E.  upon 
the  maine  land.  Due  in  right  of  his 
trans,  out  of  England  of  5  servants: 
Richard  Pullipen  whoe  came  from  New- 
found Land  in  the  Elizabeth  1621,  John 
Locke  in  the  Warwicke  1621,  Robert 
Morgan  in  the  Flying  Hart  1621,  Wil- 
liam Tompson  &  John  Edmonds  both  in 
the  Southampton  1622. 

JOHN  CHEESMAN,  Gent.,  of  Kic- 
coughtan, 200  acs.,  2  Sept.  1624,  p. 
47.  S.  side  of  the  Riv.  over  against 
Kiccoughtan,  &  N.  E.  on  land  of  John 
Sipsey.  Trans,  out  of  England  of  4 
servants:  Thomas  Fuller,  Inocent  Power, 
Peter  Dickeson  &  Cutbert  Brookes,  all 
of  whom  came  in  the  Southampton  in 
1622. 


By  the  Governor  and  Cap1  Gener11  of  Virginia 

To  all  to  whome  these  p(re)sents  shall  come  greeting  in  our  Lord  God  Ever- 
lasting Whereas  by  the  Ordinances  &  Constitutions  made  and  sett  forth  by  the 
late  Company  it  is  ordered  and  appointed  that  such  lands  and  devidents  as  shall 
bee  due  to  any  Adventurers  or  planters  of  what  condicon  or  quallity  soever  bee 
laid  out  and  assigned  unto  them  by  the  Governor  and  Councell  here  And  whereas 
the  same  power  and  authoritie  is  Confirmed  and  graunted  by  his  Majties.  Letters 
Pattents  directed  unto  mee  and  the  Councell  of  State  bearing  date  the  fowerteenth 
day  of  March  One  Thowsand  six  hundred  twenty  and  five  Now  Know  yee  that  I 
Sr  Georg  Yeardley  Kt.  Governor  and  Capt.  Generll.  of  Virginia  doe  wth  the 
Consent  of  the  Councell  of  State  give  and  grant  unto  *  *  *  and  to  his 
heires  &  assignes  for  ever  etc,  *  *  *  acres  of  land  as  his  first  devident  and  upon 
a  second  division  to  bee  augmented  and  doubled  unto  him  his  said  heires  and 
assignes  when  hee  or  they  shall  sufficiently  have  peopled  and  planted  the  same  Sec. 
(here  is  given  description  of  land,  etc.).  To  have  and  to  hold  &c.  Yeilding  and 
paying  Sec.  Provided  that  if  the  said  *  *  *  his  said  heires  or  assignes  shall 
not  plant  and  seate  upon  the  said  *  *  *  acres  of  land  wthin  the  time  and 
terme  of  three  yeares  now  next  ensuing  the  date  hereof  that  then  it  shall  and  may 
bee  lawful  for  any  Adventurer  or  planter  to  make  choice  of  and  seate  upon  the 
same.    In  Witness  &c.    (P.  B.  1,  p.  49). 


By  Sir  Georg  Yeardly 

CAPT.  WILLIAM  EPES,  of  Acco- 
macke,  450  acs.  on  the  Easterne  Shoare 
of  the  Bay  of  Chesepeiacke,  nere  unto 
the  plantation  of  Accomacke,  3  Feb. 
1626,  p.  49.  Nly.  on  the  mouth  of 
Kings  Cr.  parting  this  from  the  land 
belonging  to  the  place  of  Secretary,  Sly. 
towards  the  pursimond  ponds,  Ely.  along 
the  shore  of  the  sd.  Bay  of  Chesepeyacke 
&c.    Due  for  trans,  of  9  men:  William 


Gones,  (or  Jones)  William  Gallaway, 
John  Barker,  Edward  Rogers,  &  Thomas 
Warden,  whoe  all  arrived  in  the  Anne 
1623;  Nicholas  Raynbeare  (or  Rayn- 
beard)  in  the  Swann  in  1624,  Henry 
Carter  in  the  James  1624  &  assigned 
over  to  him  by  William  Streate  Marri- 
ner;  &  Richard  Reeve  (or  Reene)  ;  & 
John  Robbins  in  the  Returne  1625. 

LT.  GILBERT  PEPPETT,  250  acs.  on 
the  Sly.  side  of  Warwicke  Riv.    18  Aug. 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


1627,  p.  50.  Ely.  towards  the  mouth  of 
the  Riv.  on  a  Cr.  parting  it  from  land 
of  Capt.  Samuell  Mathewes,  now  in  the 
tenure  of  Thomas  Attowell  (or  Howell) 
&  Nathaniell  Floyd,  Wly.  towards  land 
of  Robert  Poole,  Nly,  on  sd.  river  & 
Sly.  towards  the  maine  river  between 
Colstons  Island  &  Cedar  Is.  100  acs. 
for  trans,  of  John  Hewes  &  Edward 
Parrey  in  the  Neptune  in  1618  at  the 
costs  &  charges  of  Capt.  Samuell  Ma- 
thews, whoe  in  open  court  at  James 
Citty  hath  given  &c.  unto  sd.  Peppet; 
&  50  acs.  by  trans,  of  Alice,  his  wife, 
whoe  came  in  the  Jonathan  in  1619,  for 
whose  passage  the  sd.  Sir  Geor.  Yeardly 
hath  sattisfied  &  likewise  sett  over  to 
sd.  Peppett;  &  100  acs.  for  trans,  of 
Richard  Evans  whoe  came  from  New- 
found Land  in  the  Temperance  in  1619 
&  William  Prowse  in  sd.  Temperance 
in  1624. 

ROBERT  POOLE,  Gent.,  300  acs.  on 
Sly.  side  of  Warwicke  Riv.,  8  Sept. 
1627,  p.  51.  Ely.  on  land  of  Lt.  Gilbert 
Peppett,  Wly.  towards  the  Church  there 
erected  &  built,  Nly.  on  sd.  Riv.  &  Sly. 
to  the  maine  river  between  Colsons  Is. 
&  Cedar  Is.  100  acs.  for  his  own  per. 
adv.,  &  200  acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of 
Robert  Poole,  his  father,  deed.,  &  John 
Poole,  his  brother,  deed.,  which  by  & 
after  their  decease  doth  descend  unto 
him  as  being  next  heire,  they  being  all 
three  of  them  old  planters  &  came  over 
into  this  country  in  the  Starr  with  Sir 
Thomas  Dale. 

ADAM  DIXON,  Yeoman,  of  the 
Corp.  of  James  Citty,  200  acs.  in  the 
Territorie  of  Tappahannah  &  being  one 
mile  or  thereabouts  below  the  upper 
Choopokes  Cr.  over  against  Danceing 
point,  Wly.  on  land  assigned  unto  the 
office  &  place  of  Treasurer,  Nly.  upon 
the  maine  river  &  Sly.  upon  the  maine 
land.  8  Sept.  1627,  p.  53.  Trans,  of 
himselfe,  Ann,  his  wife,  Elizabeth 
Dixon,  his  daughter  &  John  Martin  his 
servant,  all  of  whom  came  in  the  Mar- 
garett  &  John  in  1622. 

ROBERT  WRIGHT,  of  James  Citty, 
an  old  planter,  12  acs.  to  the  Ewd.  of 
James  Citty,  1  Sept.  1627,  p.  54.  W. 
on    a    marsh    parting    same    from    land 


lately  in  possession  of  Edward  Grindon, 
S.  on  the  maine  river  &  N.  along  the 
ridge  of  land  between  two  marshes.  Due 
as  parte  of  100  acs.  for  his  per.  adventure. 

JOHN  SOUTHERNE,  Gent.,  of 
James  City,  24  acs.  in  the  Island  of 
James  Citty,  1  Nov.  1627,  p.  55.  12 
acs.  thereof  being  a  neck  bounded  on 
E.  with  a  marsh  parting  this  from  land 
of  John  Johnson,  W.  on  a  marshe 
called  Tuckers  Hole,  N.  on  the  back 
river  &  S.  on  the  highway  leading  to 
black  point;  12  acs.  lying  neare  adj.  to 
the  former,  S.  on  land  of  Mary  Holland, 
the  wife  of  Gabriell  Holland,  N.  on 
land  of  John  Johnson,  E.  on  a  marsh 
&  W.  comeing  neare  unto  land  of  Tho- 
mas Passmore;  to  be  accounted  parte  of 
his  first  devdt.  of  50  acs.  due  for  trans. 
of  William  Soane,  whoe  came  in  the 
Georg  in  1621. 

CLEMENT  DILKE,  Gent.,  of  Acco- 
macke,  20  acs.  of  land  with  all  howses 
thereupon  built,  scituate  at  Accomacke 
&  being  part  of  the  late  Companies 
land,  abutting  N.  &  W.  upon  the  maine 
Cr.,  upon  ground  in  occupation  of 
Thomas  Powell  &  S.  upon  ground  now 
in  the  occupation  of  Nicholas  Fiskins, 
which  sd.  20  acs.  was  late  in  the  occu- 
pation of  Capt.  John  Wilcocks.  Lease: 
from  the  feast  of  St.  Thomas  the  Apos- 
tle now  last  past  for  &  during  the 
terme  of  10  years  from  thence  next  en- 
suing &  fully  to  bee  compleate  &  ended. 
Fee  Rent:  20  wgt.  of  good  &  merchant- 
able tobacco  yearly  on  the  above  feast 
day.    6  Feb.   1626,  p.   76. 

LEIUT.    THOMAS    FLINT,    of    Eliz. 

Citty,  50  acs.  23  Feb.  1626,  p.  77. 
With  the  howses  &c,  being  within  the 
precincts  of  the  Companies  Land  at 
Eliz.  Citty,  commonly  called  the  Indian 
howse   thickett,    being   a    neck   of   land 

lately  in  the  occupation  of  Capt.  

Whitacre,  lying  bet.  two  creeks  on  the 
E.  side  of  Southampton  Riv.  Lease:  (as 
above).  Fee  rent:  5  Lbs.  of  tobacco, 
(as  above.) 

DICTORIS  CHRISTMAS,  Planter,  of 
Eliz.  Citty,  50  acs.,  being  parte  of  the 
Strawberry  bancke,  Ely.  on  land  of  Ed- 
ward   Waters,    gent.,    Wly.  along    the 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


bancke  of  the  great  river,  S.  upon  the 
same  &  N.  with  direct  line  striking 
into  the  maine  land.  Lease:  10  yrs. 
(as  above.)  Fee  Rent  as  above.  24 
Aug.   1627,  p.  78. 

JONAS  STOCKDEN,  Minister,  50 
acs.  on  the  Ely.  side  of  Southampton 
Riv.,  within  the  Co.'s  Land  at  Eliz. 
Citty,  abutting  Sly.  on  a  Cr.  parting 
this  from  land  in  the  occupation  of  Lt. 
Thomas  Flint  commonly  called  the  In- 
dian howse  thickett,  N.  on  another  Cr., 


W.  on  sd.  Riv.  &  E.  on  the  maine 
woods.  8  Sept.  1627,  p.  79.  Lease,  (as 
above.) 

NICHOLAS  HOSKINS,  Yeoman,  of 
Accomacke,  20  acs.  being  parte  of  the 
late  Companies  land,  abutting  N.  upon 
ground  of  Thomas  Powell,  W.  upon 
ground  late  in  the  occupation  of  Capt. 
Wilcox  &  S.  upon  a  Swamp,  part  of 
which  sd.  ground  is  now  in  the  occu- 
pation of  sd.  Hoskins.  Lease,  as  above. 
5  Feb.  1626,  p.  85. 


By  the  Govern01'  and  Cap1  Gener11  of  Virginia 

To  all  to  whome  these  presents  shall  come  I  Francis  West  Esqr.  Govr.  and 
Capt.  Generll.  of  Virginia  send  greeting  in  our  Lord  God  Everlasting.  Whereas 
by  Instructions  from  the  Rt.  Honoble.  the  Lords  of  his  Majties.  most  Honoble. 
Privie  Councell  directed  to  the  Governor  and  the  rest  of  his  Majties.  Councell  of 
State  here  resident  in  Virginia  wee  have  receaved  direction  and  order  for  the 
planting  and  seating  of  such  lands  as  belong  to  the  late  Company  and  have  beene 
appointed  to  the  publique  Now  Know  yee  that  in  consideration  hereof  as  alsoe  in 
regaurd  of  the  better  peopling  and  securing  of  those  lands  belonging  to  the 
Company  &  Cittuate  and  being  in  the  precincts  of  Elizabeth  Citty  I  the  said  Francis 
West  doe  by  these  presents  wth  the  consent  of  the  Counsell  of  State  graunt  devise 
and  to  farme  lett  unto:  *  *  *  acres  of  land  scituate  and  being  within  the  precincts 
of  Elizabeth  Citty  aforesaid  &c.  (here  follows  description)  *  *  *  To  have  and  to 
hold  &c.  from  the  feast  of  St.  Thomas  the  Apostle  last  past  for  and  during  the 
terme  of  tenn  yeares  from  thence  next  ensuing  and  fully  to  be  compleate  and  ended. 
Yeilding  and  paying  therefore  yearely  unto  the  rent  gatherers  appointed  for  the 
publique  use  at  the  feast  of  St.  Thomas  the  Apostle  fifty  weight  of  good  and 
Merchantable  Tobacco.  Provided  alwaies  that  the  said  *  *  *  his  Executors 
or  assignes  shall  alwayes  during  the  said  Terme  sufficiently  people  and  plant  the 
said  Land  that  thereby  the  place  may  bee  the  better  strengthened  and  secured.  In 
Witness  &c. 


By  Francis  West 

CAPT.  CLEMENT  DILKE,  100  acs. 
on  the  Easterne  Shoare,  within  the  pre- 
cincts of  the  Plantation  of  Accomack, 
12  Dec.  1627,  p.  56.  N.  on  the  maine 
river  of  sd.  plantation,  S.  on  the  maine 
land,  E.  on  Curtaile  Cr.  parting  some 
from  land  of  Hannah  Savage.  Trans- 
portation of  himselfe  &  Elizabeth,  his 
wife,  whoe  came  in  the  Georg  in  1622. 

HANNAH  SAVADGE,  wife  of 
Thomas  Savadge,  of  Accomack,  Gent., 
50  acs.  on  the  Easterne  Shoare  within 
the  precincts  of  the  Plantation  of  Acco- 
macke, 12  Dec.  1627,  p.  57.  Being  a 
neck  of  land  abutting  N.  on  the  maine 
riv.,  whereon  they  are  now  seated,   S. 


on  the  maine  land,  E.  on  the  long  Cr. 
&  W.  on  Curtaile  Cr.  dividing  same 
from  land  of  Capt.  Clement  Dilke.  For 
her  first  per.  devdt.,  she  haveing  de- 
frayed the  charges  of  her  own  transpor- 
tation &  came  in  the  Sea  Flower  with 
Capt.  Ralph  Hamor  in  1621,  as  by  good 
certificate  appeareth  &c. 

LT.  THOMAS  FLINT,  1000  acs.  up- 
on the  Southerne  shoare  of  Warwicke 
Riv.,  20  Sept.  1628,  p.  59.  Ely.  upon 
land  of  Robert  Poole,  Gent.,  Wly.  to- 
wards the  head  of  sd.  river,  adj.  next 
unto  the  ground  graunted  by  pattent 
unto  John  Rolfe/  Esqr.,  dec'd.,  &  Capt. 
William  Peirce,  &  S.  upon  the  maine  river. 
Due  by  act  of  Court  the  9  Feb.  1627, 


10 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


for  trans,  of  20  pers.,  whoe  came  in  the 
Temperance  in  1621  for  the  account  of 
Sir  Georg  Yeardley,  Kt.,  &  sett  over 
unto  the  sd.  Lt.  Flint,  viz:  Maxmillian 
Stone,  Elizabeth  his  wife,  Georg  White- 
hand,  Thomas  Newson,  Thomas  Mann, 
Thomas  Harris,  Thomas  Powis,  William 
Chelmedge,  Jon.  Wray,  Phillipp  Smith, 
Richard  Gregory  &  John  Moyer,  Peter 
Mason,  Henry  Rowen,  Nath.  Thomas, 
William  Brooke,  John  Phillipps,  John 
Bradford,  John  Penny,  &  George 
Deverell. 

ELIZABETH  JONES,  wife  of  Giles 
Jones,  Gent.,  100  acs.  within  the  Island 
of  Point  Comfort,  16  Oct.  1628,  p.  60. 
Sly.  upon  the  ponds,  Nly.  towards  the 
end  of  the  island,  Ely.  upon  Chese- 
peiacke  Bay  &  Wly.  on  the  Cr.  parting 
it  from  the  maine  land.  Her  first  per. 
devdt.,  being  an  Ancient  Planter;  to  be 
doubled  etc. 

ENSIGNE  THOMAS  WILLOUGH- 
BY,  Gent.,  of  Eliz.  City,  50  acs.,  17 
Nov.  1628,  p.  61.  Wly.  upon  Salfords 
Cr.,  E.  unto  land  formerly  graunted  to 
Miles  Prickett,  now  in  the  tenure  of  sd. 
Willoughby.  Due  for  trans,  of  Strenght 
Shere  whoe  came  at  the  charge  of  Capt. 
William  Tucker  in  the  Ellins  1621  & 
made  over  to  sd.  Willoughby  by  Act  of 
Court  17  Oct.  1628. 

JOHN  POTT,  Dr.  of  Physicke  &  one 
of  the  Councell  of  State,  12  acs.  lying 
aboute  his  howse  within  the  precincts 
of  James  City,  20  Sept.  1628,  p.  61.  S. 
upon  the  back  streete,  Nwd.  through 
the  Swamp  &  W.  upon  ground  late  in 
the  tenure  of  Edward  Blaney.  Due  as 
part  of  his  per.  adv.  3  acs.  granted  to 
him  11  Aug.  1624,  to  which  the  above 
is  added. 

IZABELLA  PERRY,  wife  of  William 
Perry,  Gent.,  200  acs.  within  the  Corp. 
of  James  Citty,  20  Sept.  1628,  p.  62. 
At  the  S.  side  of  the  plantation  called 
Paces  Paine  granted  to  herselfe  &  her 
late  husband  Richard  Pace,  deed.,  5 
Dec.  1620;  W.  on  land  of  John  Bur- 
rowes  now  in  the  tenure  of  John  Smith, 
E.  to  land  graunted  to  her  son  Georg 
Pace,  &  N.  on  the  maine  river.  100  acs. 
for  her  owne  per.  adv.,  being  an  An- 


cient planter  &  the  other  100  acs.  as  the 
devdt.  of  Francis  Chapman,  having  been 
graunted  to  him  5  Dec.  1620  &  by  him 
made  over  to  Richard  Richards  &  Rich- 
ard Dolphenby  &  by  them  made  over  to 
sd.  Izabella  at  a  Court  at  James  Cittv 
21  Jan.   1621. 

GEORG  PACE,  sonn  &  heire  ap- 
parent to  Richard  Pace,  dee'd.,  400  acs. 
within  the  Corp.  of  James  Citty,  1  Sept. 
1628,  p.  64.  On  S.  side  of  the  river  at 
the  plantation  called  Paces  Paines, 
graunted  to  his  father  5  Dec.  1620;  W. 
on  land  of  his  mother  Izabella  Perry, 
E.  on  land  of  Francis  Chapman,  now  in 
the  tenure  of  William  Perry,  Gent.,  his 
father  in  law,  &  N.  on  the  maine  river. 
100  acs.  due  for  the  per.  adv.  of  Rich- 
ard Pace  &  300  acs.  by  trans,  of  Lewis 
Bayly,  Richard  Irnest,  John  Skinner, 
Bennett  Pulle,  Roger  Macker,  &  Ann 
Mason,  whoe  came  in  the  Marmaduke 
1621. 

THOMAS  SULLEY,  Planter,  of  Eliz. 
Citty,  94  acs.  towards  the  head  of 
Southampton  Riv.,  Sly.  on  a  Cr.  parting 
this  from  land  of  Thomas  Bolden,  Wly. 
upon  the  maine  land.  30  Nov.  1628, 
p.  65.  Part  of  his  per.  adv.,  being  an 
Ancient  Planter,  &  the  other  6  acs. 
within  the  Is.  of  James  Citty  to  be 
doubled  &c. 

MARTHA  KEY,  wife  of  Thomas 
Key,  Planter,  of  Warwick  River,  2  Dec. 
1628,  p.  66.  Lying  on  E.  side  of  Warr- 
wicksqueike  Riv.  opposite  against  land 
of  Capt.  Nathaniell  Basse,  Nly.  towards 
the  mouth  of  sd.  river  on  a  small  Cr., 
Sly.  up  the  same  to  land  of  Rice  Jones, 
W.  upon  the  river  &  E.  upon  the  maine 
land.  Her  first  per.  devdt.,  being  an 
Ancient  Planter. 

RICE  JONES,  Planter,  of  Warwick 
River,  50  acs.,  2  Dec.  1628,  p.  67.  Ly- 
ing on  the  Ely.  side  of  Warwicksqueicke 
Riv.,  Nly.  on  land  of  Martha  Key,  S. 
to  land  of  Phettiplace  Clause,  W.  on 
sd.  river  &  E.  on  the  maine  land.  Due 
as  his  first  devdt.  Due  unto  Francis 
West  for  trans,  of  sd.  Jones  whoe  came 
from  Cannada  in  the  John  &  Francis  in 
1623  &  by  these  presents  made  over  to 
him,  etc. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


11 


PHETTIPLACE  CLAUSE,  Ancient 
Planter,  100  acs.  on  E.  side  of  War- 
wicksqueake  Riv.,  Nly.  on  land  of  Rice 
Jones,  W.  upon  sd.  Riv.  &  E.  upon  the 
maine  land.  2  Dec.  1628,  p.  68.  Said 
100  acs.  graunted  to  him  by  Sir  Georg 
Yeardley,  &  being  scituated  in  the  upper 
part  of  the  River  as  by  pattent  dated  2 
May  1619,  which  pattent  is  now  re- 
signed &  given  up  in  regards  of  the 
great  danger  in  planting  the  same  etc. 

JOHN  LEYDEN,  Ancient  Planter, 
100  acs.  on  E.  side  of  Blunt  Point  Cr., 
abutting  N.  on  land  graunted  by  lease 
to  William  Cooksey,  extending  Sly.  to 
the  Cr.  (parting)  the  same  from  land 
now  in  the  tenure  of  Anthony  Burrowes 
&  William  Harris.  2  Dec.  1628,  p.  69- 
Formerly  granted  to  him  by  Sir  Georg 
Yeardley  within  the  Islands  of  Heneri- 
cus  &  Coxendale  2  May  1619.  (Mar- 
ginal note:  This  date  is  mistaken  it 
should  bee  26  Feb.  1619.)  Which  pat- 
tent is  now  resigned  in  reguard  of  the 
great  danger  of  planting  the  same  &c. 

EDWARD  JOHNSON,  Yeoman,  of 
Eliz.  Citty,  50  acs.,  being  a  parte  of  the 
Strawberry  bancks,  abutting  Wly.  upon 
Thomas  his  Creek  parting  the  same 
from  land  of  Edward  Waters,  gent., 
Ely.  along  the  bancke  of  the  greate 
river,  Sly.  upon  the  same  &  Nly.  with 
a  direct  line  striking  up  into  the  maine 
land.  Lease:  10  years.  Fee  Rent:  50 
Lbs.  weight  of  tobacco.  24  Nov.  1627, 
p.  77. 

DAVID  POOLE,  of  the  Country  of 
France,  Vignorone,  &  now  inhabiting 
Eliz.  Citty,  60  acs.  lying  at  Buck  Roe, 
within  sd.  precincts,  abutting  N.  on 
land  of  Richard  Ball,  S.  on  land  of  John 
Arundell,  gent.,  E.  on  the  Cr.  parting 
same  from  Point  Comfort  Island.  To 
have  &  to  hold  &c,  unto  the  said  David 
Poole  for  &  to  the  only  use  benifitt  & 
behoofe  of  his  Master  John  Bonall  of 
London,  gent.,  &c.  Lease:  10  years. 
12  Dec.  1627,  p.  80. 

JOHN  ARUNDELL,  Gent.,  12  acs. 
lying  at  Buck  Roe  within  the  precincts 
of  Eliz.  Citty,  N.  on  a  Cr.  parting  same 
from  land  of  David  Poole,  Frenchman, 
S.   on   another   Cr.   parting   same   from 


land  of  James  Bonall,  Frenchman  &  E. 
on  the  Cr.  parting  same  from  Point 
Comfort  Island.  Lease,  (as  above.)  12 
Dec.  1627,  p.  81. 

JOHN  WEBB,  Marriner,  50  acs. 
within  the  precincts  of  the  plantation 
of  Accomacke,  N.  on  the  maine  river  of 
sd.  plantation,  S.  on  the  maine  land,  E. 
on  land  of  Capt.  Clement  Dilke  &  W. 
upon  land  of  Georg  Med  calf  e.  10  year 
lease,  as  above.    13  Dec.   1627,  p.  81. 

JAMES  BONALL,  Vignerone,  50 
acs.  within  the  precincts  of  Eliz.  Citty, 
at  Buck  Roe,  N.  on  a  Cr.  parting  same 
from  land  of  John  Arundell,  S.  on  an- 
other Cr.  parting  it  from  land  of  Wil- 
liam Hampton  &  E.  upon  the  Cr.  divid- 
ing it  from  point  Comfort  Island.  10 
yr.  Lease,  as  above.  12  Dec.  1627, 
p.  82. 

JOHN  HEMY,  Planter,  (or  Henry), 
150  acs.  at  Buck  Roe  within  the  pre- 
cincts of  Eliz.  Citty,  N.  on  land  of 
William  Hampton  now  William  Fowler, 
extending  S.  150  po.,  E.  on  the  Cr. 
parting  same  from  point  Comfort  Is- 
land. Lease,  as  above.  12  Dec.  1627, 
p.  83.  (This  name  is  indexed  as  Henry 
in  the  county  index.)  Marginal  note: 
Now  graunted  to  Henry  Coleman. 

WILLIAM  HAMPTON,  Planter,  50 
acs.  at  Buck  Roe,  within  &c,  abutting 
on  a  Cr.  parting  the  same  from  land 
of  James  Bonall,  Frenchman,  extending 
S.  to  land  of  John  Henry,  (or  Hemy), 
Planter,  &  E.  upon  Cr.  parting  same 
from  point  Comfort  Island.  Lease,  as 
above.    10  Dec.  1627,  p.  84. 

RICHARD  BALL,  Planter,  6  acs.  at 
Buck  Roe,  within  &c,  abutting  N.  up- 
on a  small  marsh  towards  the  wading 
place,  S.  upon  land  of  David  Poole, 
Frenchman,  E.  upon  a  Cr.  parting  same 
from  Pt.  Comfort  Is.  Lease,  as  above. 
10  Dec.   1627,  p.  84. 

ROBERT  BROWNE,  Planter,  of  Ac- 
comack, 20  acs.  upon  the  E.  shoare  of 
the  bay  of  Chesepeyack  at  Accomack, 
with  all  howses  &c,  abutting  towards 
the  S.  W.  upon  land  belonging  to  the 
place  of  Secretary,  N.  E.  upon  land  late 


12 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


in  the  tenure  of  Capt.  Clement  Dilke, 
S.  W.  upon  land  of  John  Home  (?)  & 
S.  W.  upon  the  maine  land.  Lease,  as 
above.    20  Sept.  1628,  p.  86. 

JOHN  HOME  (or  Howe— name 
altered),  Gent.,  of  Accomack,  30  acs. 
with  all  howses  &c,  abutting  N.  on  a 
Cr.  parting  the  same  from  the  land 
belonging  to  the  late  Company  & 
graunted  by  lease  to  Capt.  Clement 
Dilke,  S.  on  a  Cr.  dividing  this  from 
the  land  belonging  to  the  place  of  Secre- 
tary, W.  on  the  mouth  of  the  maine 
Cr.  towards  the  bay  of  Chesepeiacke  & 
E.  upon  land  now  in  the  tenure  of 
Robert  Browne.  Lease,  as  above.  20 
Sept.   1628,  p.  87. 

WILLIAM  HARRIS,  Planter,  of 
Warwick  River,  100  acs.  about  2  mi. 
below  Blunt  point,  abutting  W.  on  a 
Cr.  parting  same  from  land  of  Richard 
Tree,  Ely.  along  the  maine  river  &c. 
Lease,  as  above.    20  Sept.  1628,  p.  88. 

LT.  THOMAS  PURFURY,  100  acs. 
within  the  precincts  of  Eliz.  Citty,  abut- 
ting W.  on  a  Cr.  which  divides  the 
same  from  the  feilds  called  fort  Henry, 
E.  50  po.  unto  the  ground  in  like  man- 
ner graunted  unto  Christopher  Cal- 
thropp,  Gent.,  S.  on  the  maine  river  &c. 
Lease,  as  above.    20  Sept.  1628,  p.  88. 

WILLIAM  COX,  of  Eliz.  Citty, 
Planter,  100  acs.  within  sd.  precincts, 
abutting  E.  on  land  of  Dictoris  Christ- 
mas, Planter,  extending  towards  ground 
now  graunted  to  Christopher  Calthropp, 
Gent.,  S.  on  the  maine  river  &c.  Lease, 
as  above.    20  Sept.  1628,  p.  89. 

CHRISTOPHER  WINDMILL,  Plan- 
ter, of  Eliz.  Citty,  60  acs.  within  sd. 
precincts,  abutting  Sly.  on  the  planta- 
tion commonly  called  the  Indian  howse 
thickett  &  formerly  in  like  manner 
graunted  unto  Lt.  Thomas  Flint,  N.  on 
ground  of  Jonas  Stockden,  Minister, 
dec'd.,  &  W.  upon  Southampton  Riv. 
Lease,  as  above.    20  Sept.  1628,  p.  90. 

WALTER     HEYLEY,     an     Ancient 


Planter,  50  acs.  within  the  precincts  of 
Eliz.  Citty,  abutting  S.  on  ground  of 
Jonas  Stockton,  Minister,  N.  towards 
the  head  of  Southampton  Riv.  &c.  Lease, 
as  above.    20  Sept.  1628,  p.  91. 

ROBERT  MARSHALL,  Planter,  10 
acs.  within  the  Island  of  James  Citty, 
W.  on  land  of  Mary  Bayly,  E.  on  land 
of  Thomas  Passmore,  Carpenter,  S.  on 
the  highway  adj.  to  the  Marshes  of 
Goose  hill  &  W.  upon  the  highway 
parting  the  same  from  land  now  in  the 
occupation  of  Elmer  Phillipps.  20  Sept. 
1628,  p.  92. 

LT.  EDWARD  WATERS,  100  acs. 
within  the  precincts  of  Eliz.  Citty,  being 
part  of  the  Strawberry  banckes,  abutting 
E.  on  Thomas  his  Cr.  towards  the  part 
of  Buck  Roe,  W.  along  the  banke  of 
the  river,  S.  upon  the  maine  river  & 
N.  with  a  direct  line  up  into  the  maine 
land.  Lease,  as  above.  20  Oct.  1628, 
p.  93. 

CHRISTOPHER  WINDMILL,  Plan- 
ter, 50  acs.  within  the  precincts  of  Eliz. 
Citty,  S.  on  a  Cr.  which  goeth  toward 
the  land  of  Walter  Heley,  W.  on 
Southampton  Riv.  &  E.  on  the  maine 
land.  Lease,  as  above.  30  Nov.  1628, 
p.  93. 

WILLIAM  HARRIS,  Planter,  of 
Warwick  River,  50  acs.  about  2  mi.  be- 
low Blunt  point,  W.  upon  land  of  sd. 
Harris,  extending  E.  25  po.,  S.  on  the 
maine  river  &  N.  into  the  maine  woods. 
Lease,  as  above.    20  Nov.  1628,  p.  94. 

WILLIAM  COOKESEY,  Planter,  of 
Warwick  Riv.,  150  acs.  on  the  E.  side 
of  Blunt  point  Cr.,  N.  upon  a  Cr.,  S.  75 
po.  to  land  of  John  Layden  &c.  Lease, 
as  above.    2  Dec.  1628,  p.  95. 

NICHOLAS  ROE,  Planter,  43  acs. 
within  the  precincts  of  Eliz.  Citty,  W. 
on  the  long  creek  partng  this  from  land 
of  Giles  Jones,  S.  25  po.,  E.  upon 
Point  Comfort  Cr.  &  W.  upon  the 
maine  land.  Lease,  as  above.  2  Dec. 
1628,  p.  96. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


13 


By  the  Govern0'  and  Cap1  Gener11  of  Virginia 

To  all  to  whome  these  p(re)sents  shall  come  I  John  Pott  Esqr.  Governor  and 
Capt.  Generll.  of  Virginia  send  greeting  in  our  Lord  God  Everlasting  Whereas  by 
an  order  of  Court  made  the  twelfth  day  of  January  one  Thowsand  six  hundred 
twentie  six  It  was  thought  fitt  and  accordingly  ordered  that  such  servants  tennants 
and  planters  as  have  noe  land  belonging  unto  them  by  Adventure  purchase  or 
otherwise  should  have  a  Competent  quantitie  of  ground  graunted  unto  them  in 
convenient  and  secure  places  Now  Know  yee  that  in  consideration  hereof  I  the 
said  John  Pott  doe  by  these  psents  wth  the  consent  of  the  Councell  of  State  graunt 
devise  and  to  farme  lett  unto  *  *  *  To  have  and  to  hold  the  said  *  *  *  acres 
of  land  wth  the  appertenances  unto  the  said  *  *  *  his  Executors  Admrs.  and 
assignes  from  the  feast  of  St.  Thomas  the  Apostle  now  last  past  for  and  during 
the  terme  of  tenn  yeares  from  thence  next  ensuing  fully  to  bee  Compleate  and 
ended.  Yeilding  and  paying  therefore  yearely  unto  the  rent  gatherers  appointed 
for  the  publique  use  at  the  feast  of  St.  Thomas  the  apostle  three  pownd  weight 
of  good  and  Merchantable  Tobacco.  Provided  alwaies  that  the  said  *  *  *  his 
Executors  or  assignes  shall  alwaies  during  the  said  terme  sufficiently  people  and 
plant  the  said  land  that  thereby  the  place  may  bee  better  strengthened  and  secured. 
In  Witness  &c.    (P.  B.  1,  p.  97). 


By  John  Pott 

ROBERT  SWEETE,  Gent.,  of  Eliz. 
Citty,  150  acs.  lying  below  Waters  Cr., 
abutting  W.  on  land  graunted  to  Robert 
Hutchins,  Marriner,  Ely.  by  the  water- 
side, S.  upon  the  maine  river  &  N. 
upon  the  maine  land.  14  Mar.  1628, 
p.  70.  Due  for  trans,  of  3  pers:  Him- 
selfe  in  the  Neptune  in  1618,  John 
Rutherford  in  the  Warwicke  1621  & 
William  Weaver  in  the  John  &  Francis 
1623. 

WILLIAM  ANDREWES,  Planter,  of 
Accomack,  100  acs.  on  the  Easterne 
shoare  of  the  bay  of  Chesepeiacke,  14 
Mar.  1628,  p.  71.  N.  upon  Capt.  Wil- 
liam Epes,  S.  towards  the  pursimmond 
ponds,  W.  upon  the  main  baye.  Trans, 
of  Robert  Owles  &  John  Holmes  whoe 
came  in  the  Southampton  1622  at  the 
charges  of  William  Ferrer,  Esqr.  & 
made  over  to  sd.  Andrewes  by  Act  of 
Court  3  Mar.  1628. 

THOMAS  GRAIES,  (or  Graves),  An- 
cient Planter,  200  acs.  on  the  E.  side  of 
the  Shoare  of  the  bay  of  Chesepeiacke 
butting  Sly.  on  land  of  Capt.  Henry 
Fleete,  extending  Nly.  along  the  water 
side  &  Wly.  on  the  bay.  14  Mar.  1628, 
p.  72.  Due  by  vertue  of  an  adv.  of  25 
Lbs.  paid  to  Sir  Thomas  Smith,  late 
Treasurer  for  the  Co.  of  Va. 


MARY  FLINT,  Ancient  Planter,  now 
wife  of  Thomas  Flint,  Gent.,  of  War- 
wick Riv.,  100  acs.  in  the  Corp.  of 
Eliz.  Citty,  commonly  called  Foxhill, 
being  a  neck  of  land  abutting  Ely.  on 
the  Cr.  parting  same  from  Point  Com- 
fort Island,  14  Mar.  1628,  p.  73.  Due 
as  her  first  per.  devdt. 

ZACHARIAH  CRIPPS,  of  Warwick 
Riv.,  100  acs.  lying  at  the  mouth  of  sd. 
Riv.,  Sly.  upon  Saxons  gaole,  Nly.  to- 
wards land  of  Lt.  Gilbert  Peppitt,  dec'd., 
Ely.  upon  the  maine  river  &  Wly.  upon 
a  Cr.  parting  same  from  Colsonns  Is- 
land. P.  74.  (Date  not  given).  Trans, 
of  Thomas  Dryhurst  &  Mathew  Lyving 
whoe  came  in  the  Neptune  1618  at  the 
charge  of  Capt.  Samuell  Mathews  & 
made  over  to  sd.  Cripps  by  Act  of  Ct., 
5  Mar.  1628. 

THOMAS  DELAMAJOR,  Joyner,  of 
James  Citty,  a  small  slipe  of  land  lying 
at  Goose  hill  within  the  Island  of  James 
Citty,  conteyning  3  acs.,  abutting  W. 
upon  land  of  Dame  Elizabeth  Dale,  E. 
upon  Goose  hill  Marsh,  S.  towards  the 
maine  river  &  N.  on  the  Island.  Lease: 
10  years.    14  Mar.  1628,  p.  97. 

ROGER  SAUNDERS,  Marriner,  of 
Accomacke,  50  acs.  upon  the  E.  shoare 
of  Chesepiacke  Bay,  abutting  S.  on 
ground  of  John  Blore,   dec'd.,   now  in 


14 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


possession  of  sd.  Roger,  N.  along  the 
water  side  to  land  of  Capt.  Henry  Fleete 
&  W.  upon  the  maine  bay.  Lease,  as 
above.    14  Mar.  1628,  p.  98. 

ELI  AS  la  GUARD,  Vignerone,  100 
acs.  upon  the  Wly.  side  of  Harris  his 
Cr.,  Nly.  on  the  first  br.  running  out  of 


same    &c.    Lease, 
1628,  p.  99. 


as    above.    14    Mar. 


WILLIAM  SMITH,  Planter,  of  Acco- 
mack, 100  acs.  Sly.  on  land  of  John 
Fulwood,  Nly.  along  the  water  side,  & 
Wly.  upon  Chesepeiacke  Bay  &c.  Lease, 
as  above.    15  Oct.  1629,  p.  100. 


By  the  Govern0'  and  Cap1  Gener11  of  Virginia 

To  all  to  whome  these  p(re)sents  shall  come  I  Sr  John  Harvey  Kt.  Governor 
and  Capt.  Generll..  of  Virginia  send  greeting  in  our  Lord  God  Everlasting. 
Whereas  by  the  ordinances  and  Constitutions  formerly  made  and  sett  forth  by  the 
late  Company  for  the  affaires  of  this  Colony  It  is  ordeyned  and  appointed  that  all 
such  devidents  of  Land  as  are  due  or  belonging  to  any  Adventurers  or  planters  of 
what  condicon  soever  they  bee  should  bee  laid  out  and  assigned  unto  them  by  the 
Governor  and  Councell  thereof  established  And  whereas  the  same  power  and 
authoritie  is  Confirmed  &  graunted  by  his  Majties.  Letters  Pattents  directed  to 
mee  and  the  Councell  of  State  bearing  date  the  six  and  twentieth  day  of  March 
in  the  third  yeare  of  his  Majties.  raigne  that  now  is  one  Thowsand  six  hundred 
twentie  seaven  Now  Known  yee  that  I  the  said  Sir  John  Harvey  doe  by  these 
psents  wth  the  consent  of  the  Councell  of  State  give  and  graunt  unto  *  *  *  and 
to  his  heires  and  assignes  for  ever  *  *  *  acres  of  land  scituate  lying  and  being 
&c.  To  have  and  to  hold  the  said  *  *  *  acres  of  land  wth  the  appurtenances  wth 
his  due  share  of  all  Mines  and  Minneralls  therein  Conteyned  wth  all  &c.  Yeilding 
and  paying  for  every  fifty  acres  of  land  herein  by  these  psents  given  and  graunted 
the  fee  rent  of  one  shilling  of  lawfull  mony  of  England.  Provided  &c.  Dated  at 
James  Citty  the  *  *  *  day  of  *  *  *  in  the  *  *  *  yeare  of  the  raigne  of  our 
Soveraigne  Lord  Charles  &c.  Anno  Domini  one  Thowsand  six  hundred  *  *  * 
(P.  B.  1,  P.  75). 


By  Sir  John  Harvey 

RICHARD  ATKINS,  Planter,  of 
Mulberry  Island  in  Va.,  100  acs.  lying 
at  the  head  of  Kethes  Cr.,  Sly.  towards 
land  of  Mr.  Thomas  Harwood,  the  first 
bounds  beg.  aboute  a  mile  from  the 
same,  extending  Nly.  &c.  27  Aug.  1632, 
p.  75.  Due  by  order  of  Ct.  dated  6 
Mar.  1632,  viz:  50  for  his  owne  per. 
adv.  in  the  Abigail  1621  at  the  charge 
of  Capt.  William  Peirce,  &  50  acs.  in 
right  of  his  wife  whoe  came  in  the 
Tyger  1621  at  his  owne  charge. 

NICHOLAS  BROWNE,  Planter,  50 
acs.  within  the  precincts  of  Eliz.  Citty, 
Sly.  on  land  of  Walter  Heeley,  N.  to- 
wards the  head  of  Southampton  Riv.  &c. 
Lease:    21    yrs.    6   June   1632,   p.    101. 

JACOB  AVERIE,  500  acs.  on  Skiffs 
Cr.,  stretching  Nly.  towards  the  Cr.  to 
Martins  Hundred,  S.  W.  towards  land 


of  Thomas  Nowell,  E.  upon  the  maine 
(river),  beg.  on  E.  side  of  a  spring 
called  Jacobs  Well,  measuring  to  the 
Wwd.  21  yr.  Leas.  Fee  Rent:  500  Lbs. 
of  good  &  merchantable  tobacco  yearly 

on  the  feast  of  All  Saints.  ,  1630, 

p.  102. 

THOMAS     PURIFOY,     ESQR.,     of 

Eliz.  Citty,  500  acs.  upon  a  point  called 
Cross  quarter,  bounded  S.  W.  with  the 
back  river  &  goeth  to  a  point  called 
Willoughbys  Neck  E.  &  lyeth  upon  the 
Pocoson  Riv.,  which  runneth  N.  W. 
&c.  Fee  Rent:  1  Shilling  yearely  at 
feast  of  St.  Michaell  the  Archangel!  for 
every  50  acres.    10  May  1631,  p.   103. 

CAPT.  ROBERT  FELGATE,  Gent., 
350  acs.  lying  at  Kiskeyacke  upon 
Pamunkey  Riv.,  E.  upon  ground  of 
Capt.  John  West,  W.  along  the  maine 
river  &c.  25  Apr.  1632,  p.  104.    Trans. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


15 


of  himself e,  his  sonn  &  4  servants,* 
whoe  came  in  the  William  &  John  1628, 
being  graunted  by  order  of  Ct.  7  Dec. 

1630.  His  first  devdt.,  to  be  doubled, 
etc. 

CAPT.  TOBYE  FELGATE,  Marriner, 
150  acs.  at  Kiskeyacke  upon  Pamunkey 
Riv.,  abutting  E.  upon  land  of  his 
brother  Capt.  Robert  Felgate,  W.  along 
the  maine  river  towards  a  small  Cr.  &c. 
Due  unto  him  as  an  Adventurer  into 
this  Colony  &  graunted  by  order  of  Ct. 
7   Dec.    1630.    25    Apr.    1632,   p.    105. 

ROGER  SAUNDERS,  Gent.,  300  acs. 
at  Accomacke  commonly  called  the  In- 
dian feild,  S.  E.  upon  the  Cr.  that  run- 
neth by  the  old  plantation,  N.  E.  on  the 
Cr.  running  between  this  &  land  of  Mr. 
Harman  &c.  Due  by  order  of  Ct.  6 
Oct.  1631.  18  June  1632,  p.  106.  His 
first  devdt.,  to  be  doubled,  etc. 

WILLIAM  DAWKES,  Planter,  250 
acs.  in  the  upper  part  neare  the  neck 
of  land  commonly  called  Verinas,  but- 
ting E.  upon  2  Mi.  Cr.,  W.  towards 
land  of  Thomas  Packer,  (or  Parker),  S. 
upon  a  Swamp  adj.  to  the  maine  river. 
20  June  1632,  p.  107.  Due  in  right  of 
his  father  Henry  Dawkes  &  his  uncle 
William  Leigh  for  their  per.  adv.  &  by 
bill  of  adv.  dated  14  July  1608  & 
granted  to  him  by  order  of  Ct.  the  7 
Oct.  last  past.  His  first  devdt.,  to  be 
doubled,  etc. 

ROBERT  BARRINGTON,  of  James 
Citty,  250  acs.  within  sd.  Corp.,  3  July 

1631,  p.  108.  S.  upon  the  back  river, 
N.  E.  upon  Powhetan  Sw.  &  N.  W. 
upon  the  fore  great  river.  His  first 
devdt,  etc. 

JOHN  ARUNDELL,  Gent.,  of  the 
lower  parish  of  Eliz.  Citty,  100  acs. 
within  the  Corp.  of  Eliz.  Citty,  upon 
the  back  river,  1  Aug.  1632,  p.  109. 
Abutting  W.  upon  land  of  Bartholo- 
mew Hoskins,  E.  towards  land  of  John 
Chandler  &c,  S.  towards  the  head  of 
Southampton  Riv.  Due  as  one  share  in 
parte  of  a  bill  of  adv.  of  287  Lbs.  10 
Shill.  dated  4  Oct.  1617  signed  David 
Watkins  Cash.  (Cashier.) 


THOMAS  HARWOOD,  of  SkifTes 
Cr.,  Gent.,  100  acs.  upon  sd.  Cr.,  1 
Sept.  1632,  p.  110.  Abutting  S.  upon 
land  of  sd.  Harwood,  graunted  in  the 
right  of  Sergt.  Hugh  Heyward  by 
pattern  dated  with  these  presents,  N. 
towards  the  head  of  sd.  Cr.  &c. 

SAME.  140  acs.  on  Skiffes  Cr.,  1 
Sept.  1632,  p.  111.  Abutting  Sly.  to- 
wards land  of  Mr.  Avery  &c.  Due  in 
the  right  of  Hugh  Heyward,  being 
graunted  to  him  by  order  of  Ct.  the  29 
June  1631  &  confirmed  unto  him  with 
the  acknowledgment  of  sd.  Heyward. 

JOHN  POTT,  Doctor  in  Phisick,  of 
Harrop  within  the  Corp.  of  James  Citty, 
200  acs.  upon  Skiffes  Cr.  that  parts  the 
same  from  land  of  Mr.  Thomas  Nowell, 
Nly.  towards  land  of  Mr.  Jacob  Avery. 
1  Sept.  1632,  p.  113.  Due  for  the  adv. 
of  4  servants:  John  Milward,  Randolph 
Holt,  Ruth  a  maid  servant  &  Thomas 
Popkin  whoe  came  in  the  George  1621. 

WILLIAM  DAWKES,  of  Verinas, 
within  the  Corp.  of  Chas.  Citty,  Planter, 
sonn  &  heire  aparant  of  Henry  Dawkes, 
dec'd.,  200  acs.  within  sd.  Corp.,  7 
Sept.  1632,  p.  114.  Ely.  upon  2  mi. 
Cr.,  W.  towards  land  of  Thomas  Packer 
(or  Parker)  &  S.  upon  the  Sw.  adj.  the 
maine  river.  Due  as  lawfull  heire  of 
his  father,  being  an  Ancient  Planter,  for 
his  per.  devdt.,  being  100  acs.,  &  the 
other  hundred  acs.  by  bill  of  adv.  of  12 
Lbs.  10  Shill.  in  right  of  his  father, 
dated  14  July  1608  &  graunted  him  by 
order  of  Ct.  7  Oct.  last  past. 

Whereas  Henry  Dawkes  now  bound 
on  the  intended  voyage  to  Virginia 
hath  paid  in  read  mony  to  Sir  Thomas 
Smith,  Kt.  Treas.  for  Va.,  the  sume  of 
12  Lbs.  10  Sh.  for  his  Adv.  in  the 
voyage  to  Va.  it  is  agreed  that  for  the 
same  the  said  Henry  his  heires  &c. 
shall  have  rateably  according  to  his 
Adv.  his  full  parte  of  all  such  lands 
tenements  &c.  as  shall  from  time  to  time 
bee  there  recovered  planted  and  in- 
habited &  of  all  such  Mines  &  Min- 
neralls  of  Gould  silver  and  other  mettals 
or  Treasures  pearles  precious  stoanes  or 
any  kind  of  wares  or  merchandize  &c. 
whatsoever  which  shall  bee  obtained  or 


16 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


gotten  in  the  said  voyage  according  to 
the  portion  of  mony  by  him  imployed 
to  that  use  in  as  large  and  ample  man- 
ner as  any  other  Adventurer  therein 
shall  receave  for  the  like  some  written 
this  14  of  July  1608.  (Signed)  Richard 
Atkinson.  Recorded  8  Sept.  1632. 
(Signed)  Benj.  Harrison.    Page  115. 

JOHN  ARUNDELL,  of  the  back 
river,  within  the  Corp.  of  Eliz.  Citty, 
Gent.,  sonn  &  heire  apparent  to  Peter 
Arundell,  Gent.,  deed.,  100  acs.  lying 
at  the  sd.  back  river,  abutting  W.  upon 
land  of  Bartholomew  Hoskins,  E.  to- 
wards land  of  Capt.  Richard  Stephens, 
Esqr.,  now  in  tenure  of  John  Chandler, 
Planter,  &c.  7  Sept.  1632,  p.  116.  Due 
in  right  of  his  father  for  one  share  of 
a  bill  of  Adv.  of  287  Lbs.  10  Sh.  dated 
4  Oct.  1617  &  signed  by  David  Watkins, 
Cash,  2  other  shares  being  graunted  sd. 
Peter   by   pattern    dated    8    Nov.    1624. 

BARTHOLOMEW  HOSKINS,  an 
Ancient  Planter  whoe  came  over  to  this 
country  before  the  departure  of  Sir 
Thomas  Dale,  of  the  back  river  within 
the  Corp.  of  Eliz.  Citty,  100  acs.  in  the 
sd.  Corp.,  7  Sept.  1632,  p.  117.  W. 
upon  a  Cr.  deviding  this  &  land  of 
Peter  Arundell,  Gent.,  E.  towards  land 
of  John  Arundell,  Gent.,  N.  upon  the 
back  river  &  S.  towards  the  head  of 
Hampton  Riv.  Due  for  his  per.  adv. 
&  graunted  to  him  by  Sir  Francis  Wyatt 
3  Nov.   1624. 

JOHN  ROBINS,  the  younger,  of  the 
back  river  in  the  Corp.  of  Eliz.  Citty, 
Planter  sonn  &  heire  apparant  unto  John 
Robins  the  elder,  ede'd.,  300  acs.  at  sd. 
back  river,  7  Sept.  1632,  p.  119.  Abut- 
ting E.  upon  land  of  Peter  Arundell, 
deed.,  W.  towards  the  head  of  sd.  river 
&c.  Due  in  right  of  his  father  for  the 
adv.  of  6  pers:  himselfe  the  sd.  John 
the  elder,  John  Robins  his  sonn,  Henry 
West,  Peter  Asheley,  Joseph  Moore,  & 
William  Davis  his  servants  whoe  came 
all  over  in  the  Margarett  &  John  1622. 

WILLIAM  SPENCER,  of  James  Is- 
land within  the  Corp.  of  James  Citty, 
Yeoman,  250  acs.  on  the  W.  side  of 
Lawnes  Cr.  at  the  mouth,  9  Sept.  1632, 


p.  120.  Extending  up  the  Cr.  S.  W;, 
50  acs.  accrewing  due  in  the  right  of 
James  Tooke  whoe  came  in  the  George 
1621  the  charges  of  whose  passage  hee 
defrayed  unto  William  Dum  (?),  Car- 
penter, of  the  sd.  shipp;  100  acs.  in 
right  of  Hugh  Wynn  &  Robert  Latchett 
whoe  both  came  in  the  George  1621  at 
the  charges  of  Capt.  William  Peirce 
whoe  in  open  Ct.  hath  transferred  the 
land  accrewing  by  vertue  of  their  pass- 
age unto  sd.  William  Spencer;  50  acs. 
in  right  of  James  Robinson  whoe  came 
in  the  Charitie  whose  passage  sd.  Spen- 
cer defrayed  unto  Mr.  Weston,  Mer- 
chant of  the  sd.  Shipp;  &  50  acs.  in 
right  of  Joseph  Deane  whoe  came  in  the 
Abigail  1622  whose  passage  sd.  Spencer 
defrayed    unto    John    Tooke,    Marriner. 

CAPT.  WILLIAM  TUCKER,  ESQ. 
&  one  of  the  Councell  of  State  of  Va., 
100  acs.  at  the  back  river  within  the 
precincts  of  Eliz.  Citty,  at  or  within 
the  mouth  of  the  broad  Cr.,  1  June 
1633,  p.  122.  S.  upon  a  br.  of  sd.  Cr. 
parting  it  from  land  of  Henry  South- 
erne,  Nly.  up  the  Cr.  towards  land  of 
Thomas  Watts  &c.  Due  for  trans,  of 
Richard  Heale  &  William  Elberry  whoe 
came  in  the  Elianor  1622. 

CAPT.  WILLIAM  TUCKER  to 
LANCELOTT  BARNES,  6  Feb.  1632, 
transfer  of  his  right,  title  &  interest  in 
100  acs.  due  for  the  trans,  of  said 
Heale  &  Elberry.  Witnesses:  John  Utye 
&  Francis  Bolton.    Page  123. 

ELMER  PHILLIPPS,  of  Eliz.  Citty, 
100  acs.  neare  unto  Foxhill  knowe  by 
the  name  of  the  Indian  Spring,  5  June 
1633,  p.  123.  Along  bancke  of  point 
Comfort  Cr.  Trans,  of  himselfe  &  his 
servant  Daniell  Franck  whoe  came  in 
the  Southampton  1622. 

JEREMIAH  CLEMENTS,  sonn  & 
heire  to  Elizabeth  Clements,  dee'd.,  350 
acs.  upon  the  Ely.  side  of  Upper  Chip- 
poackes  Cr.,  W.  upon  the  same,  extend- 
ing Ely.  &c.  26  Aug.  1633,  p.  124.  Due 
in  right  of  his  mother  for  adv.  of  7 
pers:  herselfe,  Jerimiah  Clements, 
Nicholas  Clements,  Ezechiell  Clements 
her     sonns,     Elizabeth     Clements     her 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


17 


daughter,  Dorothy  Greene  &  Jefferie 
Hull  her  servants,  whoe  came  all  over 
in  the  George  1617. 

JOHN  SMITH,  Planter,  of  Warwick- 
squeeke,  150  acs.  upon  the  Swd.  shoare 
over  against  Maries  Mount,  near  unto 
the  mouth  of  Nanzemund  Riv.,  26  Aug. 
1633,  p.  126.  Abutting  Ewd.  upon  a 
Cedar  Island.  100  acs.  for  his  per.  adv. 
in  the  Shipp  the  Starr  at  the  first  come- 
ing  of  Sir  Thomas  Dale  &  50  acs.  for 
trans,  of  a  servant  named  Reginald 
Griffin  in  the  Bona  Nova  1621. 

JOHN  MOONE,  Planter,  of  War- 
wicksqueicke,  200  acs.  within  the  limitts 
of  Warwicksqueick,  on  E.  side  of  sd. 
Cr.,  W.  on  Virgoes  Cr.  &  E.  towards 
Pagan  point  Cr.  6  Mar.   1633,  p.   127. 


Due  for  charge  of  trans,  of  4  pers: 
himselfe,  Giles  Martin,  Julian  Hollier 
&  Clement  Thrush  his  servants  whoe 
came  in  the  Returne  of  London   1623. 

THOMAS  DAVIS,  Planter,  of  War- 
wicksqueick, sonn  &  heir  apparant  to 
James  Davis,  Gent.,  late  of  Henerico  in 
Va.,  dec'd.,  300  acs.  abutting  Ely.  on 
Warwicksqueicke  Cr.  about  2  mi.  from 
the  mouth,  beg.  at  a  point  of  land  called 
the  redd  point,  extending  Wly.  up  the 
Cr.  &c.  6  Mar.  1633,  p.  128.  In  right 
of  his  father,  an  Ancient  Planter  for 
his  per.  devdt;  100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2 
servts.:  Georg  Cooke,  Alice  Mulleines 
whoe  came  in  the  George  1617  &  100 
acs.  in  right  of  Rachell  Davis,  Mother 
to  sd.  Thomas,  for  her  per.  devdt.,  whoe 
was  an  Ancient  Planter. 


By  the  Governor  and  Cap1  Gener11  of  Virginia 

To  all  to  whome  these  presents  shall  come  I  Sr.  John  Harvey  Kt.  Governor 
and  Capt.  Generll.  of  Virginia  send  greeting  in  our  Lord  God  Everlasting.  Where- 
as by  an  order  of  Court  made  the  Eleaventh  day  of  February  one  Thowsand  six 
hundred  thirtie  twoe  it  was  ordered  that  such  psons  as  have  noe  lands  due  unto 
them  by  any  Adventure  or  other  wise  might  have  a  Competent  quantitie  of  land 
graunted  unto  them  for  the  terme  of  one  and  twentie  yeares  and  alsoe  that  such 
men  as  have  had  former  graunts  or  other  rights  of  Leases  may  have  them  renewed 
accordingly  Now  Know  yee  that  in  consideration  hereof  I  the  said  Sr  John  Harvey 
doe  by  these  presents  wth  the  consent  of  the  Councell  of  State  graunt  devise  and 
to  farme  lett  unto  *  *  *  acres  of  land  being  parte  of  the  land  belonging  to  the 
late  Company  scituate  lying  &  being  &c.  To  have  and  to  hold  &c.  from  the  feast 
of  St.  Thomas  the  Apostle  last  past  for  and  during  the  terme  of  twentie  and  one 
years  from  thence  next  ensuing  and  fully  yo  bee  compleate  and  ended.  Yeilding 
and  paying  &c.  the  fee  rent  of  twoe  barrells  of  Corne.    Provided  &c. 


ROGER  RACE,  WALTER  FLOYD, 
THOMAS  SMITH  &  SILVESTER 
TATNAM,  Ca(r)penter,  400  acs.  in 
Martins  hundred  &  Skiffes  Cr.,  Wly. 
upon  said  land  of  Martins  hundred,  Ely. 
along  the  maine  river  towards  Skiffe  Cr. 
24  Apr.  1632,  p.  130.  21  yr.  Lease 
from  feast  of  St.  Thomas  the  Apostle 
last  past.  Fee  Rent:  "In  regard  of  the 
barrenesse  of  the  land  but  the  valuable 
rent  of  fower  pence  for  every  acre 
either  in  mony  or  corne  according  to 
the  rates  of  money"  &c. 

HENRY  CONEY,  Gent.,  100  acs., 
24  July  1632,  p.  130.  *  *  *  In  regard 
of  the  Extraordinary  charge  and  labour 


of  Henry  Coney  bestowed  in  building 
and  clearing  upon  a  parcell  of  land  ly- 
ing towards  the  head  of  Archers  Hope 
Cr.  commonly  called  by  the  name  of  the 
Coney  burrough"  etc.,  abutting  Sly.  up- 
on land  of  John  Johnson,  planter,  N. 
towards  land  of  Robert  Martin,  E.  upon 
sd.  Creek  &  W.  into  the  maine  woods. 
21  Yr.  lease,  from  feast  of  St.  Thomas 
the  Apostle  last  past.  Fee  Rent:  3  bbls. 
of  sound  &  sweete  Indian  Corne. 

ROBERT  MARTIN,  30  acs.  Sly.  up- 
on land  of  Henry  Coney,  Gent.,  N.  to 
land  of  John  Milnehowse,  E.  on  Archers 
Hope  Cr.  &  W.  into  the  woods.  24 
July   1632,  p.   131.    *    *    *   In  reguard 


18 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


to  the  labour  of  Robert  Martin  bestowed 
in  building  &  clearing  a  parcell  of  land 
towards  the  head  of  Archers  Hope  Cr., 
commonly  called  by  the  name  of  Coney 
borough  &c.    21  yr.  lease,  as  above. 

JOHN  MILNEHOWSE,  40  acs.,  Sly. 
on  Robert  Martin.  24  July  1632,  p. 
132.  21  yr.  Lease.  Consideration  same 
as  above. 

JAMES  KNOTT,  Planter,  of  Acco- 
mack, 50  acs.,  12  Mar.  1632,  p.  133. 
Desiring  to  keepe  a  howse  of  entertain- 
ment in  the  lower  parte  at  the  Mouth 
of  Hampton  Riv.  within  the  precincts  of 
Eliz.  Citty  whereby  strangers  &  other 
may  bee  well  accommodated  with  great 
ease  to  the  inhabitants  in  those  parts, 
etc.  Abutting  Sly.  upon  a  Cr.  parting 
the  same  from  land  of  Capt.  Francis 
West,  Nly.  upon  the  Gleab  land  &  Wly. 
upon  sd.  Riv.  To  have  &  to  hold  the 
sd.  50  acs.  togeather  with  the  howse 
commonly  called  the  great  howse  &  all 
other  howses  edifices  &  buildings  &c. 
21  year  Lease,  as  above. 

DICTORIS  CHRISTMAS,  Planter,  of 
Eliz.  Citty,  to  LYONELL  ROULSTON, 
Gent.,  of  the  same  place;  assignment  of 
title  of  lease  under  the  hand  of  Sir 
Georg  Yeardley,  20  Aug.  1627;  50  acs. 
upon  the  Strawberry  banckes  where  "I 
now  dwell."  Signed  by  sd.  Christmas, 
in  the  presence  of:  Will.  Clayborne  & 
Edwd.  Cage.    29  Sept.  1628,  p.  134. 

LYONELL  ROULSTON,  Gent.,  of 
Keskyake,  "doe  according  to  the  tenor 
of  this  Assignment  make  over  the  same 
Lease  for  the  full  terme  that  I  the  said 
Lyonell  had  it  to  my  Loveing  friend 
JOHN  NEALE  this  Act  was  made  the 
14th  day  of  January  1630."  Signed  by 
sd.  Roulston  &  witnessed  by:  Henry 
Hill  &  Henry  Pumry.    Page  134. 

JOHN  NEALE,  Merchant,  50  acs. 
upon  the  Strawberry  banckes  within  the 
precincts  of  Eliz.  Citty,  E.  upon  land  of 
Lt.  Edward  Waters,  now  in  the  tenure 
of  Georg  Downes,  Gent.,  W.  along  the 
gr.  Riv.  &c.  12  Feb.  1632,  p.  135.  21 
yr.  lease.  (See  two  preceding  abstracts.) 
Being  the  same  land  leased  by  Sir  Georg 
Yeardlev  to  Dictoris  Christmas,  &c. 


WILLIAM  HAMPTON,  Planter,  50 
acs.  at  Buck  Roe  within  the  precincts 
of  Eliz.  Citty,  12  Mar.  1632,  p.  136. 
Abutting  on  a  Cr.  parting  same  from 
land  of  James  Bonall,  Frenchman,  Sly. 
toward  land  of  John  Hayney,  planter,  & 
Ely.  upon  Cr.  parting  same  from  point 
Comfort  Island.  Which  sd.  50  acs,  was 
leased  by  Francis  West  10  Dec.   1627. 

THOMAS  SAVADGE,  Carpenter, 
100  acs.  upon  old  plantation  Cr.,  abut- 
ting W.  upon  land  of  Roger  Saunders 
&  Ely.  toward  the  second  Cr.  14  Mar. 
1632,  p.  137.    21  Yr.  lease. 

BRIDGETT  LOWTHER,  Widdowe, 
of  Pasbeyheys  within  the  Corp.  of  James 
Citty,  250  acs.  on  W.  side  of  Chicha- 
hominy,  Riv.,  opposite  land  of  Bridges 
Freeman,  Gent.,  pointing  S.  E.  upon  the 
maine  river,  W.  along  the  Cr.  into  the 
woods,  neare  adj.  to  the  place  called 
Juring  point.  16  Mar.  1632,  p.  137. 
21  Yr.  Lease. 

WILLIAM  DAWKES,  of  Verinas 
within  the  Corp.  of  Chas.  Citty,  Planter, 
50  acs.  within  sd.  Corp.,  15  Mar.  1632, 
p.  138.  W.  towards  land  of  Thomas 
Packer  (or  Parker),  Sly.  upon  a  Sw. 
adj.  the  maine  river,  &  adj.  his  own 
land.    21  yr.  Lease. 

JAMES  BONALL,  Vignerone,  50  acs. 
at  Buck  Roe  within  the  precincts  of 
Eliz.  Citty,  8  May  1633,  p.  139.  S. 
upon  a  Cr.  parting  this  from  land  of 
William  Hampton,  N.  upon  a  Cr.  part- 
ing it  from  land  of  Elias  la  Guard  & 
E.  upon  Cr.  dividing  it  from  point 
Comfort.    21  Yr.  Lease. 

ELIAS  la  GUARD,  Vignerone,  100 
acs.  upon  W.  side  of  Harris'  Cr.  &c. 
8  May  1633,  p.  140.    21  yr.  Lease. 

SAME.  12  acs.  at  Buck  Roe,  within 
&c.  12  Apr.  1633,  p.  141.  N.  on  a 
Cr.  parting  this  from  land  of  William 
Croney,  S.  upon  land  granted  by  lease, 
bearing  date  herewith,  unto  James 
Bonall,  which  sd.  50  acs.  was  graunted 
to  John  Arundell,  Gent.,  by  lease  &  as- 
signed &c.  (see  first  item  below).  21 
yr.  Lease. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


19 


JOHN  ARUNDELL,  of  Hampton 
River,  assignment  of  title  of  above 
mentioned  land  under  lease,  to  ELIAS 
la  GUARD,  29  Jan.  1629,  p.  141. 
(Signed)   John  Arundell. 

THOMAS  HARVEY,  Taylor,  of  James 
Citty,  50  acs.  Ely.  upon  a  marsh  part- 
ing it  from  the  Swan  howse  Cr.,  ex- 
tending W.  towards  land  of  John  Tyas 
&  S.  upon  the  maine  river.  21  yr.  Lease. 
12  Apr.  1633,  p.  142.  Granted  by  order 
of  Ct.  dated  10  Dec.  last  past. 

LANCELOTT  BARNES,  Gent.,   100 

acs.  within  the  precincts  of  Eliz.  Citty, 
comonly  called  the  Indian  Thickett,  50 
acs.  whereof  is  now  in  the  tenure  of 
Samuell  Bennett  &  the  other  in  the  oc- 
cupation of  William  Warren.  12  Apr. 
1633,  p.   142.    21  yr.  Lease. 

DANIELL  SHURLEY  (Sherley), 
Planter,  of  the  Neck  of  Land  within 
the  precincts  of  Chas.  Citty,  50  acs.,  12 
Apr.  1633,  p.  143.  21  yr.  Lease.  Bor- 
dering upon  land  of  William  Dawkes. 
Granted  by  order  of  Ct.  5  Dec.  1632. 

JACOB  AVERIE,  Gent.,  500  acs.  in 
Skiffes  Cr.  (that  is  to  say)  250  acs.  N. 
towards  the  Cr.  to  Martins  hundred, 
S.  W.  towards  land  of  Thomas  Nowell, 
E.  upon  the  maine  beg.  50  po.  on  the 
E.  side  of  a  Spring  called  Jacobs  Well; 
250  acs.  at  the  head  of  the  same  Cr., 
N.  towards  Martins  hundred,  S.  to- 
wards the  river  &  N.  E.  into  the  maine. 
2  Feb.  1630,  p.  144.  21  yr.  Lease 
granted  by  order  of  Ct.  8  July  last  past. 

JOSEPH  HATFEILD,  Planter,  of 
Eliz.  Citty,  50  acs.  within  sd.  precincts, 
Sly.  on  a  Cr.  towards  land  of  Walter 
Heyley,  extending  Nly.,  &  Wly.  on 
Southampton  Riv.  &  E.  on  the  maine 
land,  which  sd.  50  acs.  was  granted  to 
Christopher  Windmill  for  the  terme  of 
10  yrs.  by  lease  dated  30  Nov.  1628  & 
assigned  by  deed  to  sd.  Hatfeild  by 
Francis  Hough  29  Oct.  1632.  21  Yr. 
Lease.    31  Oct.  1633,  p.  145. 

LEONARD  MOORE,  Planter,  of  the 
Necke  of  Land  in  the  upper  part,  100 
acs.  on  W.  side  of  the  4  Mi.  Cr.,  W. 
towards  3  Mi.  Cr.  &  S.  upon  the  maine 


river.     21    Yr.    Lease.     21    Mar.  1633, 
p.  146. 

JOHN  WARD,  Planter,  of  Verinas, 
25  acs.  E.  upon  his  own  land,  W.  to- 
wards land  of  Thomas  Packer  (or 
Parker),  &  S.  upon  the  maine  river. 
21    yr.   Lease.    21   Mar.    1633,   p.    146. 

HENRY  COLEMAN,  Planter,  of 
Eliz.  Citty,  60  acs.  within  sd.  precincts, 
abutting  Sly.  upon  the  plantation  called 
the  Indian  Howse  Thickett  &  formerly 
in  like  manner  graunted  unto  Thomas 
Flint,  N.  upon  land  of  Jonas  Stockton, 
Minister,  dec'd.,  &  W.  upon  Southamp- 
ton Riv.  Sd.  land  graunted  to  Christo- 
pher Windmill  by  lease  for  10  yrs. 
dated  20  Sept.  1628  &  assigned  to  sd. 
Coleman  3  Jan.  1633  by  Francis  Hough 
whoe  married  the  relict  &  widdowe  of 
sd.  Windmill.  21  yr.  lease.  30  May 
1634,  p.  147. 

FRANCIS  HOUGH  to  HENRY 
COLEMAN,  of  Kickotan,  assignment  of 
all  interest  in  sd.  land.  3  Jan.  1633. 
Signed  by  sd.  Hough  &  witnessed  by: 
John  Robins  &  Rich.  Rutherford.  Page 
148. 

SEATH  WARD,  Planter,  of  Verina 
in  the  upper  part,  60  acs.  in  the  upper 
part  within  the  Corp.  of  Henrico,  abut- 
ting W.  upon  land  of  Daniell  Sherley, 
E.  towards  a  tree  knowne  as  Powhetans 
tree,  Sly.  upon  3  Mi.  Sw.  &  Nly.  into 
the  maine  woods.  21  yr.  Lease.  30 
May  1634,  p.  148. 

THOMAS  WATTS,  Planter,  50  acs. 
at  the  back  river  in  the  Corp.  of  Eliz. 
Citty,  upon  the  broad  Cr.,  abutting  Sly. 
upon  a  br.  of  same  parting  it  from  land 
of  Launcelott  Barnes,  dec'd.,  N.  up  the 
Cr.  towards  another  br.  deviding  it  from 
land  of  Owen  Dawson.  21  yr.  Lease. 
30  May  1634,  p.  149. 

JOHN  TYAS,  50  acs.  abutting^  Sly. 
on  a  Cr.  parting  it  from  land  of  Bridges 
Freeman,  extending  Nly.  up  Chicka- 
hominy  Riv.  &c.  21  yr.  Lease.  30 
May  1634,  p.  150. 

MATHEW  SMALLWOOD,  Mer- 
chant,   500   acs.   in   Bicknes   bay,   Chas. 


20 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


City  Co.,  E.  upon  land  of  Capt. 
Nathaniel!  Powell,  deed,  now  in  the 
occupation  of  William  Barker,  Marri- 
ner,  Wly.  towards  a  Cr.  parting  it  from 
land  called  Chaplins  Choice,  Nly.  on 
the  maine  river  &  Sly.  into  the  maine 
woods.  21  yr.  Lease.  30  Mar.  1634,  p. 
151. 

WILLIAM  CONNER,  Planter,  of 
Eliz.  Citty  Co.,  60  acs.  aboute  2  mi. 
within  the  narrow  of  back  river  on  E. 
side  of  the  little  Otterdams,  Ely.  to- 
wards land  of  Thomas  Thornebury  &c. 
21    yr.   Lease.    13   Aug.    1634,   p.    152. 

WILLIAM  HAMPTON,  Planter,  of 
Eliz.  Citty  Co.,  100  acs.  on  the  E.  side 
of  Harris  his  Cr.  in  sd.  Co.,  adj.  land 
of  James  Bonall.  100  year  Lease.  13 
Aug.  1634,  p.  153. 

ABRAHAM  ROOTE,  of  Hogg  Is- 
land, James  Citty  Co.,  Planter,  50  acs. 
in  Hog  Island  mayne  at  a  place  called 
the  Rockes.  21  yr.  Lease.  13  Aug. 
1634,  p.  153. 

WILLIAM  STAFFORD,  of  Kethes 
Cr.,  Warwicke  Riv.  Co.,  Planter,  100 
acs.  on  the  W.  side  of  sd.  Cr.  about  a 
mile  upwards  from  the  mouth  over 
against  the  plantation  now  in  possession 
of  William  Rabnett,  bounding  N.  on 
land  of  Francis  Richbill,  Planter,  Sly. 
down  towards  the  mouth  of  sd.  Cr.  &c. 
21   yr.   Lease.    23   Aug.    1634,   p.    154. 


CHRISTOPHER  BRANCH,  Planter, 
of  Arrowhattocks  in  Henrico  Co.,  100 
acs.,  Nly.  on  land  graunted  to  Thomas 
Sheffeild,  E.  upon  the  maine  river  Sly. 
on  land  graunted  to  John  Griffin,  &  W. 
into    the   maine   woods.    21    yr.    Lease. 

20  Oct.  1634,  p.  155. 

GILBERT  SYMONDS,  Planter,  of 
Eliz.  Citty  Co.,  100  acs.  lying  at  the  old 
Pocoson  Riv.,  abutting  E.  upon  land  of 
John  Kadon,  W.  towards  the  head  of 
sd.  river  &c.  Lease,  21  Yrs.  20  Oct. 
1634,  p.   156. 

NICHOLAS  HARWOOD,  Cooper, 
50  acs.  on  the  Easterne  Shoare  within 
Accomack  Co.,  abutting  upon  land  of 
William  Blore,  now  in  possession  of 
William  Burditt  &c.  Which  land  was 
graunted  unto  Roger  Saunders,  dee'd. 
for  the  terme  of  10  yrs.,  as  by  lease 
dated  14  Mar.  1628  &  assigned  to  sd. 
Harwood   by  Georg  Traveller,   Planter. 

21  yr.  Lease.    20  Oct.  1634,  p.  157. 

CAPT.  HUGH  BULLOCKE,  2,550 
acs.  lying  &  being  from  the  runn  that 
falleth  downe  by  the  Easter  side  of  a 
peece  of  land  knowne  by  the  name  of 
the  Woodvard  &  soe  from  that  runn 
along  the  side  of  the  Pocoson  or  great 
Otter  pond  soe  called  N.  W.  &  about 
the  head  of  the  sd.  pond  back  S.  E. 
leaving  the  Otter  pond  in  the  midle. 
12  Mar.  1634,  p.  158. 


By  the  Governor  and  Cap1  Gener11  of  Virginia 

To  all  to  whome  these  presents  shall  come  I  Sr.  John  Harvey  Kt.  &c.  Send  &c. 
Whereas  by  Letters  bearing  date  the  twoe  and  twentieth  day  of  July  on  Thowsand 
six  hundre  thirtie  fower  from  the  Rt.  Honoble  the  Lords  of  his  Majesties  most 
Honoble,  Privy  Councell  &c,  their  Lordshipps  did  authorize  the  Governor  and 
Councell  of  Virginia  to  dispose  of  such  proportions  of  lands  to  all  planters  being 
freemen  as  they  had  power  to  doe  before  the  yeare  one  Thowsand  six  hundred 
twentie  and  five  when  according  to  divers  orders  and  constitutions  in  that  case 
provided  and  appointed  all  devidents  of  land  any  waies  due  or  belonging  to  any 
Adventurers  or  planters  of  what  conditions  soever  were  to  bee  laid  out  and 
assigned  unto  them  according  to  the  severall  conditions  in  the  same  mentioned 
Now  Know  yee  &c.  To  have  and  to  hold  the  said  twoe  hundred  acres  of  land 
with  his  due  share  of  all  Mines  and  Minneralls  therein  conteyned  and  with  all 
rights  and  priviledges  of  hunting  &c.  Yeilding  and  paying  for  every  fifty  acres  of 
land  herein  by  these  presents  given  and  graunted  yearely  at  the  feast  of  St.  Michaell 
the  Archangell  the  fee  rent  of  one  shilling  &c.  Provided  alwaies  that  if  the  said 
&c.  his  heirs  or  assignes  shall  not  plant  or  seate  or  cause  to  bee  planted  on  the 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


21 


said  twoe  hundred  acres  of  land  within  the  time  and  terme  of  three  years  now- 
next  ensuing  the  date  hereof  that  then  it  shall  and  may  bee  lawfull  for  any 
Adventurer  or  planter  to  make  choice  and  seate  upon  the  same.  Given  at  James 
Citty  &c.    (P.  B.   1,  P.   158). 


MR.  THOMAS  EATON,  250  acs. 
lying  towards  the  head  of  the  back  river 
within  a  mile  of  the  wading  place,  Swd. 
to  the  lower  part  of  Eliz.  Citty  &c.  11 
Mar.  1634,  p.  159. 

MR.       ADAM       THOROWGOOD 

(Thorrogood)  200  acs.,  21  Mar.  1634, 
p.  160.  Confirmation  of  200  acs.  pur- 
chased of  Capt.  Stephens,  bounding  W. 
upon  the  backe  river,  N.  upon  land  of 
John  Robinson,  E.  upon  land  of  Thomas 
Boulding  &  his  own,  S.  upon  William 
Capps,  to  begin  at  a  little  otterdam  be- 
ing Why.  upon  the  back  river  &  soe  to 
run  one-quarter  of  a  mile  into  the  woods 
&c,  which  land  was  due  sd,  Capt. 
Stevens  as  being  a  planter  &  adv.  to  this 
colony. 

SAME.  200  acs.,  21  Mar.  1634,  p. 
161.  Bounded  Sly.  upon  the  back  river, 
Wly.  upon  the  little  Otterdam,  Nly. 
into  the  land,  Ely.  upon  land  of  Thomas 
Thornbury;  the  said  200  acs.  accrewing 
due  to  him  as  being  an  Adventurer  into 
this  Colony. 

THOMAS  CAUSEY,  150  acs.  Chas. 
Citty  Co.  in  the  Indian  feild,  comonly 
soe  called,  18  Apr.  1635,  p.  162.  Due 
N.  upon  Jordans  Journy,  W.  upon  the 
maine  woods,  S.  upon  Chaplins  Choice 
&  due  E.  upon  the  maine  river. 

CAPT.  THOMAS  PURIFIE,  2,000 
acs.,  18  Apr.  1635,  p.  163.  1,000  acs. 
beg.  S.  E.  from  the  Pocoson  river  at 
Willoughby  poynt,  stretching  along  the 
back  river  S.  W.  to  a  point  called  Cross 
quarter,  from  thence  to  point  called 
Topgallant  quarter,  thence  to  the  broad 
creeke  head  lying  N.  W.  into  the  woods 
towards  the  dams  which  land  is  now 
called  by  the  name  of  Drayton;  500 
acs.  on  this  side  the  sd.  dams  abutting 
on  John  Laydens  ground,  W.  to  the 
head  of  the  dams,  S.  upon  Drayton  & 
above  the  sams;  the  last  500  acs.  adj. 
the  dams  upon  the  maine  Cr.  N.  W.  to 
the  maine  Creek,  S.  W.  to  a  ridge  of 
land  &  E.  to  the  Cr. 


THOMAS  SEAWELL,  400  acs.,  20 
Apr.  1635,  p.  164.  350  acs.  at  the  head 
of  the  old  Pocoson  on  S.  side  adj.  the 
great  ridge  &c.  50  acs.  lying  betweene 
Thomas  Boulding  on  the  W.  and  John 
Snede  on  the  E.,  butting  upon  a  Cr. 
lying  N.  parting  this  &  Ben j amine  Syms' 
Marsh. 

MR.  FRANCIS  TOWERS,  200  acs.  in 
the  W.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.  one  mile  up  the 
same,  butting  with  a  point  upon  the 
river  S.  &  running  N.  into  the  woods 
with  a  Cr.  on  the  upper  side  &  a  baye 
on  the  lower  side.  21  Apr.  1635,  p. 
165. 

JOHN  HILL,  350  acs.  lying  at  a 
point  of  head  land  about  4  mi.  up  the 
W.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.  &c,  N.  with  a  Cr. 
to  the  Ewd.  named  Clarkes  Cr.  &  to  the 
Wwd.  a  Cr.  called  Browns  bay.  21 
Apr.   1635,  p.   166. 

RICHARD  ROBINSON,  100  acs., 
21  Apr.  1635,  p.  167.  50  acs.  on  N. 
side  of  the  great  Pocoson  Riv.,  butting 
S.  on  the  entring  of  the  narrow  of  the 
river,  E.  next  to  plantation  of  Mr.  Sy- 
mons  &c.  50  acs.  lying  Ewd.  next  the 
aforesd.  devdt.,  the  neck  of  land  being 
called  Monnack. 

MARTIN  BAKER,  600  acs.,  24  Apr. 
1635,  p.  168.  Lying  from  Robert  Bue 
upon  Capt.  Martins  lands  N.  W.  by  W. 
into  the  woods,  S.  W.  by  S. 

By  Capt.  John  West 

JOHN  SLAUGHTER,  200  acs.  Nly. 
on  Wrights  Cr.,  Mr.  Thomas  Wright 
haveing  land  next  adj.  sd.  Cr.,  Sly.  upon 
a  Cr.  called  Brownes  bay,  E.  upon  the 
Westermost  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.  30  May 
1635,  p.  169.  Due  for  trans,  of  4  ser- 
vants: Robt.  Bennett,  Wm.  Dickenson, 
Adam  Stevely,  Jon.  Day.  Note:  In  the 
name  of  John  Radford,  renewed. 

JOHN  PARROTT,  450  acs.,  Nly.  up- 
on Nansamund  Riv.,  W.  upon  a  great 


22 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


bay  running  from  Paraketo  point  &c. 
29  May  1635,  p.  170.  Trans,  of  9  pers: 
John  Parrott,  Prunella  Parrott,  his  wife, 
John  Bodin,  James  Traneere  (or  Tra- 
veere),  John  Morgan,  Tho.  Banton, 
Georg  Clarke,  Georg  Heele,  Thomas 
Cottle. 

THOMAS  LAMBERT,  100  acs.  on 
E.  side  of  the  bay  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  &c.  1 
June  1635,  p.  171.  Trans,  of  2  ser- 
vants.* 

MR.  JOHN  SIPSEY,  1500  acs.  upon 
W.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  1  June  1635,  p. 
172.    Trans,  of  30  servts.* 

SAME.  1500  acs.  next  adj.  upon 
land  of  Mr.  Francis  Towers,  S.  upon 
the  maine  river,  E.  as  farr  as  the  part- 
ing of  an  Island  called  Craine  poynt. 
1  June  1635,  p.  173.  Trans,  of  30 
servts.* 

CAPT.  JOHN  UTYE,  ESQR.,  one  of 
the  Councell  of  State,  1250  acs.  at  the 
head  of  Utyes  Cr.  in  Charles  Riv.,  to- 
wards James  Riv.  with  a  Swamp  called 
the  Midle  way  Sw.  which  is  included 
herein,  towards  the  Midle  plantation 
with  the  woods  towards  sd.  Riv.  neare 
upon  his  own  land.  24  June  1635,  p. 
174.    Trans,  of  25  pers.* 

HANNIBALL  FLETCHER,  150  acs. 
in  the  lower  Chippoakes  Cr.,  between 
the  two  creeks,  adj.  land  of  John  Rus- 
sell, running  from  the  lower  little  Cr. 
Ely.  towards  Lawnes  Cr.,  Wly.  towards 
the  great  Cr.  called  Chippoakes  Cr.,  & 
Nly.  towards  James  Riv.  24  June  1635, 
p.  176.  50  acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of 
his  wife  Elizabeth  Fletcher  whoe  came 
in  1634  in  the  Primrose  of  London;  & 
100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2  servts:  Tho. 
Owen  whoe  came  in  the  Susan  of  Lon- 
don 1632,  &  Francis  Francklin  whoe 
came  in  the  Revenge  1634. 

JOHN  RUSSELL,  250  acs.  in  Lower 
Chippoakes  Cr.,  beg.  at  the  upper  little 
Cr.,  running  into  the  maine  towards 
Lawnes  Cr.,  bounding  upon  the  gr. 
Chippoakes  Cr.  S.  W.  by  W.  &  N.  to- 
wards James  Riv.  24  June  1635,  p. 
177.    50  acs.  for  his  own  per.  adv.,  & 


200  acs.  for  trans,  of  4  pers:  John 
Webber,  Rich.  Deane,  Willi.  Exton, 
Jon.  Asley. 

CAPT.    ADAM    THOROWGOOD, 

(Thoroughgood),  5350  acs.  lying  Nly 
upon  Chesopean  bay,  to  begin  at  the 
first  Cr.  of  that  river,  running  to  a  broad 
cr.  that  shooteth  behind  a  long  point  of 
land  Wly.  into  the  maine  land,  Sly.  up 
the  Riv.  to  a  little  island  shooting  into 
Chesopean  Riv.,  E.  upon  the  same,  this 
land  lying  upon  the  W.  side  &  if  in 
case  these  bounds  or  neck  of  land  doe 
not  include  the  sd.  5350  acs.  then  he 
shall  measure  upon  the  sd.  first  Cr.  soe 
farr  as  the  remainder  of  his  sd.  acres 
shall  extend.  Sd.  land  graunted  at  the 
especiall  recomendation  of  him  from 
their  Lordshipps  &  others  his  Majesties 
most  Honble.  privie  Councell  to  the 
Govr.  &  Councell  of  State  for  Va. 
24  June  1635,  p.  179.  Also  due  as 
followeth:  50  acs.  for  his  per.  adv., 
50  acs.  for  per  adv.  of  his  wife 
Sarah  Thoroughgood  &  5250  acs.  for 
trans,  of  105  pers:  Trans,  of  himselfe, 
wife  Sarah,  and  Thos.  Thoroughgood, 
Francis  Newton,  James  Leading,  Stephen 
Bernard,  Jon.  Newarke,  Edward  Pitts, 
Rich.  Jenerie,  Wm.  Edwards,  Dennis 
Russell,  Jon.  Barnards,  Jon.  Waters, 
Jon.  Leake,  Thomas  Johnson,  Jon. 
Bradston,  Richard  Jego,  Thomas  Brooks, 
Jon.  Moyse,  John  Penton,  Edward 
Parish,  Thomas  Melton,  Augustine 
Warner,  Tho.  Chandler,  Andrew  Chant, 
John  Percie,  Edmund  Wallis,  Thomas 
Boulton,  Robert  Heasell,  Richard  John- 
son, Margaret  Bilbie,  Jane  Prosser, 
Jane  Westerfield,  Ann  Spark,  Susan, 
Colson,  in  the  Hopewell  in  1628,  John 
Harris,  John  Lock,  Andrew  Boyer,  Tho- 
mas Boyer,  in  the  True  Love  in  1628, 
Thomas  Keeling,  Rachell  Lane,  in  Hope- 
well in  1628,  William  Hines,  Edward 
Reynolds,  Wm.  Hookes,  Edward  Palmer, 
Edward  Jones,  John  Dyer,  in  the  french 
ship  in  1629,  Victo  Fraford,  Casander 
Underwood,  Merciful  Halley,  Ann  Long, 
Dorothy  Wheeler,  Ann  Allerson,  in  the 
Africa,  Eliz.  Gosmore  in  the  Christopher 
&  Mary,  Francis  Bramly  in  the  Ark, 
John  Writt,  Wm.  Fawne,  Wm.  Was, 
Georg  Mee,  Gilbert  Gye,  John  Enies, 
James  Wilsonn,  Daniell  Hutton,  Wm. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


23 


Gastrock,  Wm,  Speed,  Jon.  Reynolds, 
in  the  Hopewell  in  1633,  Jon.  Wake- 
feild,  James  Belly,  Patrick  Blacock, 
Stephen  Swaine,  John  Cowes,  Ann 
Boulton,  in  the  Bona  Adventure  in 
1634,  Wm.  Fletcher,  in  Mr.  Middleton, 
1634,  Robert  Westwell  in  the  Mer- 
chants Hope  in  1634,  Robert  Spring  in 
the  Jon.  &  Dorothy,  Adam  Thorough- 
good,  Edward  Windam,  Cob.  Howell, 
Tho.  Creaser,  Henry  Hill,  Roger  Ward, 
Jon.  Withers,  Wm.  Holton,  Wm. 
Kempe,  Humphrey  Heyward,  Jon  Al- 
porte,  Symond  Stanfeild,  Robt.  Gainnie, 
Thomas  Smith,  George  Whitehead, 
Henry  Franklin,  Jon.  Hill,  Joseph 
Sedgwick,  Arthur  Eggleston,  Richard 
Poole,  Jon.  Holton,  Stephen  Withers, 
Christ.  Newgent,  Jon.  Brewton,  Thomas 
Atmore,  Mary  Hill,  Henry  Wood  in 
the  Jon  &  Dorothy  in  1634,  Wm.  Bur- 
roughs, Ann  Burroughs,  Ann  White- 
thorne,  Eliza.  Creaser,  Eliza  Curtisse, 
Mary  Hill,  Jr.,  Wm.  Atkins. 

WILLIAM  ANDREWS,  100  acs. 
Accomack  Co.,  25  June  1635,  p.  181. 
S.  E.  upon  old  plantation  Cr.,  N.  N.  W. 
towards  Kings  Cr.,  abutting  upon  land 
of  John  Bloare  W.  S.  W.  Due  by  order 
of  Ct.  9  Oct.  1627  &  for  trans,  of  2 
pers:   Richard  Evans,  Zacharias  Turner. 

SAME.  200  acs.  Accomack  Co.,  25 
June,  1635,  p.  182.  Nwd.  side  of  the 
mouth  of  Hungers  Cr.,  W.  upon  the 
bay,  Ely.  with  the  breadth  up  the  maine 
Cr.  &  Slv.  upon  the  point  of  the  mouth 
of  the  Cr.  50  acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of 
his  wife  Susanna  Andrews  &  150  acs. 
for  trans,  of  3  pers:  Robert  Johnson, 
Andrew  Sims,  James  Little  John. 

DANIELL  CUGLEY,  400  acs.  Acco- 
macke  Co.,  25  June  1635,  p.  183. 
Comonly  knowne  by  the  name  of  hogg 
pen  necke;  S.  W.  upon  the  maine  Cr., 
E.  into  the  woods,  N.  W.  upon  the 
Greene  Sw.  &  S.  by  E.  upon  br.  of  the 
Frenchmans  neck.  Trans,  of  8  pers: 
Pascall  Crocker,  Peter  Varlow,  Thomas 
Dyner,  Georg  Luckin,  Thomas  Peake, 
John  Champion,  Leonard  Lenards,  John 
Dennis. 


a  Cr.  on  S.  E.  side  of  Nansamund  Riv. 
about  3  mi.  up  the  Cr.,  running  Sly., 
beg.  at  a  little  Cr.,  running  Ely.,  over 
against  land  of  Richard  Bennett  &  adj. 
land  of  Robert  Bennett.  50  acs.  for  his 
own  per.  adv.,  50  acs.  for  adv.  of  his 
wife  Marie,  50  acs.  for  per.  adv.  of  his 
sonn  William  &  250  acs.  for  trans,  of 
5  pers:  James  Smith,  Tho.  Webb,  John 
Morgan,  Thomas  Williams,  Richd.  Davis. 

RICHARD  BENNETT,  2000  acs. 
upon  Nansamund  Riv.  &  neare  adjacent 
to  land  granted  to  Georg  Fawdon;  be- 
ing a  neck  of  land,  the  river  on  one 
side  &  on  the  other  a  Cr.,  beg.  3  miles 
up  sd.  Cr.  &c.  26  June  1635,  p.  186. 
Trans,  of  40  pers:  John  Francis,  Ann 
Atwood  Alex.  Garner,  John  Lane,  Georg 
Locker,  Eliz.  Husley,  jon.  Peeters,  Jon. 
Dee,  Rich.  Bird,  Tho.  Williams,  Gilbert 
Lee,  Tho.  Jones,  Ambro.  Bennett,  Rich. 
Cullumbine,  vIb£i_Luter,  Robt.  Moore, 
Hen.  RutkirT,  Rich.  Morris,  Ralph 
Hewes,  Rich.  Glascock,  Rich.  Glascock, 
Edw.  Yorke,  Wm.  Quilmead,  Peter  Bay- 
ly, Robt.  Rawson,  Peter  White,  Wm. 
Fowler,  Wm.  Limpson,  Wm.  Durand, 
Ralph  Compeere,  Arthur  Wood,  Hen. 
Johnson,  Grace,  his  wife,  James  Smith, 
Mary  Harding,  Arthur,  Martin,  Georg 
Bussey,  Rich.  Bennett,  Augt.  Negoe  (or 
Negro),  Tho.  kild  with  a  tree. 

ROBERT  BENNETT,  700  acs.  aboute 
V/i  mi.  up  a  Cr.  neare  the  mouth  of 
Nansamund  Riv.,  beg.  at  a  pine  marked 
with  the  letters  of  his  name  &  bordering 
land  marked  by  Robert  Newman,  etc.  26 
June  1635,  p.  188.  Trans,  of  14  pers: 
James  Leonard,  Peter  Rice,  Eliz.  Gil- 
bert, George  Rawles,  Robert  Rabye, 
Rich.  Hayes,  Phill.  Pharrin,  Geo. 
Rotheram,  Jon.  Ford,  Jon.  Lee,  Ann 
Busby,  Richd.  Smith,  Edward  Mayo, 
Eliz.  Bussy. 

DANIELL  CUGLEY,  400  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  27  June  1635,  p.  189.  S.  E. 
on  Savages  Cr.,  N.  E.  on  the  bay,  S.  W. 
on  land  of  Mrs.  Hannah  Savage  called 
by  the  name  of  Savages  Choice.  Trans. 
of  8  persons.* 


JOHN    ARMIE,    400    acs.    Warras- 
quioake  Co.,  26  June  1635,  p.  185.    In 


STEPHEN  WEBB,  300  acs.  neare  the 
mouth    of    Chippoakes    Cr.,    beg.    at    a 


24 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


little  valley  butting  upon  a  Reedy  Sw., 
running  Nly.  towards  James  Riv.,  S.  in- 
to the  woods  upon  land  of  Hanniball 
Fletcher,  E.  towards  Lawnes  Cr.  &  W. 
upon  the  great  Cr.  called  Chippoakes 
Cr.  30  June  1635.  50  acs.  for  his  own 
per.  adv.  &  250  acs.  for  trans,  of  5 
pers:  Georg  Nicholson,  Roger  Nichols, 
Richard  Child,  Tho.  Glorie,  Daniell 
Nurserie. 

JOHN  SEAWARD,  300  acs.  in 
Warrasquioake  Co.,  1  July  1635,  p. 
191.  Upon  the  S.  side  of  a  Cr.  running 
N.  W.  into  the  woods,  W.  S.  W.  into 
the  woods  with  a  Sw.  running  in  the 
midle  of  the  ground.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
Henry  Weblin,  Thos.  Woodcock,  Wm. 
Tompson,  Arth.  Scott,  Jon.  Bruton, 
Edward  Perkes. 

WILLIAM  RANSHAW,  200  acs. 
Eliz.  City  Co.,  1  July  1635,  p.  193.  N. 
upon  the  mouth  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  S.  into 
the  maine  woods,  bounded  W.  upon  a 
Cr.  &  E.  on  another  Cr.  50  acs.  for 
his  own  per.  adv.,  50  acs.  for  per.  adv. 
of  his  wife  Katherine  Ranshaw  &  100 
acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers:  John  Stephens, 
Tho.  Pawford. 

JOHN  SEAWARD,  100  acs.  in 
Warrasquioake  Co.,  1  July  1635,  p.  194. 
From  a  point  of  marsh  by  a  small  ridge 
of  trees,  running  N.  W.  upon  the  river 
&  S.  W.  into  the  woods,  said  land  be- 
ing part  of  Ragged  island.  Trans,  of 
2  pers:   Katherine  Peircy,  Henry  King. 

WILLIAM  CLARKE,  250  acs.  in 
Warrasquioake  Co.,  1  July  1635,  p. 
195.  On  S.  side  of  Nansamund  Riv., 
running  S.  W.  along  same,  E.  S.  E.  into 
the  woods,  beg.  at  a  great  poplar  tree 
marked  with  3  notches,  butting  upon 
land  of  Georg  Fawder.  50  acs.  for  his 
per.  adv.  &  200  for  trans,  of  4  pers: 
Alex.  Tucker,  Franc.  Costerdine,  Tho- 
mas Southerne,  Jos.  Spring. 


woods  S.  by  E.  upon  Nansamund  Riv. 
Trans,  of  5  pers:  Francis  Stefferton, 
John  Rashe,  Humphrey  Broade,  John 
Pumfrey,  Willi.  Empson. 

SAMUELL  WEAVER,  650  acs.  lying 
Ely.  upon  Capt.  John  Wests  Cr.,  &  Nly. 
upon  Sergt.  Weyne.  2  July  1635,  p. 
198.  Trans,  of  13  pers:  Wm.  Rawlins, 
Tho.  Wills,  Rich.  Lacy,  Tho.  Darby, 
Rich.  Powell,  Tho.  Wethersby,  Grace 
Smith,  Tho.  Watkins,  Jon.  Joyce,  Rich. 
Possin,  Dennis  Brotherton,  Hen.  Harris, 
Wm.  Goulding.  Note:  This  pattern  is 
recorded  in  the  name  of  Thomas  Wes- 
ton, Marriner.  Tho.  Cooke,  Clk. 

MR.  GEORGE  MINIFIE,  ESQR., 
one  of  the  Councell  of  State,  1200  acs. 
James  Citty  Co.,  2  July  1635,  p.  199. 
Being  a  neck  of  land  comonly  called 
the  Rich  Neck,  bounded  on  W.  with  a 
br.  of  Archers  Hope  Cr.  which  parts 
this  from  the  barren  Neck,  on  E.  with 
main  br.  of  sd.  Cr.  to  the  head,  thence 
W.  on  a  direct  line  to  the  head  of  sd. 
br.  Trans,  of  24  pers:  Edwd.  Williams, 
Thomas  Andrews,  Anth.  Skinner,  Rich. 
Clarke,  Symon  Loram,  Jon.  Doe,  Rich. 
Appleton,  Tony  (an)  Eastindian,  Wm. 
Sutton,  Wm.  Large,  Jon.  Abram,  Wm. 
Stoddon,  Jon.  Bugbye,  Jon.  Ellis,  Samll. 
Turner,  Nich.  Whoorewood,  Jon.  Baker, 
Jon.  Grimes,  Tho.  Poole,  Tho.  Taylor, 
Lydian  Price,  Robt.  Thomas,  Tony  a 
Turke,  Jeffery  Hatton. 

THOMAS  GARNETT,  200  acs.,  3 
July  1635,  p.  201.  Bounding  upon 
land  of  Dictoris  Christmas,  upon  head 
of  the  little  poquosun  Cr.  &  due  W. 
upon  Georg  Hull.    Trans,   of  4  pers.* 

JOHN  MOORE,  200  acs.,  3  July 
1635,  p.  202.  N.  upon  little  Poquoson 
Cr.,  E.  upon  land  of  Thomas  Boulding, 
W.  upon  land  of  Thomas  Garnett  &  S. 
towards  the  head  of  the  broad  Cr. 
Trans,  of  4  pers.* 


WILLIAM  HEIRES  (Eyres),  250  acs. 
Warresquioake  Co.,  30  June  1635,  p. 
197.  Beg.  at  a  red  point  that  is  joyning 
upon  a  small  Cr.  which  runneth  from 
the  great  river  called  Warresquioake 
Cr.    W.    by   S.    &   backwards    into   the 


GEORGE  BURTCHER,  200  acs., 
James  Citty  Co.,  3  July  1635,  p.  203. 
Near  the  head  of  a  little  Cr.  between 
the  mouth  of  Hog  Island  Cr.  &  mouth 
of  Lawnes  Cr.,  Ely.  from  the  first  Cr. 
to  the   latter  Cr.,   Wly.   towards   Chip- 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


25 


poakes  Cr.,  Sly.  into  the  woods  &  Nly. 
towards  James  Riv.  50  acs.  for  his  own 
per.  adv.,  50  acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of 
his  wife  Anne  Burtcher  &  100  acs.  for 
the  per.  adv.  of  his  2  children:  John 
Jefferson  &  Jane  Burtcher.  Note:  In 
the  list  of  names  at  the  end  of  record 
John  Jefferson  is  given  as  "his  wifes  son." 

JOHN  DAVIS,  100  acs.  James  Citty 
Co.,  4  July  1635,  p.  204.  On  Ely.  side 
of  land  knowne  as  Jockeys  Neck,  Sly. 
upon  John  his  Neck,  extending  Nly.  up 
a  Cr.,  Ely.  upon  Archers  Hope  Cr.  & 
Wly.  into  the  woods,  the  sd.  land  be- 
ing called  the  barren  Neck.  50  acs.  due 
by  covenant  from  his  late  Master  Mr. 
Richard  Perry,  of  London,  Merchant,  & 
50  acs.  due  for  trans,  at  his  owne  costs 
of  one  servant  called  Richard  Thomas. 

DAVID  JONES,  300  acs.  Chas.  Citty 
Co.,  4  July  1635,  p.  206.  Over  against 
Tapahanna  Marsh  a  little  below  the 
poynt  butting  S.  S.  W.  upon  the  maine 
river,  being  bounded  between  2  Crks. 
the  second  &  third  Cr.  below  Matticoe 
Cr.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Tobie  Borke, 
Thomas  Jones,  Robert  Scory  (or  Story), 
Jon.  Cole,  Jon.  Harrison,  1  Negro  woman. 

BENJAMINE  HARRISON,  200  acs. 
Warresquioake  Co.,  7  July  1635,  p. 
207.  About  2  mi.  up  Warresquioake 
Cr.,  beg.  at  a  pine  marked  with  3 
notches,  extending  N.  W.  &c,  which 
land  is  now  in  the  tenure  of  Thomas 
Jordan,  Gent.  Due  by  deed  of  sale  from 
John  Davis,  of  Kiskiake,  9  July  1633, 
being  part  of  a  devdt.  graunted  sd. 
Davis  by  order  of  Ct.  5  June  1633  as 
being  heire  to  his  uncle  Walter  Davis. 

THOMAS  HARWOOD,  1500  acs., 
7  July  1635,  p.  208.  At  the  head  of 
Kethes  Cr.  adj.  his  own  land.  Due  for 
trans,  of  30  pers:  Tho.  Read,  John 
Spiltimber,  John  Dennett,  Silvester 
Totnam,  Wm.  Peters,  Robt.  Hudson, 
Thomas  Parks,  Robert  Smith,  Tho. 
Hinckly,  Jon.  Heyward,  Wm.  Darnely, 
Daniell  Lane,  Lewis  Cocke,  Thomas 
Smith,  Mathews  Burrows,  Tho.  Casson, 
Edw.  Hall,  Jon.  Greene,  Foulke  Brasey, 
John  Stockdell,  Wm.  Bell,  Robt.  Tep- 
pett,  Tho.  Lewis,  Tho.  Brownser, 
Blanch   Braunes,   Mary   Eaworth,   Joane 


Butler,     Elianor     Dunberbeach,     Samll. 
Trigg,  Jon.  Eastcote. 

JOHN  UPTON,  1650  acs.,  Warres- 
quioake L,o.,  7  July  1635,  p.  210.  About 
3  mi.  up  Pagan  point  Cr.,  bounding 
almost  W.  from  the  Cr.  into  the  woods 
a  little  Cr.  running  in  by  the  sd.  land 
out  of  the  Pagan  Pt.  Cr.  to  a  great 
poplar  tree.  Trans,  of  33  pers:  Rich. 
Young,  Antho.  a  Negroe,  Mary  a 
Negroe,  Florence  Richards,  Roger  Bag- 
nol,  Ralph  Harwood,  Thomas  Reevs, 
Rich.  Spackman,  Edward  Burr,  Savage 
Merrie,  Wm.  Scott,  Rich.  Jones,  Fr. 
Savage,  Owen  Howell,  Nich.  Bushell, 
James  Parsons,  Jon.  Parker,  Lewis  Phil- 
lipps,  Morgan  Roberts,  Wm.  Davis,  John 
Fitchett,  Morgan  Evans,  Christopher 
Lewis,  Phillipp  Jennersly,  Eliz.  King, 
Martha  Swann,  Mary  Johnson,  Jonas 
Sadlington,  Anth.  Tyler,  Peter  Heyes, 
Rich.  Jackson,  Wm.  Pincher,  Eliz.  Larkin. 

JOHN  RISHTON,  50  acs.  Tames 
Citty  Co.,  8  July  1635,  p.  211.  Upon 
the  gr.  Cr.  over  against  James  Towne 
on  the  S.  side  of  the  Riv.  neare  upon 
the  mouth  of  the  first  arme  running  W., 
called  the  Crosse  Cr.  Due  by  covenant 
from  his  late  Master  Richard  Perry,  of 
London,  Merchant,  26  July  1628. 

JOSEPH  STRATTON,  500  acs.  at 
Nutmegg  Quarter,  within  Denbigh  Co., 
8  July  1635,  p.  212.  S.  E.  upon  land 
that  did  once  belong  unto  Capt.  John 
Smith,  now  in  the  occupation  of  Perci- 
vall  Champion  &  John  Slaughter,  N.  W. 
upon  land  of  John  Loyton,  S.  E.  &  N. 
W.  along  the  river  &  S.  W.  &  N.  E.  in- 
to the  woods.  Part  of  devdt.  formerly 
belonging  to  Sir.  Francis  Wyatt  &  due 
sd.  Stratton  for  a  valuable  consideration 
by  bargaine  from  Capt.  William  Peirce, 
Atty.  of  sd.  Wyatt,  which  sd.  Peirce 
was  to  make  an  assurance  by  pattern  ac- 
cording to  order  of  Ct.  dated  25  Feb.  1630. 

JENKIN  OSBORNE,  400  acs.  Chas. 
Citty  Co.,  9  July  1635,  p.  214.  Lying 
bet.  land  of  Capt.  Woodley  &  William 
Bayly,  N.  upon  James  Riv.  &  S.  into 
the  woods.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  William 
Brock,  Thomas  Ashton,  John  Cugley, 
Tho.  Bateman,  Tho.  Tyler,  Georg 
Purser,   Thomas   Jones,   Samll.  Ramsey. 


26 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


THOMAS  BAILIE  (Baylie),  150  acs. 
Chas.  Citty  Co.,  9  July  1635,  p.  215. 
On  the  S.  &  near  the  mouth  of  Baylys 
Cr.,  beg,  at  a  small  swamp  with  a  little 
brooke  running  in  the  "middest"  of  it 
&  extending  S.  into  the  woods.  50  acs. 
due  unto  him  as  heire  of  his  father 
William  Baylie  who  dyed  possessed 
thereof  &  100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers: 
Mary  Welsh  &  Marv  . 

THOMAS  PHILLIPPS,  300  acs., 
James  Citty  Co.,  9  July  1635,  p.  216. 
S.  side  of  Chichahominy  Riv.,  beg.  at  a 
small  cr.,  extending  Sly.  to  a  neck  of 
land,  Nly.  up  the  Riv.  unto  an  old 
Indian  feild,  Ely.  upon  the  maine  river 
butting  upon  the  lowest  of  twoe  islands 
of  Sedge,  neare  adj.  Wly.  upon  a  marsh. 
150  acs.  for  per.  adv.  of  himself e,  Eliza- 
beth Phillipps  his  wife  &  Elizabeth  his 
daughter  &  150  acs.  for  trans,  of  3 
pers:  Robt.  Greenefeild,  Robert  Mason, 
Solomon  Dorillios  a  Negroe. 

ROWLAND  CHAMBERS,  50  acs. 
James  Citty  Co.,  at  peyny  point  in 
Chichahominy  Riv.,  10  July  1635,  p. 
218.  W.  upon  the  maine  river,  &c.  Due 
for  service  by  Covennt.  from  his  Master, 
Thomas  Phillipps. 

WILLIAM  PILKINGTON,  (Pilkin- 
ton),  300  acs.,  10  July  1635,  p.  219. 
N.  W.  upon  the  head  of  Lawnes  Cr. 
S.  W.  upon  a  fresh  brooke  &  E.  to- 
wards James  Riv.  100  acs.  for  the  per. 
adv.  of  himselfe  &  his  wife  Margarett 
Pilkinton,  &  200  acs.  for  trans,  of  4 
pers:  Tho.  Bellowes,  James  Pinkney, 
Tho.  Stephens,  1  boy. 

ERASMUS  CARTER,  100  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  10  July  1635,  p.  221.  S. 
side  of  James  Riv.,  a  neck  of  land  be- 
tween Smith  his  Mount  &  Capt. 
Browne  his  plantation  comonly  called 
the  halfe  way  tree  neck,  Nly.  towards 
sd.  river,  being  bounded  between  two 
swamps.  50  acs.  for  per  adv.  of  his 
wife  Phillis  Carter  &  trans,  of  1  ser- 
vant:   Thomas   Cole. 

THOMAS  BUTLER,  Clarke  &  Pastor 
of  Denbie,  1000  acs.  Warrasquioake 
Co.,  11  July  1635,  p.  222.  Within  a 
small  river  falling  into  Nanzemund  bay, 


running  on  back  side  of  land  of  Georg 
Fawdon  &  John  Parrott,  the  land  beg. 
2  mi.  within  the  mouth  &  S.  side  of  sd. 
river  at  a  Cedar  point,  running  Sly.  to 
an  Indian  Towne  &  Wly.  towards 
Nanzemund  Riv.  Said  land  being  the 
right  of  John  Brewer,  Esqr.,  of  which 
50  acs.  due  for  his  owne  per.  adv.  & 
50  acs.  for  per.  adv.  of  his  wife  Marie 
Brewer  (also  given  as  Mary  Brewer) 
&  900  acs.  for  trans,  of  18  pers.,  men- 
tioned below.  Due  sd.  Butler  as  marry- 
ing with  sd.  Marie  Brewer,  relict  of  sd. 
John  Brewer.  John  Potter,  Rice  Davis, 
Eliz.  Rawell,  Eliz.  Wallis,  Ann  Wil- 
liams, Susanna  Williamson,  Dorias 
Hound,  John  Jordan,  Dennis  Mohonney, 
Edwd.  Willis,  Redman  Fitzgarrett,  Nich. 
Welsh,  Tho.  Ketle,  John  Langston, 
Michaell  Babbington,  Roger  Williams, 
Rich.  Johnson,  Thomas  Witney. 

WILLIAM  PRIOR,  200  acs.,  11  July 
1635,  p.  223.  Lying  N.  by  E.  upon 
Charles  Riv.,  E.  by  S.  upon  his  own 
devdt.,  &  W.  by  N.  upon  land  of  Lewis 
Cocke.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Wm.  Prior, 
Wm.  Norton,  Ann  Powell,  Ann  Cooke. 

JOHN  WATSON,  150  acs.  at  the 
New  Poquoson,  11  July  1635,  p.  225. 
S.  upon  the  river,  N.  into  the  woods, 
E.  adj.  land  of  Christopher  Stoakes  & 
W.  upon  land  of  Joseph  Jolly.  100  acs. 
for  the  per.  adv.  of  himselfe  &  wife 
Elizabeth  Watson  &  50  acs.  for  trans, 
of  1  servant  called  Richard  . 

THOMAS  VICOUNT,  100  acs.  Eliz. 
Citty  Co.,  13  July  1635,  p.  226.  Butt- 
ing S.  upon  land  of  John  Moore,  N. 
upon  John  Garnett,  S.  S.  W.  into  the 
woods  &  Nly.  upon  a  Cr.  between  Tho- 
mas Bolden  &  Benjamin  Simms,  bet.  two 
branches  N.  N.   E.  Trans,  of   2   pers.* 

CAPT.  CHRISTOPHER  CAL- 
THORPE,  500  acs.  at  the  New  Poquo- 
son, Eliz.  Citty  Co.,  13  July  1635,  p. 
227.  E.  upon  Calthorps  Cr.,  W.  to- 
wards John  Powells  Cr.,  Nly.  upon  the 
river  &  Sly.  into  the  woods.  Sd.  land 
graunted  unto  him  by  order  of  court  26 
Apr.  1631  &  due  for  trans,  of  10  pers.* 

JOHN  SPACKMAN,  (Spakeman) 
300    acs.    Warrasquioake   Co.,    13    July 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


27 


1635,  p.  228.  2  mi.  up  on  W.  side  of 
Pagan  point  Cr.  100  acs.  for  per.  adv. 
of  himselfe  &  Dorothy  Spademan,  his 
wife  &  200  acs.  for  trans,  of  his  chil- 
dren Joyce  &  Rosemond,  &  2  servts: 
John  Evans,  John  Wilsonn. 

JOHN  CLAY,  1200  acs.  Chas.  Citty 
Co.,  13  July  1635,  p.  230.  Bounding 
from  land  graunted  by  order  of  Ct.  to 
Capt.  Francis  Hooke  to  the  head  of 
Ward  his  Cr.,  E.  upon  same,  S.  W.  into 
the  maine  land  &  N.  upon  James  Riv. 
100  acs.  due  to  him  as  being  an  old 
planter  at  or  before  the  govmt.  of  Sir 
Thomas  Dale  &c.  1100  acs.  for  trans, 
of  22  persons.* 

CAPT.  WILLIAM  TUCKER,  Esqr., 
one  of  the  Councell  of  State,  200  acs., 
14  July  1635,  p.  231.  Upon  N.  side  of 
the  Westermost  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  beg. 
at  Allingtons  Cr.,  S.  S.  W.  upon  the 
same,  N.  N.  E.  upon  Watton  br.  of  sd. 
Riv.  &  W.  N.  W.  into  the  woods. 
Trans,  of  4  pers.* 

THOMAS  JORDAN,  900  acs.  War- 
rasquioake  Co.,  2  July  1635,  p.  233. 
Near  the  head  of  Warrasquioake  Riv., 
beg.  on  Wly.  side  of  an  old  Indian 
Towne  at  an  oake  marked  with  3 
notches,  being  upon  the  N.  W.  side  of 
the  river,  runin<*  W.  N.  W.  into  the 
woods  a  mile,  soe  coming  down  the 
river  to  a  Crosse  Cr.  a  small  oake  be- 
ing there  marked  with  twoe  notches. 
Trans,  of  18  pers.* 

MARTHA  TOMLIN,  (Tomlyn), 
Widdowe,   250   acs.,    14  July   1635,   p. 

234.  In  a  Cr.  on  the  S.  E.  side  of 
Nanzemund  Riv.,  on  the  E.  side  &  about 
3  mi.  up  the  Cr.,  running  Sly.  &  adj.  land 
graunted  unto  John  Armie,  beg.  next 
above  his  land.  Trans,  of  5  pers.*  Re- 
newed in  the  name  of  Epaproditus  Law- 
son  by  Sir  John  Harvey.  Rich.  Kemp,  Seer. 

THOMAS  WRIGHT,  150  acs.  in  the 
W.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.,   14  July  1635,  p. 

235.  S.  upon  sd.  branch,  N.  into  the 
woods,  adj.  W.  upon  a  Cr.  about  3  mi. 
up  the  same  &  E.  towards  the  mouth  of 
sd.  branch.  Trans,  of  3  pers.*  Renewed 
by  Sir  William  Berkeley  26  Apr.  1647 
with  additional  310  acs.  Sam:  Abbot,  Clk. 


CORNELIUS  LOYD,  800  acs.,  2 
July  1635,  p.  237.  Adj.  upon  Eliz. 
Riv.  W.  N.  W.,  into  the  woods  E.  S. 
E.,  N.  N.  E.  upon  Merchants  Cr.  & 
S.  S.  W.  upon  Maddisses  Cr.  Trans,  of 
16    servants.* 

MR.  ANTHONY  JONES,  500  acs., 
2  June  1635,  p.  238.  Upon  E.  side  of 
Pagan  point  Cr.,  beg.  at  the  Cross  Cr., 
Sly.  to  land  of  John  Sparkes,  W.  upon 
the  river  &  E.  into  the  woods  a  mile. 
Trans,  of  10  servts:  Nich.  Lee,  Michaell 
Brinckley,  William  Richards,  John 
Weston,  Jon.  Aram,  Edward  Page,  De- 
borah Merrard,  Rich.  Austin,  Jos. 
Bech  (?),  Tho.  Randall. 

JOHN  SPARKES,  750  acs.,  3  June 
1635,  p.  239.  At  the  head  of  Pagan 
point  Cr.,  butting  Nly.  upon  land  of 
Mr.  Jones,  Sly.  upon  the  white  marsh, 
W.  upon  the  river  &  Ely.  into  the 
woods  a  mile.  Trans,  of  15  pers:  John 
Sparkes.  Grace  Sparkes,  Ellin  Perkins, 
John  Clarke,  Robert  Hopkins,  Jon. 
Grandy,  Wm.  Peirce,  Wm.  Hurdis, 
Robt.  Dugg,  Stephen  Banister,  Christo- 
pher Tennant,  Rich.  Cole,  Wm.  Gallo- 
pin,  Henry  Taylor,  Mary  Sparkes. 

MR.  GEORGE  WHITE,  Minister  of 
the  word  of  God,  200  acs.,  3  June  1635, 
p.  240.  Nly.  upon  Nanzemund  Riv.,  S. 
into  the  woods,  W.  upon  a  Cr.  devid- 
ing  sd.  land  &  James  Knots  land  &  Ely. 
upon  the  first  Cr.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
Georg  White,  Wm.  Moore,  John  Joyce, 
Tho.  Catchman.  This  pattent  surren- 
dered &  renewed  by  Sir  John  Harvey. 
Rich.  Kempe,   Seer. 

HENRY  COLEMAN,  150  acs.,  6 
June  1635,  p.  241.  E.  upon  neck  of 
land  of  Mr.  Eaton,  W.  into  the  woods 
goeing  up  to  Eliz.  Citty,  N.  upon  the 
Riv.  &  S.  into  the  woods,  running  up  to 
Hampton  Riv.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Wm. 
Fann,  Tho.  Jones,  Eliz.  Smith. 

_  JOHN  JACKSON,  100  acs.  on  S. 
side  of  Lt.  Cheesemans  Cr.,  9  June 
1635,  p.  242.  Trans,  of  2  servants: 
Robt.  Tassell,  Peter  Buck. 

MR.  WILLIAM  STONE,  1800  acs. 
4  June  1635,  p.  244.  Beg.  at  the  blunt 
point   between    Hungers    Cr.    &   Matta- 


28 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


womens,  Wly.  on  the  bay,  Ely.  towards 
the  pynie  swampe  takein?  in  the  Clap- 
board quarter.  Due  for  the  per.  adv.  of 
himselfe  &  his  brother  Andrew  Stone 
&  trans,  of  34  servants:  Hugh  Hayes, 
Armstrong  Foster,  Wm.  Hawkinson, 
Tho.  Ward,  Cha.  Farrington,  Edwd. 
Burt,  Tho.  Hatcock,  Hen.  Holland,  Hen. 
Hartwell,  Robt.  Chessheire,  An  Irish- 
man, Tho.  Chilcott,  Wm.  Bucher,  Wm. 
Piss,  Jon.  Winnall,  James  Fletcher,  Jon. 
Blackstone,  Tho.  Smith,  Edwd.  Allen, 
Math  Scarbourgh,  David  Winley,  Hen. 
Johnson,  Richard  Worster,  Ann  Light- 
foote,  Hen.  Armetrading,  Richard  Powell, 
Ann  Smith,  John  Buffin,  Wm.  Davis, 
Thomas  Connagrave,  Sampson  Robins, 
Wm.  Matrun,  Hen.  Harris,  Willi.  Cole. 

CHARLES  HARMER,  1050  acs.,  4 
June  1635,  p.  245.  S.  by  a  pond  called 
the  deepe  ditch  W.  by  the  shore  of  the 
main  bav,  S.  by  the  old  plantation  Cr. 
mouth  &  E.  by  the  maine  woods  adj. 
upon  Eastermost  bank  of  the  great  pond. 
Due  for  his  own  &  the  per.  adv.  of  his 
wife  Ann  Harmer  &  trans,  of  19  ser- 
vts:  Evan  Jones,  Tho.  Cole,  James 
Courtney,  Lazarus  Maning,  Tho.  Davis, 
Rich.  Wrych,  Jon.  Symon,  Rich.  New- 
ton, Samll.  Lucas,  Eliz.  Bennett,  Rebec- 
ca Slaughter,  8  Negroes  named:  Alexan- 
der, Anthony,  Sebastian,  Polonia,  Jane, 
Palatia,  Cassanga  &  John.  Renewed  17 
Sept.  1644  in  the  name  of  Eliz.  Harmer, 
daughter  of  sd.  Charles  &  150  acs. 
added.    Teste:  Samll.  Abbott,  CI. 

MR.    NATHANIELL    HOOKE,    200 

acs.  2^4  mi.  up  the  Pagan  point  Cr.  up- 
on the  W.  side,  5  June  1635,  p.  247. 
For  his  own  per.  adv.  &  trans,  of  3 
pers:  Tho.  Boyer,  Rich.  Dunningham, 
Patrick  Vaughan. 

MR.  JERIMIAH  CLEMENT,  500 
acs.  E.  upon  land  formerly  in  his 
possession  &  N.  upon  James  Riv.  11 
June  1635,  p.  248.  50  acs.  for  the  per. 
adv.  of  his  wife  Edey  Clements  &  450 
acs.  for  trans,  of  9  pers:  John  Clement, 
John  Giles,  John  Dawtres,  Christopher 
Abbott,  Henry  Tompson,  John  Taylor, 
Tho.  Ashly  (or  Ashby),  Wm.  Stevens, 
Wm.  Winter,  Nathaniell  Eaton.  Re- 
newed by  Sir  John  Harvey  in  the  name 
of  the  patentee.    Test,  Tho.  Cooke,  Clk. 


WILLIAM  SPENCER,  1100  acs.  in 
Lawnes  Cr.,  Wly.  upon  hog  Island  Cr. 
&  Sly.  upon  a  parcell  of  land  he  hath 
taken  up  neare  the  mouth  of  the  Creek 
East.  19  June  1635,  p.  249.  Trans,  of 
22  servts:  Robt.  Stoakes,  Edwd.  Wil- 
mott,  Robt.  Arnall,  Annanias  Cople- 
stone,  Geo.  Prower,  Nicholas  Atwill, 
Evan  Williams,  Franc  Pearle,  Wm. 
Michaell,  John  Lewis,  Katherine  Perce, 
Ellen  Alice,  Antho.  Streate,  Hector 
Godbeare,  Nicho.  Spencer,  Jon.  Dod- 
man,  John  Holdin,  Tho.  Powell,  Tho. 
Smith,  Tho.  Clayton,  Jon.  Mathews, 
Elizabeth  Nicholson.  This  pattent  re- 
newed.   Tho.    Cooke,    Clk. 

ROBERT  SHEPPARD,  300  acs.  neare 
the  head  of  Chippoakes  Cr.,  beg.  at  the 
pond  Sw.,  Nly.  towards  James  Riv.,  E. 
upon  sd.  Cr.  &  W.  towards  the  Sunken 
Marshes.  19  July  1635,  p.  250.  100 
acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of  himself  & 
wife  Priscilla  Sheppard  &  200  acs.  for 
trans,  of  4  servts:  Wm.  Maulden,  Jon. 
Shawbooke,  Eliz.  Bonne,  Edwd.  Owen. 

JOSEPH  JOHNSON,  400  acs.  Ely 
upon  a  Cr.  about  3  mi.  of  Nanzemund 
Riv.,  extending  Wly.  Nly.  upon  sd. 
river.  19  June  1635,  n.  252.  Granted 
by  order  of  Court  12  Dec.  1634  &  due 
for  trans,  of  Elizabeth  Johnson  his  wife 
&  7  servts:  Wm.  Smith,  Hen.  Giles, 
Georg.  Gilbert,  Rebecca  Crewe,  Wm. 
Robinson,  Fran.  Gray,  Alice  Spore. 

WILLIAM  BEARD,  450  acs.  in  Pas- 
byhayes  within  the  Corp.  of  James  Citty, 
19  June  1635,  p.  253.  Beg.  at  a  swamp 
parting  this  &  land  now  in  the  tenure 
of  sd.  Beard.  Ely.  to  land  of  Richard 
Barrington  &  extending  from  sd.  Sw. 
N.  W.  &  Wly.  into  the  woods.  100  acs. 
for  the  per.  adv.  of  himselfe  &  his  wife 
Joane  Beard  &  350  acs.  for  trans,  of  7 
servts:  John  Stoute,  Hen.  Meares,  Fr. 
Withers,  Tho.  Lock,  Nich.  Midleton, 
Anth.  Rockwood,  Marg.  Walton.  This 
pattent  was  surrendered  &  never  planted. 
Rich.  Kemp,  Seer. 

ALEXANDER  STONAR,  350  acs. 
lying  E.  on  a  Cr.  next  to  the  Gleab 
land,  N.  W.  upon  a  Cr.  abutting  upon 
the  Otterdams,  N.  E.  into  the  maine 
woods  &  S.  E.  upon  the  maine  Cr.    22 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


29 


June  1635,  p.  254.  100  acs.  due  for 
the  per.  adv.  of  John  Cooke  who  was 
the  first  husband  of  Jane  Stoner,  the 
now  wife  of  sd.  Alexander  Stonar,  hav- 
ing been  granted  sd.  Cooke  according 
to  the  orders  &  constitutions  of  the  late 
Treasurer  &  Company  18  Nov.  1618, 
hee  havin°-  accomplished  his  time  of 
service  to  the  sd.  Co.  as  by  certificate 
under   the  hand   of   Sir   Georg  Yeardly 

20  June  1620;  50  acs.  for  his  own  per. 
adv.,  50  acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of  his 
wife  Jane  Stonar  &  150  acs.  for  trans, 
of  3  servts:  Richard  Venable  Geo.  Wal- 
ton, Richard  Phillipps.  Note:  There 
being  sould  out  of  this  pattent  to  Rich- 
ard Bell  twoe  hundred  acres,  there  re- 
maines  due  to  the  Pattentee  150  acs. 
Rich.  Kemp,  Seer. 

CAPT.  WILLIAM  PEIRCE,  Esqr., 
one  of  the  Councell  of  State,  2000  acs. 
in  Lawnes  Cr.,  22  June  1635,  p.  255. 
Sly.  upon  land  in  the  tenure  of  Alice 
Delke,  widdowe,  Nly.  towards  land  of 
William  Spencer,  Ely.  upon  the  Cr.  & 
Wly.  into  the  woods,  towards  Chip- 
poakes  Cr.  Trans,  of  40  pers:  Mary 
Peefe,  Barbary  Tanner,  Tho.  Dawson, 
James  Harrison,  Rich.  Burthen,  Wm. 
Tompson,  Edwd.  Cockshott,  Tho.  Rolfe, 
Jam.  Eustis,  Margt.  Smally,  Jon.  Pawly, 
Wm.  Allin,  Ja.  Legat,  Edwd.  Hamer, 
Niccodemus  White  Christ.  Adkins,  Ja. 
Smalledge,  Wm.  Short,  Wm.  Edwards, 
Greg.  Wells,  Alice  Lawson,  Hen.  Harri- 
son, Wm.  Weekes,  Robt.  Brittaine, 
Rich.  Webber,  Benj.  Dodson,  Jon.  New- 
man, Jon.  Browning,  Geo.  Eagle,  Jon. 
Heath,  Tho.  Johnson,  Jon.  Sparks,  Jon. 
Lowe,  Peeter  Willoughby,  Edwd.  Wil- 
ford,  Math.  Martledon,  Alice  King, 
Eliz.  Adams,  Ann  Drawter,  John  Bayant. 

SILVESTER  TOTNAM,  100  acs.  in 
Martins   hundred  in  the  Co.  of  James, 

21  July  1635,  p.  257.  Adj.  W.  unto 
land  of  Thomas  Smith,  Sly.  upon  a  br. 
of  Kethes  Cr.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Rich- 
ard Ascough,  Hen.  Cooper.  This  pat- 
tent  renewed  in  the  name  of  Thomas 
Smith.    Rich.  Kemp,   Seer. 

THOMAS  SMITH,  250  acs.  in  Mar- 
tins hundred  in  James  Co.,  21  Tuly 
1635,  p.  258.  Adj.  Mr.  Weaver's  plan- 
tation, Sly.  towards  a  br.  of  Kethes  Cr., 


Ely.  into  the  woods  &  on  N.  side  of 
Edward  Hales  plantation.  50  for  his 
per.  adv.  &  250  acs.  for  trans,  of  4 
pers:  Jon.  Vining,  Jon.  Gass,  Wm. 
Townend,  Francis  Coffin.    Renewed. 

DAVID  MANCELL  (Mansell),  500 
acs.  in  Martins  Hundred,  James  Co., 
22  July  1635,  p.  259.  Adj.  the  planta- 
tion or  neck  of  land  in  his  possession, 
N.  E.  towards  the  maine  river  &  S.  W. 
adj.  Mr.  Barhams  land.  Trans,  of  10 
pers:  Fra.  Sawyer,  Rich.  Kenscott,  Jonas 
Evans,  Jon.  Smalledge,  Phi.  Powell, 
Wm.  Crouch,  Wm.  Heyly,  Geo.  Bul- 
lock, Eliz.  Lewis,  Jon.  Bennett.  Renewed. 

EDWARD  MINTER,  250  acs.  James 
Co.,  over  against  Danceing  poynt,  on  the 
Sly.  side  of  the  river  &  Ely.  side  of 
Sunken  Marsh  Cr.  22  July  1635,  p. 
261.  Due  unto  him  as  sonn  &  heire  of 
his  father  Richard  Minter,  deed.,  to 
whom  it  was  due,  viz:  50  acs.  for  his 
per.  adv.,  50  acs.  for  per.  adv.  of  his 
wife  Ann  Minter,  mother  of  sd.  Ed- 
ward, &  150  acs.  for  trans,  of  his  2 
sons  Edward  &  John  &  one  servant 
called  William  Browne.  Note:  This 
pattent  surrendered  &  renewed  in  the 
name  of  Charles  Foard.  Tho.  Cooke,  Clr. 

THOMAS  RANSHAW,  50  acs. 
Denby  Co.,  27  July  1635,  p.  262.  Up- 
on Warwick  Riv.  W.,  N.  upon  the 
Deepe  Cr.,  E.  into  the  forrest  &  S.  upon 
land  of  one  Burrows.  Trans,  of  1  servt.* 

SAME.  250  acs.  Eliz.  Co.,  27  July 
1635,  p.  264.  E.  upon  land  of  Christo- 
pher Stoakes  &  S.  upon  the  new  Poquo- 
son.   Trans,  of  5  pers.* 

CHRISTOPHER  STOAKES,  300  acs. 
Eliz.  Citty  Co.,  28  July  1635,  p.  265. 
At  the  new  Pocoson,  Sly.  upon  the  river, 
Ely.  upon  a  small  brooke  betwixt  sd. 
land  &  John  Watsons  land  &  running 
Wly.  toward  the  Pocoson  dams.  Trans, 
of  6  pers:  Mill.  Freeman,  Samll.  Wat- 
son, Rich.  Sharbou'e.  (or  Stratboule), 
Hen.  Hickman,  Wm.  Wattye,  Hen.  Powell. 

MR.  GEORG  KETH,  Clarke  &  Pastor 
of  Kiskiake,  850  acs.  Chas.  River  Co., 
29  Julv  1635,  P.  266.  N.  E.  on  Cheese- 
mans  Cr..  S.  W.  on  a  running;  brooke 
which  falls  into  this  Cr.,  this  being  the 


30 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


breadth,  on  the  W.  &  N.  on  a  long  dry 
marshe  along  the  backside,  on  the  E.  & 
S.  to  run  over  the  Cr.  &  about  on  the 
woods  over  the  Cr.  Granted  by  order 
of  Ct.  26  Feb.  1634  &  due,  viz:  150 
acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of  himselfe,  his 
wife  Martha  Keth,  &  sonn  John  Keth  & 
700  acs.  for  trans,  of  14  pers:  James 
Whiting,  Rebecca  Whiting,  Tho.  Cupper- 
whaite,  Robt.  Derry,  James  Huggesson, 
Hen.  Merrick,  Tho.  Jackson,  Jon.  Ger- 
rard,  Mary  Wilsonn,  Mary  a  Negroe, 
Isaac  Gargrave,  Robt.  Tempest,  Elias 
Jones,  Jon.  Singcleare. 

SAMUELL  SNEAD,  (Sneade),  200 
acs.  in  James  Co.,  4  Aug.  1635,  p.  268. 
At  the  head  of  Keths  Cr.  beg.  at  a  Crosse 
path  which  lyeth  on  the  S.  E.  side  of 
sd.  land,  running  N.  W.  into  the  forrest 
towards  Kiskiake  between  two  swamps 
on  the  N.  E.  &  S.  W.  sides,  adj. 
Samuell  Griges  plantation,  being  alsoe 
parted  with  a  sw.  from  the  land  of 
Thomas  Smith.  150  acs.  for  per.  adv. 
of  himselfe,  his  wife  Alice  Sneade  & 
his  sonn  William  Sneade  &  50  acs.  for 
trans,  of  a  servt.  called  Henry  Vincent. 

GEORGE  HOLMES,  150  acs.  in 
James  Co.,  4  Aug.  1635,  p.  269.  At 
the  head  of  a  Cr.  parting  Archers  hope 
&  Jockes  Neck,  running  Nly.  into  the 
woods  &  adj.  on  W.  side  to  land  of 
John  Johnson  commonly  called  Jockeys 
Neck.  100  acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of 
himselfe  &  wife  Rebecca  Holmes  & 
trans,  of  a  servt.  called  Thomas  Browne. 

WILLIAM  BERRIMAN,  150  acs. 
Accomacke  Co.,  6  Aug.  1635,  p.  270. 
In  the  old  plantation  Cr.,  bounding  up- 
on land  of  Henry  Careleys  called  by  the 
name  of  fishing  poynt  neck,  N.  W.  by 
N.  running  upon  a  Cr.,  S.  E.  by  S. 
joyning  on  a  runing  spring,  E.  by  N. 
into  the  woods  &  S.  W.  upon  the  Cr. 
parting  Henry  Bagnells  land  &  sd.  neck. 
50  acs.  for  his  per.  adv.  &  100  acs.  for 
trans,  of  2  servts.  called  John  Causey 
&  Edward  Prince. 

JOHN  DENNETT,  200  acs.  Co.  of 
James,  10  Aug.  1635,  p.  271.  On  N. 
side  of  Mr.  Thomas  Kingstones  land 
(only   a    barren    ridge    between),    Nly. 


into  the  forrest  betweene  Martins  hun- 
dred &  Kiskiake  by  a  br.  of  Capt.  John 
West  Cr.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  John  Ley,  Jon. 
Rowland,    Susan   Richey,   Ann   Combey. 

MR.  WILLIS  HELY,  Clarke  &  Pastor 
of  Mulberry  Island,  250  acs.  in  sd. 
parish,  17  Aug.  1635,  p.  273.  Beg.  at 
a  place  called  the  Otterdams,  running 
by  a  Sw.  butting  upon  land  of  Thomas 
Harwood  now  in  the  occupation  of 
Daniell  Lane  on  the  N.  side,  S.  E.  upon 
the  Mills,  W.  upon  land  of  Thomas 
Nowell  (or  Lowell),  dec'd.,  &  S.  to- 
wards land  of  Capt.  Thomas  Flint. 
Granted  by  order  of  Ct.  6  June  last 
past  upon  a  twofold  consideration,  first 
in  reward  of  his  faithfull  paines  in  the 
Ministrie  exemplified  by  a  Godly  & 
quiet  life  thereby  seconding  his  doc- 
trine, next  as  a  spurr  &  encouragement 
for  others  of  his  calling  to  pursue  soe 
faire  &  bright  and  example. 

RICHARD  DURRANT,  250  acs.  in 
James  Co.,  24  Aug.  1635,  p.  274.    To 

begin  at  the  upper  path  that  goeth  to 
Jockeys  Neck  bounded  with  a  valley 
parting  sd.  neck  &  this  land,  W.  to  the 
Midle  plantation  path.  100  acs.  for  the 
per.  adv.  of  himselfe  &  wife  &  150  acs. 
for  trans,  of  3  pers:  Walter  Grimes, 
Tho.  Benton,  Mary  Smith. 

MRS.  HANNA  SALVAGE,  relict  of 
Ensigne  Thomas  Savage,  late  of  Acco- 
mack, planter,  a  parcell  of  land  lying 
in  Accomack,  bounded  with  the  Cr.  of 
Accomack  on  the  S.,  the  great  bay  on 
the  W.,  Wiscapanso  on  the  N.  &  the 
main  Ocean  on  the  E.  24  Aug.  1635, 
p.  275.  Which  land  was  graunted  unto 
her  husband  by  the  King  of  the  East- 
erne  shoare  as  by  deed  calling  himselfe 
Esmy  Shichans.  Renewed  in  the  name 
of  John  Savage. 

THOMAS  HOLEMAN  (Holman), 
100  acs.  in  the  Co.  of  James  in  Martins 
Hundred,  24  Aug.  1635,  p.  276.  Adj. 
on  N.  to  land  of  John  Dennett,  Ely. 
into  the  woods  by  a  br.  of  a  Cr.  called 
Capt.  John  Wests  Cr.  50  acs.  for  his 
per.  adv.  &  50  acs.  as  Admr.  to  Tho- 
mas Harvey,  late  of  Martins  hundred, 
dec'd.,  to  whom  it  was  due  for  his  per. 
adv. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


31 


WILLIAM  DENHAM,  300  acs.  in 
Warresquioake  Riv.  about  3  mi.  up  the 
same,  N.  W.  from  land  of  Mr.  Thomas 
Jordan  about  a  mile  up  a  Cr.,  S.  E.  into 
the  woods,  N.  W.  upon  sd.  Cr.,  op- 
posite against  land  that  Mr.  Butler 
marked.  Trans,  of  6  pers.*  20  Aug. 
1635,  p.  278. 

CAPT.  JOHN  WOOD,  650  acs.  in 
James  Co.,  26  Aug.  1635,  p.  279.  Beg. 
at  Sandy  poynt,  Wwd.  to  the  small  Cr. 
by  the  maine  river  side,  N.  into  the 
woods  as  farr  as  the  sd.  quantity  will 
beare.  Due  by  order  of  Ct.  4  June 
1635  upon  severall  considerations  & 
conditions. 

CAPT.  FRANCIS  EPPES,  (Epes), 
1700  acs.  in  the  Co.  of  Chas.,  26  Aug. 
1635,  p.  280.  E.  upon  Bayly  his  Cr.,  S. 
into  the  maine  land,  W.  upon  Cason  his 
Cr.  up  Appamattuck  Riv.  &  N.  upon  the 
maine  river.  50  acs.  for  his  per.  adv.  & 
1650  acs.  for  trans,  of  3  sons:  Jon.  Epes, 
Fr.  Epes,  Tho.  Epes  &  30  servts:  Jon. 
Long,  Jon.  Baker,  Tho.  Warden,  Jon. 
Joyce,  Tho.  Foanes,  Tho.  Cropp,  Rich. 
Stayle,  Rich.  Huett,  Geo.  Addams,  Sarah 
Hickmore,  Thomas  Pattison,  Anth.  Box, 
Jonath.  Ellison,  Barth.  Swinborne,  Sil- 
vester Atkins,  Robt.  Fossett,  Ja.  Row- 
land, Ann  Turner,  Geo.  Archer,  Hugh 
James,  Jon.  Nowells,  Bashaw,  Juliana, 
Andrea,  Maydelina,  Cessent,  Negroes, 
Rich.  Litchfeild,  Edward  Ames,  Susan 
Mills,  James  Long.  Note  ;  Surren- 
dered &  renewed  by  Sir  Georg  Harvey. 
Rich.  Kemp,  Seer. 

HUGH  COX,  500  acs.  Chas.  Citty 
Co.,  between  Kimiges  (?)  Cr.  &  land 
in  possession  of  Walter  Ashton.  27 
Aug.  1635,  p.  282.  Granted  by  order 
of  Ct.  to  said  Hugh  Cockes,  6  Dec. 
1634  &  due  for  trans,  of  10  pers:  Hugh 
Powell,  Hen.  Crosbye,  Hen.  Pattison, 
Hen.  Collins,  James  Fowler,  Robt. 
Morris,  Geo.  Browning,  Peter  Holloway, 
Asher  Joy,  Francis  Harper. 

THOMAS  GRAY,  550  acs.  James 
Co.,  27  Aug.  1635,  p.  283.  On  S.  side 
of  the  maine  riv.  over  against  James 
Citty,  adj.  on  the  E.  to  the  plantation 
now  in  his  possession  &  to  land  of  Capt. 


Perry,  running  along  by  Rolfes  Cr.  &  S. 
into  the  woods  upon  the  Cross  Cr.  100 
acs.  due  as  an  Ancient  Planter  at  or  be- 
fore the  time  of  Sir  Thomas  Dale,  ac- 
cording to  a  charter  of  orders  from  the 
late  Treasurer  &  Co.,  dated  18  Nov. 
1618;  50  acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of  Anis 
(Annis)  Gray  his  first  wife,  50  acs. 
for  the  per.  adv.  of  Rebecca  Gray  his 
now  wife  &  350  acs.  for  trans,  of  his 
2  sons:  Wm.  Gray  &  Tho.  Gray,  &  5 
servts:  Jon.  Bushopp,  Robt.  Browne, 
Robt.  Welshe,  Luke  Misle,  Jon.  Banckes. 

HENRY  HARTE,  (Hart)  350  acs. 
on  the  S.  side  of  the  maine  river  over 
against  James  Towne  Is.,  called  the 
Pynie  poynt,  last  day  of  Aug.  1635,  p. 
284.  Bounded  with  Capt.  Powells  land 
on  the  W.,  E.  upon  land  of  John  Long 
&  S.  into  the  woods.  100  acs.  for  his 
own  &  the  per.  adv.  of  his  wife  Rebec- 
ca Harte  &  250  acs.  for  trans,  of  5 
pers:  Rich.  Milborne,  Jon.  Cooper,  Hen. 
Drew,  Sam.  Eaton,  James  Burfe.  Note: 
Renewed  in  the  names  of  Edwd. 
Stephenson  &  Hen.  Cookeney. 

WILLIAM  GANY,  1250  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  17  Sept.  1635,  p.  286.  On 
Nwd.  side  of  the  mouth  of  Hungar  Cr., 
adj.  land  of  William  Andrewes,  W. 
upon  the  Bay,  E.  with  the  breadth  of 
the  maine  Cr.,  etc.  200  acs.  for  the 
per.  adv.  of  his  wife  Ann  Gany,  his 
two  children:  William  &  Ann;  his 
brother  Henry  Gany  &  1050  acs.  for 
trans,  of  21  servts:  Edward  Stockden, 
Roger  Fearebrace,  Jon.  Collins,  Tho. 
Collins,  Samll.  Wools,  Jon.  Hedlen, 
Jon.  Pullapin,  Robt.  Browne,  Thomasin 
Lux,  Anthony  a  Negroe,  Jon.  Wright, 
Nicho.  Clarke,  Jon.  Hether,  Tho. 
Savage,  Eliza.  Browne,  Wm.  Baldwin, 
Jon.  Sparkes,  Jon.  Evans,  Nich.  Jordan, 
Wm.  Cole,  Tymothy  Joane;  the  name  of 
Wm.  Ganv  is  also  included.  Renewed 
by  Sir  John  Harvey  in  the  name  of 
Thomas  Burbage.    Test:    Tho.  Cooke. 

THOMAS  CROMPE,  500  acs.  James 
Co.,  28  Sept.  1633,  p.  287.  In  the  neck 
of  land  bounding  E.  on  a  Cr.  which 
runs  between  the  Gleab  land  &  sd.  neck, 
W.  upon  a  Cr.  between  sd.  neck  &  land 
in  the  tenure   of  Thomas   Phillipps,   S. 


32 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


adj.  land  belonging  to  the  Orphans  & 
heirs  of  Mr.  Richard  Buck.  50  acs.  for 
his  own  per.  adv.  &  450  acs.  for  trans, 
of  9  pers:  Jon.  Gowing,  Roger  Arn- 
wood,  Robt.  Ackerman,  Fr.  Peale,  Jon. 
Abott,  Lewis  DepQma,  Peter  Brill,  Wm. 
Mallett,  Tho.  Trunchfeild. 

JOHN  TRUSSELL,  200  acs.  neare 
the  back  river,  Nly.  upon  land  of  John 
Grew,  Sly.  upon  the  Cr.,  S.  W.  upon  a 
running  brooke  from  the  great  Otter- 
dams  &  N.  W.  into  the  woods.  12  Oct. 
1635,  p.  289.  Trans,  of  4  pers.*  Note: 
Surrendered  &  renewed  in  the  name  of 
John  Graves.    Tho.  Cooke,  Clk. 

ROBERT  GLASCOCKE,  200  acs. 
Eliz.  Co.,  7  Oct.  1635,  p.  290.  Being 
a  point  of  land  on  S.  side  the  maine 
river  bounded  with  a  great  Cr.,  N.  upon 
land  of  Lt.  Cheeseman  &  E.  into  the 
woods.    Trans,  of  4  servts.* 

JOHN  MOONE,  900  acs.  Warres- 
quioake  Co.,  21  Oct.  1635,  p.  291.  300 
acs.  at  the  mouth  of  Pagan  poynt  Cr., 
Ely.  on  the  W.  side  of  same,  Wly.  to- 
wards Virgoz  Cr.,  Nly.  on  Warresqui- 
oake  great  bay  Cr.  &  Sly.  into  the 
woods;  600  acs.  in  the  neck  &  branches 
of  Virgos  Cr.,  butting  Ely.  according 
to  the  marked  trees  &c.  50  acs.  for  the 
per.  adv.  of  his  wife  Susan  Moone  & 
850  acs.  for  trans,  of  17  pers:  Jon. 
Russell,  Jon.  Prise,  Robt.  Bard,  Tho. 
Wernner,  Jon.  Silliward,  Norman  Wil- 
liams, Jon.  Cloyes,  Jon.  White,  Rich. 
Petway,  Tho.  Boy,  Solon  a  Negro,  Jon. 
Rowlett,  Anth.  Jordan,  Rich.  Banen, 
Tho.  Warder,  Jon.  Neale. 

GEORG  HULL,  450  acs.,  12  Oct. 
1635,  p.  292.  200  acs.  neare  the  head 
of  the  old  Poquoson  river,  E.  upon 
same,  W.  into  the  woods,  N.  upon  a 
plantation  of  Thomas  Saywells,  S.  upon 
the  widdowe  Tompsons  plantation;  250 
acs.  S.  upon  sd.  river,  N.  into  the 
woods,  E.  upon  Warwick  Cr.  &  W. 
into  the  woods.  (This  name  was  first 
written  Hall.) 

WILLIAM  SWAN,  1200  acs.  James 
Co.,  5  Nov.  1635,  p.  293.  On  S.  side 
of  James  Riv.,  W.  from  Smiths  Mount 
to  the  halfe  way  Neck.  Trans,  of  24 
pers:    Rich.  Jones,   Hen.   Dawkes,  Jon. 


Swan,  Nich.  Stalling,  Jos.  Manners, 
Kath.  Crippin/^RfthT  Maddison,  Tho. 
Williams,  Wm.  Motts,  Georg  Yeomans, 
Jon.  Flood,  Edwd.  Swan,  Rich.  Thim- 
bleby,  Nicholas  Foster,  Edwd.  Champin, 
Judith  Greene,  Nich.  Barnett,  Rich. 
Perry,  Jon.  Goodson,  Rich.  Flood,  Alice 
Edes,  Mary  Hawkes,  Andrew  Jacob, 
Kath  Cripps.  Note:  Renewed  in  the 
name  of  Thomas  Swan. 

PEIRCE  LENNON,  300  acs.  Chas. 
Citty  Co.,  6  Nov.  1635,  p.  295.  Neare 
adj.  to  Weyenoake,  bounded  W.  upon 
Matchocoes  Cr.,  W.  N.  W.  into  the 
woods,  S.  upon  James  Riv.  50  acs.  for 
per.  adv.  of  his  wife  Rebecca  Lennon 
&  trans,  of  5  pers:  James  Turner,  Tho. 
Chote,  Jon.  Probat,  Jon.  Kerne,  Georg 

.     Note:    Pattern     surrendered     & 

renewed  in  the  name  of  Henry  Rowen. 
Tho.  Cooke,  Clr. 

JAMES  MERRIMAN,  150  acs.  Chas. 
Citty  Co.,  6  Nov.  1635,  p.  296.  Adj. 
to  Weyanoake,  next  alsoe  adj.  to  land 
of  Peirce  Lennon,  E.  upon  David  Jones. 
100  acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of  himself  & 
wife  Sarah  Merriman  &  trans,  of  1 
servt.  called  William  Bird. 

JOHN  GEORGE,  900  acs.,  7  Nov. 
1635,  p.  297.  E.  upon  land  of  William 
Bayly,  W.  S.  W.  upon  the  maine  land, 
N.  upon  Baylys  Cr.  50  acs.  for  the 
per.  adv.  of  his  wife  Jane  George  & 
850  acs.  for  trans,  of  17  pers.* 

AUGUSTINE  WARNER,  one  neck 
of  ground  called  by  the  name  of  Pynie 
Neck  conteyning  by  estimation  250  acs., 
lying  at  the  new  Poquoson,  W.  into  the 
woods,  E\  upon  the  bay,  S.  upon 
Samuell  Bennetts  plantation  &  N.  upon 
Mr.  Pettys  land.  Trans,  of  5  pers.*  12 
Oct.  1635,  p.  298.  Renewed  &  200 
acres  added. 

THOMAS  BAYWELL,  450  acs.  upon 
Appamuttuck  Riv.,  7  Nov.  1635,  p. 
300.  N.  towards  the  Conjurers  feild, 
E.  upon  the  river,  &  W.  into  the  maine 
woods.  100  acs.  for  his  per.  adv.,  be- 
ing a  planter  in  the  time  of  the  Govern- 
ment of  Sir  Thomas  Dale,  50  acs.  for 
the  per.  adv.  of  his  wife — Baywell  & 
300    acs:   for    trans,    of    6    pers:    Wm. 


George    Sandys    Patent.    One    of    the    oldest    recorded    patents,    referring    to    lands 

included   in  more  ancient  patents  which  are  not  extant.    Found  in 

Patent  Book   1,   page  16. — Cavaliers  and  Pioneers,   page  4. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


33 


Wader,  Walter  Collins,  Benis  Bulmer, 
Jon.  Weaver,  Wm. .  Gill.  Note:  Re- 
newed.   Tho.  Cooke,  Clr. 

CHRISTOPHER  WOODDARD,  300 
acs.  upon  Appamuttuck  River.,  9  Nov. 
1635,  p.  301.  N.  upon  the  river,  S. 
into  the  maine  woods,  E.  upon  Mr. 
Farrar  &  W.  upon  the  winding  river. 
100  acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of  himself  & 
wife  &  200  acs.  for  trans,  of  4  pers: 
Wm.  Thomas,  Thomas  Williams,  Rich. 
Burpott,  Tho.  Jones. 

FRANCIS  FOWLER,  800  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  9  Nov.  1635,  p.  302.  On 
the  Creek  side  against  Juring  poynt, 
beg.  on  N.  side  of  land  of  Bridges  Free- 
man, E.  towards  Chichahominy  Riv. 
Trans,  of  16  pers:  William  Frye,  Jon. 
Smith,  Jon.  Mortlye,  Anth.  Jeggins, 
Susan  Ward,  Rich.  Jones,  Charles 
Rogers,  John  Taylor,  Hen.  Smith,  Robt. 
Nash,  John  Tompkison,  Robt.  Lovell, 
Robt.  Grace,  Jon.  Jennings,  Robt. 
Purches,  Richard  West. 

THOMAS  HARRIS,  750  acs.  Henrico 
Co.,  within  Digs  his  hundred,  11  Nov. 
1635,  p.  304.  Swd.  upon  land  of  Ed- 
ward Virgany,  thence  extending  Nwd. 
upon  land  of  Joane  Harris  his  wife,  W. 
upon  the  river  &  E.  into  the  woods. 
100  acs.  due  him  as  being  an  Ancient 
planter  &  adventurer  in  the  time  of  Sir 
Thomas  Dale  his  Govmt.,  according  to 
a  Charter  of  orders  from  the  late 
Treasurer  &  Co.,  18  Nov.  1618,  &  650 
acs.  for  trans,  of  13  pers:  Wm.  Purnell, 
Jon.  Godfrye,  Jon.  Searle,  Tho.  Keane, 
Rich.  Mascoll,  Nath.  Moore,  Jon.  Ed- 
wards, Ann  Ridly,  Wm.  Jones,  Tho. 
Morgan,  Wm.  Jones;  2  Negroes,  a  man 
&  a  woman.  Note:  Renewed  &  70  acs. 
added.    Tho.  Cooke,  Clr. 

WILLIAM  STAFFORD,  300  acs.  in 
Kethes  Cr.,  12  Nov.  1635,  p.  305.  N. 
&  by  E.  upon  land  of  Edward  Hall,  S. 
&  by  W.  upon  land  of  Edward  Grimes, 
E.  &  by  S.  upon  land  of  William 
Ravenett  (or  Rabenett),  N.  &  by  W. 
into  the  woods.  50  acs.  for  the  per. 
adv.  of  his  wife  Rebecca  Stafford  &  250 
acs.  for  the  trans,  of  5  pers:  Christo. 
Stafford,  Robert  Martin,  Robt.  Wilkin- 
son, Fr.  Reeve,  John  Farr,  Servants. 


FRANCIS  HOUGH,  800  acs.,  12 
Nov.  1635,  p.  305.  Beg.  at  the  first 
Cr.  of  Nansamund  Riv.  on  the  S.  side, 
extending  towards  the  mouth  of  sd. 
river,  Nly.  up  the  same,  Sly.  into  the 
woods,  Wly.  upon  sd.  Cr.  &  Ely.  to- 
wards the  maine  river.   Trans,  of  16  pers.* 

HENRY  DANIELL,  200  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  13  Nov.  1635,  p.  306.  Adj. 
land  of  Alexander  Stoner  &  running 
unto  the  woods  E.  &  W.  100  acs.  for 
the  per.  adv.  of  himselfe  &  wife  Eliza- 
beth Daniell  &  100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2 
pers:  Eliza.  Hudson,  Katherine  Sanders. 
Note:  Renewed  in  the  name  of  Wil- 
liam Davis.    Test:  Tho.  Cooke,  Clr. 

JOHN  GRINETT,  150  acs.  neare  the 
Deepe  Cr.  comonly  knowne  by  the  name 
of  Harwoods  Necke,  bounded  W.  upon 
sd.  Cr.,  E.  into  the  woods,  S.  upon  land 
of  Thomas  Ranshaw  &  N.  upon  land  of 
Christooher  Boyse.  Due  for  trans,  of 
Alice  his  first  wife,  Peter  Hooper  her 
sonn,  "&  Elizabeth  Grinett  his  now  wife. 
Note:  This  pattent  surrendered  &  re- 
newed in  the  name  of  Peter  Stafferton. 
Test:  Tho.  Cooke,  Clr.  14  Nov.  1635, 
p.  306. 

THOMAS  SHIPPEY,  250  acs.,  14 
Nov.  1635,  p.  307.  S.  upon  land  of 
Robert  Greene,  W.  upon  the  river  over 
against  the  neck  of  land,  N.  upon  the 
4  Mi.  Cr.  &  E.  upon  the  maine  land. 
Trans,  of  5  pers:  Thomas  Shippey, 
Elizabeth  Shippey,  Jeffery  Brewer,  Robt. 
Cole,  Thomas  Brooke,  John  Cawker. 
Note:  Renewed  by  Sir  John  Harvey. 
Rich.  Kemp,  Seer. 

WILLIAM  PILKINGTON,  (Pilkin- 
ton)  200  acs.  James  Citty  Co.,  16  Nov. 
1635,  p.  308.  S.  upon  Chippoakes  Cr., 
W.  into  the  maine  woods,  a  small  Cr. 
lying  upon  each  side.  Trans,  of  4  pers.* 
Note:  Renewed  in  the  name  of  Sir 
John    Harvey.    Test:    Tho.   Cooke,   Clr. 

ROGER  BAGNALL,  350  acs.  War- 
resquioake  Co.,  16  Nov.  1635,  p.  308. 
Bounded  on  W.  with  land  of  Thomas 
Dangle,  N.  &  N.  E.  with  the  Pagan  Cr. 
&  on  S.  &  S.  W.  with  the  maine  woods. 
300  acs.  by  deed  of  sale  from  Wm. 
Clapham   of  Warresquioake,    planter,    3 


34 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Aug.    1635   &  50  acs.  for  trans,  of  1 
servt  called  John  Slaughter. 

WILLIAM  WOOLRITCH,  400  acs. 
Eliz.  Citty  Co.,  17  June  1635,  p.  309. 
A  ridge  of  land  lying  in  the  woods 
butting  in  length  Wly.  upon  land  of 
Capt.  Christopher  Calthroppe,  Ely.  upon 
Samuell  Bennett  &  Robert  Thresher,  N. 
upon  Mr.  Phettiplace  Cloyse  &  Sly.  into 
the  maine  woods.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Joane 
Woolrich,  Humphrye  Edwards,  Mar- 
garett  Clement,  Mark  Foster,  Robt  Reeves, 
Jon.  Hunt,  Robt.  Reeves,  Wm.  Jening. 

TOHN  VASLER,  150  acs.  Warresqui- 
oake  Co.,  18  Nov.  1635,  p.  310.  Being 
a  necke  of  land  lying  up  the  maine  Cr. 
of  Warresquioake  bay,  next  behind  the 
land  ofWarresquioake&Nathaniell  Loyd, 
a  back  Cr.  parting  them,  which  Cr.  runs 
up  W.  N.  W.  neare  the  maine  Cr.  & 
the  sd.  maine  Cr.  S.  W.  on  the  other 
side.  Trans,  of  himselfe,  his  wife  Eli- 
zabeth Vasler  &  1  servt.  called  William 
Baker. 

WILLIAM  CLARKE,  100  acs.  Eliz. 
Citty  Co.,  18  Nov.  1635,  p.  310.  S.W. 
upon  land  of  Mr.  Georg  White,  Minister, 
E.  into  the  woods,  W.  upon  the  New 
Pocoson  Riv.  &  N.  upon  Clarkes  Cr. 
Trans .  of  2  pers :  John  Oker,  Nich .  Bennett . 

CAPT.  THOMAS  WILLOWBYE, 
300  acs.  adj.  land  now  in  his  possession, 
19  Nov.  1635,  p.  311.  N.  upon  the 
maine  river,  Sly.  into  the  woods,  &  E. 
upon  his  now  dwelling  howse.  Trans, 
of  6  pers:  John  Draper,  Giles  Collins, 
Theod.  Loyd,  Jon.  Scot,  Wm.  Palmer, 
Walter  Howell.  Note:  Renewed  in  his 
name  19  Mar.  1643.  Test:  Sam.  Ab- 
bott, Clr. 

SAME.  300  acs.  Eliz.  Citty  Co.,  19 
Nov.  1635,  p.  312.  Upon  the  "hither" 
Cr.  between  Francis  Mason  &  his  own 
land,  S.  upon  the  woods,  W.  upon  the 
Cr.,  N.  upon  land  formerly  taken  up  by 
him.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Jon.  Pinches, 
Howell  Hayward,  Jon.  David,  Wey- 
mouth Vensey,  Jon.  Wood,  Rich.  Jack- 
son. Note:  Renewed  19  Mar.  1643  in 
his  name.    Samll.  Abbot,  CI. 

SAME.  300  acs.  in  Eliz.  Riv.,  being 
2  or  3  small  necks  of  land,  W.  upon  a 


br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  S.  E.  upon  the  maine 
land  &  N.  upon  the  Sly.  br.  of  Eliz. 
Riv.  Same  date  &  page.  Trans,  of  6 
pers:  Tymothy  Barloe,  Nich.  Fortescue, 
Jon.  Farrow,  Mary  Wormewell,  Robt. 
Barkwith,    Demis    (or   Dennis)    Reeve. 

THOMAS  KEELING,  100  acs.  Eliz. 
Citty  Co.,  18  Nov.  1635,  p.  313.  Nly. 
upon  land  of  Henry  Southwell,  Ely.  up- 
on the  back  river,  Sly.  upon  land  of 
William  Morgan  &  Wly.  on  the  maine 
land.    Trans,  of  2  pers.* 

THOMAS  WARREN,  300  acs.,  Chas. 
Citty  Co.,    20  Nov.    1635,   p.    314.    S. 

upon  Bayliffs  ,  E.  upon  the  maine 

woods,  W.  upon  the  river,  &  N.  upon 
4  Mi.  Cr.  150  acs.  in  right  of  his  wife 
Susan  Greeneleafe,  the  relict  of  Robert 
Greeneleafe;  50  acs.  due  for  her  per. 
adv.  &  100  for  sd.  Robert  her  former 
husband,  being  an  Ancient  Planter  in 
the  time  of  Sir  Thomas  Dale;  50  acs. 
due  sd.  Warren  for  his  own  per.  adv. 
&  100  acs.  for  the  trans,  of  2  servts: 
John  Fouke,  Rich.  Whitfeild. 

EDWARD  SPARSHOTT,  100  acs. 
Chas.  Citty  Co.,  20  Nov.  1635,  p.  314. 
At  Merchants  Hope  Cr.  at  the  parting 
of  same,  S.  up  the  Cr.,  W.  upon  the 
maine  woods,  E.  upon  the  Cr.  &  on  the 
N.  side  of  the  Indian  feild.  50  acs.  for 
the  per.  adv.  of  his  wife  Maudelin  (or 
Mandelin)  Canes  (or  Caves)  &  50  acs. 
for  trans,  of  1  servt.  called  Robert 
Honyborne.  Note:  Renewed  &  250 
acs.  added. 

WILLIAM  WILKINSON,  Minister, 
700  acs.  in  Linhaven,  comonly  called 
Chisopeian  river,  upon  a  Cr.,  W.  on 
Thomas  Keeling  &  Georg  Downes,  S. 
into  the  woods,  Ely.  along  the  Cr.,  be- 
ing opposite  to  Capt.  Thorrogoods 
plantation  in  Lynhaven  &  N.  upon 
Chisopeian  bay.  20  Nov.  1635,  p.  315. 
200  acs.  due  by  assignment  from  Robert 
Newberke,  3  Oct.  1635,  to  whom  it  was 
due,  viz:  50  acs.  for  his  own  per.  adv. 
&  150  acs.  for  trans,  of  3  servts,  500 
acs.  due  sd.  Wilkinson,  viz:  100  acs. 
for  the  per.  adv.  of  himselfe  &  wife 
Naomy  Wilkinson  &  400  acs.  for  trans, 
of  8  pers.  (In  addition  to  the  above, 
the  following  names  appear  under  this 
record,    no   distinction   being   made  be- 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


35 


tween  the  3  servants  &  those  transported 
by  sd.  Wilkinson):  Robt  Houghton, 
Jon.  Goodwin,  Thomas  Preston,  Edward 
Pearce,  Hugh  Jones,  Martha  Deacon, 
Tho.  Craftin,  Daniell  Baker,  John 
Boods,  Jon.  Johnson. 

WILLIAM  DAWSON,  150  acs.,  20 
Nov.  1635,  p.  316.  Within  the  first 
small  Cr.  of  Warresquioake  Gr.  Cr., 
N.  W.  between  Henry  Hoopers  land  & 
the  first  point  within  the  Gr.  Creek,  sd. 
land  lying  S.  E.  upon  the  main  river  & 
N.  W.  into  the  woods.  Due  by  deed 
of  sale  from  Hugh  Williams,  16  June 
1635,  to  whom  it  was  due  for  trans,  of 
3  pers:  Hen.  Reason,  Jon.  Walter,  Jon. 
Boran. 

DICTORIS  CHRISTMAS,  300  acs. 
Eliz.  Citty  Co.,  21  Nov.  1635,  p.  317. 
On  the  N.  side  of  the  old  Poquoson 
Riv.,  joyning  upon  land  of  Gilbert  Per- 
kins Eastward,  W.  upon  Monack  neck 
&  N.  into  the  woods.  100  acs.  for  the 
per.  adv.  of  himselfe  &  wife  Isabell 
Christmas  &  200  for  trans,  of  4  pers: 
William  Gun,  Rich.  Combes,  Israeli 
Atwell,  Zachariah  Foster. 

SAME.  50  acs.  Eliz.  Citty  Co.,  21 
Nov.  1635,  p.  318.  Ewd.  upon  the  old 
Poquoson  Riv.,  N.  upon  Benjamin  Sims 
&  W.  into  the  woods.  Trans,  of  1  sen. 
called  Roger  Leach,  (or  Louch). 

WILLIAM  RAVENETT,  150  acs. 
Denbigh  Co.,  21  Nov.  1635,  p.  318. 
Lying  at  the  end  of  Mr.  Harwoods  land, 
beg.  at  the  Otterdamms,  E.  along  the 
side  of  Mr.  Heleys  land  into  the  maine 
woods  &  Nly.  upon  the  land  he  is 
seated  upon.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  John 
Howe,  Christopher  Oxford,  Vincent 
Woodyard    (first    written    Woodward.) 

EPAPHRODITUS  LAWSON,  200 
acs.  at  the  head  of  the  back  river,  on 
the  E.  side  of  Scones  damm,  N.  upon 
same  &  S.  towards  the  narrow  of  sd. 
river.  25  Nov.  1635,  p.  319.  Due  by 
deed  of  sale  from  John  Davis  as  by 
order  of  St.,  8  Oct.  1635. 

LT.  JOHN  CHEESEMAN,  600  acs. 
Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  21  Nov.  1635,  p.  319. 
S.    E.    upon    the   New    Poquoson    Riv., 


N.  W.  into  the  woods  by  Oyster  Cr., 
towards  a  ridge  of  land  adj.  S.  W.  upon 
the  land  of  Thomas  Hawkings.  Trans, 
of  12  pers:  Christo.  Everitt,  Phillipp 
Aunt,  Mary  a  Negroe,  Edwd.  Cotterell, 
Jone  Bolton,  Robert  Cockett,  Rich.  Dun- 
ing,  Rich.  Ward,  Georg  Costen,  Rich. 
Banks,  John  Harwell,  Mathias  a  Negroe. 

WILLIAM  BARKER,  Marriner, 
JOHN  SADLER  &  RICHARD 
QUEYNING  (Quyening),  Merchants, 
&  to  their  Associates  &  Company,  1250 
acs.  Chas.  Citt"  Co.,  26  Nov.  1635,  p. 

320.  Extending  into  the  woods  from  a 
seate  or  tract  of  land  called  Marchants 
Hope,  formerly  graunted  to  sd.  Barker, 
his  Associates  &  Co.  Due  to  them  for 
the  trans,  of  25  pers:  Georg  Gregory, 
Tho.  Peacock,  Wm.  Radway,  Jane  Rad- 
way,  Wm.  Strange,  Jon.  Yates,  Jon. 
Minter,  Dorothy  Standish,  Math.  Robin- 
son, Danll.  Godwin,  Jon.  Jones,  Tho. 
Johnson,  Geo.  Brooks,  Sarah  Collybant, 
Eliz.  Phillipps,  Jon.  Croft,  Danll. 
Bromely,  Wm.  Woodgate,  Step.  Good- 
win, Robt.  Yates,  Wm.  Griffin,  Wm. 
Andrewes,  Benj.  Ragg,  Wm.  Jackson, 
Nath.  Deane.  Note:  Renewed  &  600 
acs.  added. 

WILLIAM  BARKER,  Marriner,  400 
acs.  Chas.  Citty  Co.,  26  Nov.  1635,  p. 

321.  Bounded  upon  Chappells  Cr.,  S. 
into  the  woods,  E.  along  the  river  adj. 
upon  Merchants  Hope.  50  acs.  for  his 
own  per.  adv.  &  350  acs.  for  the  trans, 
of  7  pers:  Richard  Hitchcox,  Wm.  Low, 
Wm.  Wall,  Tho.  Bridges,  Jon.  Feild, 
Tho.  Hooper,  Antho.  Browne. 

EDMOND     SCARBOROUGH,     200 

acs.   in   Accomacke,    28   Nov.    1635,    p. 

322.  Wly.  upon  Maggitye  bay,  beg.  to 
the  Nwd.  of  a  place  called  the  Stages. 
50  acs.  in  right  of  his  late  father  Capt. 
Edmond  Scarborough,  50  acs.  for  the 
per.  adv.  of  his  mother  Hannah  Scar- 
borough, 50  acs.  for  his  own  per.  adv. 
&  50  acs.  for  the  trans,  of  1  servt. 
called  Robert  Butler,  (or  Butter.) 

SAME.  200  acs.  Accomacke  Co.,  28 
Nov.  1635,  p.  323.  On  the  Seaboard 
side,  Nly.  to  a  Thickett  &  Dunn  Cr., 
Sly.  along  the  Seaboard  side  &  Wly. 
into    the    woods.    Trans,    of    4    pers: 


36 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Roger  Wright,  Alice  a  maid  servt.,  Ed- 
ward Agar,  Eliza.  Machin. 

CAPT.  THOMAS  PURIFYE,  Esqr., 
100  acs.  Eliz.  Citty  Co.,  28  Nov.  1635, 
p.  323.  N.  W.  upon  a  Cr.  next  upon 
the  fort  feild,  S.  upon  the  maine  river, 
E.  upon  Thomas  Oldis  &  N.  E.  upon 
land  of  John  Neale.  Due  by  assignment 
from  Capt.  Thomas  Grayes  as  by  order 
of  court  29  Feb.  1631,  to  whom  it  was 
due  for  his  per.  devident  as  being  an 
Ancient  Planter. 

BRIDGES  FREEMAN,  150  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  1  Dec.  1635,  p.  324.  Bounded 
to  the  Nwd.  of  the  W.  upon  Chicha- 
hominy  Riv.,  to  the  Swd.  of  the  E.  into 
the  maine  woods  close  by  a  Cr.  side 
next  adj.  to  a  sunken  marsh,  being  a 
point  of  land.  50  acs.  for  the  per.  adv. 
of  his  wife  Bridgett  Freeman  &  100 
acs.  for  trans,  of  his  brother  Bennett 
Freeman  &  1  servt.  named  Ellis  Baker. 

MR.  WILLIS  HEYLEY  (Hely— 
Heley),  Minister,  250  acs.  in  the  Parish 
of  Mulberry  Island,  8  Dec.  1635,  p  325. 
Beg.  at  a  place  called  the  Ottedams 
abutting  upon  land  of  Mr.  Thomas  Har- 
wood,  now  in  the  occupation  of  Daniell 
Lane,  on  the  N.  side  towards  the  Mills, 
S.  E.  towards  land  of  Capt.  Flint  on  the 
S.,  the  lands  of  Mr.  Thomas  Nowell  on 
the  W.  &  adj.  land  formerly  granted  sd. 
Heyly.  Due  for  the  per.  adv.  of  his 
wife  Mrs.  Elianor  Heyly  &  his  brother 
Robert  Heyly  &  trans,  of  3  pers:  Roger 
Holliock,  John  Chawke,  Mable  Busher. 

CHRISTOPHER  BRANCHE,  250  acs. 
Henricoe  Co.,  8  Dec.  1635,  p.  326.  At 
Kings  land  over  against  Arroehattocks, 
E.  upon  the  maine  river,  bounded  with 
the  second  Cr.  on  the  W.,  adj.  S.  upon 
land  of  John  Griffin,  now  in  the  tenure 
of  sd.  Branche,  &  thence  Nly.  towards 
land  of  Thomas  Sheffeild.  50  acs.  for 
his  owne  per.  adv.  &  200  acs.  for  the 
trans,  of  4  pers:  John  Gibson,  John 
Macham,  William  Butler,  Wm.  Possell 

MR.  ROBERT  CAVE  (or  Cane),  200 
acs.,  18  Dec.  1635,  p.  327.  Bounded  Wly. 
upon  Mr.  Wilkeson,  Nly.  upon  the  Cr., 
Ely.  alongst  that  Cr.  &  Sly.  into  the 
maine  land.    50  acs.  for  his  owne  per. 


adv.&  150  acs.  for  trans,  of  3  pers:  Joseph 
Richards,  Morgen  Huett,  Samuell  Ellis. 

CAPT.       ADAM       THOROGOOD 

( Thorowgood — Thoroughgood ) ,  600 
acs.  18  Dec.  1635,  p.  327.  Lying  N. 
upon  the  first  or  second  little  Cr.  upon 
the  Ewd.  side  of  Lynn  Haven  alias 
Chesopeian  Riv.,  Ely.  into  the  maine 
land,  Sly.  up  the  maine  river  of  Lynn 
haven  &  Wly.  upon  same.  Trans,  of  12 
pers:  Robt.  Whetle,  Choyce  Johnson, 
Elisa.  Lawcon  (or  Lawton),  Tho.  Met- 
hell  (or  Mechell),  Jon.  Phillipps,  Jon. 
Crabb,  Robert  Bennett,  Edward  Blake, 
Jon.  James,  Edward  Williams,  Edward 
Strong,   John   Burges. 

MR.  JOHN  FELGATE,  1200  acs.  up- 
on Checquers  neck,  23  Dec.  1635,  p. 
328.  N.  N.  W.  upon  the  river,  &  from 
the  Landing  place  the  body  of  the  land 
lyeth  S.  E.  into  the  woods.  Trans,  of 
24  persons.* 

JOSEPH  SAMON,  150  acs.  in  Nanze- 
mund  Riv.  on  the  S.  side,  adj.  land  of 
Georg  Fawdon,  14  July  1635,  p.  329. 
Beg.  at  a  point  which  butteth  upon  a 
red  Clift  on  the  N.  side  marked  on  a 
blacke  wallnutt  tree  with  JS  &  soe  run- 
ning up  the  river.  50  acs.  for  his  per. 
adv.  &  100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers.* 

ELIZABETH  PACKER,  (or  Parker), 
Widdowe,  200  acs.  in  Varinaes,  Henri- 
coe Co.,  12  Feb.  1635,  p.  330.  Between 
land  granted  to  William  Dawkes  on  the 
E.  &  the  Gleab  land  on  the  W.,  abutting 
on  the  Long  feild  towards  the  maine 
river,  Sly.  Nly.  into  the  woods  &  S.  W. 
adj.  (land)  in  the  tenure  of  the  sd. 
Elizabeth.  100  acs.  in  right  of  her  first 
husband  William  Sharpe,  an  Ancient 
Planter  in  the  time  of  Sir  Thomas  Dale, 
&  100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2  servts.  called 
Gilbert  Piatt  &  John  Newman. 

BRIDGES  FREEMAN,  100  acs.,  1 
June  1635,  p.  331.  Upon  the  Ely.  side 
of  Chichahominy  Riv.  within  the  mouth, 
next  adj.  land  in  the  tenure  of  sd.  Free- 
man &  Francis  Fowler  only  a  cr.  &  a 
marsh  parting  the  same,  Wly.  upon  the 
same  river  &  Ely.  into  the  maine  woods. 
Trans,  of  2  pers.  Under  this  record  ap- 
pears the  following:    "Hen.  Scott  Rich- 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


37 


ard  &c.  certified  to  bee  servant  by  Capt. 
Utye  &  Thomas  Smith." 

SAME.  800  acs.,  yeare  1635,  p.  331. 
On  the  Wly.  side  of  Chichahominy 
Riv.  Opposite  land  graunted  to  sd.  Free- 
man &  Francis  Fowler,  pointing  S.  E. 
up  the  maine  river  &  extending  N.  W. 
along  the  Cr.  into  the  woods  next  adj. 
unto  the  place  comonly  called  Jurying 
point.  Trans,  of  16  pers:  David  Min- 
ter,  William  Wilshire,  Jon.  Bing,  David 
Jones,  Wm,  Nutt,  Fr.  Aldrige,  Mathew 
Williamson,  Katherine  Leonard,  Jeri- 
miah  Stone,  Eliza.  Hart,  Richard  Saun- 
ders, Tho.  Smith. 

JOHN  GARYE,  300  acs.  on  S.  side 
of  Nanzemund  Riv.,  13  Feb.  1635,  p. 
332.  Neare  adj.  land  of  Joseph  Samon, 
S.  E.  into  the  woods,  N.  W.  upon  the 
river,  N.  E.  &  S.  W.  along  the  banke 
of  the  maine  river  150  po.  up  the  river 
towards  land  of  Daniell  Tuggins.  Trans, 
of  6  pers.* 

BENNETT  BLEWITT,  50  acs.  War- 
ricksqueick  Co.,  at  the  mouth  of  sd.  Cr., 
15  Feb.  1635,  p.  333.  N.  W.  upon  sd. 
Cr.,  running  S.  W.  up  into  the  woods 
&c.  Due  for  the  per.  adv.  of  his  now 
wife  Elizabeth  Blewitt. 

THOMAS  NORMANTON,  50  acs. 
Eliz.  Citty  Co.,  1635,  (no  other  date), 
p.  334.  Between  land  of  Robert  Huett, 
beg.  at  a  Swamp,  running  by  the  water 
side  to  the  Indian  Stone,  up  into  the 
woods  S.E.  Due  by  deed  of  sale  from  John 
Ward,  to  whom  it  was  due  for  trans,  of 
1    servt.    by   the   name   of   Ann   Ward. 

JAMES  KNOTT,  1200  acs.  Eliz. 
Citty  Co.,  24  Mar.  1635,  p.  334.  N.  E. 
faceing  upon  Nanzemund  Riv.,  S.  into 
the  woods,  E.  upon  the  second  Cr.  & 
W.  by  S.  upon  the  third  Cr.  Due  for 
the  per.  adv.  of  his  wife  Elianor  Knott 

&  trans,  of  23  pers:  Robert ,  Henry 

Yates,  Ellin  Williams,  Ann  Crawford, 
Lewis  Vaughan,  Tho.  Taylor,  Tho.  Broad, 
Jno.  Home,  Franc.  Bisley,  Jno.  Piper, 
Jon.  Popeplewell,  Tho.  Brough,  Richard 
Russell,  Tho.  Sparrow,  Tho.  Ferreby, 
Robt.  Maxe,  Robert  Selby,  Robt.  Wooles, 
Rich.  Wheeler,  Ann  Shaw  &  2  Negroes. 


THOMAS  NORMANTON,  250  acs. 
Eliz.  Citty  Co.,  11  Apr.  1635,  p.  335. 
Nly.  upon  a  br.  of  Harris  his  Cr.,  N.  E. 
on  the  ground  of  William  Hampton,  S. 
W.  to  the  end  of  Hampton  Riv.  &  Sly. 
into  the  maine  woods.  Due  by  deed  of 
sale  from  John  Ward,  15  Feb.  1635,  to 
whom  it  was  due  for  trans,  of  5  pers: 
Andrew  Peterson,  Jos.  Browne,  Eliz. 
Blackly,  Eliza.  Bently,  Ann  Ward. 

LT.  JOHN  CHEESEMAN,  200  acs. 
Chas.  Riv.,  23  Apr.  1636,  p.  336.  E. 
Sly.  upon  Chesepeiack  bay,  Nly.  upon 
the  back  Cr.,  W.  Nly.  upon  Cheesemans 
Cr.  Trans,  of  4  persons.*  Renewed  in 
the  name  of  John  Hollis  &  Richard 
Bennett.    Test:  Tho.  Cooke,  Clr. 

THOMAS  CAUSEY,  300  acs.  at  the 
mouth  of  Appamattucks  Riv.  at  the  S. 
side,  bounded  W.  upon  a  great  Cr.,  S. 
into  the  maine  woods,  E.  upon  Castines 
feild  Cr.  2  May  1636,  p.  336.  Trans, 
of  6  pers.* 

THOMAS  HARRIS,  700  acs.  called 
by  the  name  of  the  long  feild,  with 
Swamp,  Marshes  &  Creeks,  2  May  1636, 
p.  337.  Beg.  at  a  little  Cr.  over  against 
Capt.  Martins,  bounded  Nwd.  on  the 
back  side  of  the  Sw.,  Wwd.  on  the 
maine  river,  S.  E.  towards  Bremoes 
devident.    Trans,  of  14  pers.* 

RICE  HOW  (Howe),  1200  acs. 
Chas.  Citty  Co.,  2  May  1636,  p.  338. 
Neare  Martins  brandon,  W.  upon  the 
maine  river  to  a  Cr.  parting  the  land  of 
Martin  Brandon  &  Capt.  Wards  land, 
S.  upon  Capt.  Wards  Cr.,  &  E.  into 
the  woods  along  the  maine  river,  all  of 
which  land  is  called  Capt.  Wards  plan- 
tation. 100  acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of 
himselfe  &  wife  &  1100  acs.  for  the 
trans,  of  22  pers.* 

WILLIAM  NUSAM,  550  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  3  May  1636,  p.  338.  To- 
wards the  Sunken  Marsh,  Ely.  upon  a 
Sw.,  Sly.  towards  the  lower  Cr.  &  Wly. 
into  the  maine  woods.  50  acs.  for  his 
owne  per.  adv.,  50  acs.  for  the  per.  adv. 
of  his  first  wife  Penelope  Ramsey,  50 
acs.  for  per.  adv.  of  his  second  wife 
Sarah  Fisher,  50  acs.  for  per.  adv.  of 
his  now  wife  Elizabeth  Wilsonn  &  3*>0 


38 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


acs.  for  trans,  of  7  pers:  Cleer  Rrein 
(?),  Sarah  Rider,  Bridget*  Fisher,  John 
Barker,  Tobias  Waxell,  William  Wes- 
come,  Jason  Riveley.  Note:  Renewed 
26  Aug.  1643.    Samll.  Abbott,  CI. 

JOHN  HACKER,  150  acs.  upon  the 
W.  side  of  Upper  Chippoakes,  being  a 
neck  betwixt  the  branches  of  2  small 
creeks,  Ely.  upon  the  maine  Cr.  of 
Chippoecks,  Wly.  into  the  woods  &c.  3 
May  1636,  p.  339.  50  acs.  for  his  owne 
per.  adv.  &  100  acs.  for  the  trans,  of  2 
servts :   Abraham  Hill,  Christopher  Hould. 

JOHN  YATES,  300  acs.  Eliz.  Citty 
Co.,  4  May  1636,  p.  340.  Being  a  neck 
of  land  upon  the  W.  side  of  the  Swd. 
br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  bounded  S.  Wly.  & 
N.  Wly.  upon  the  maine  riv.  &  Wly. 
into  the  maine  woods.  Trans,  of  4 
pers:  Mary  Yates,  Nicholas  Seaburne, 
John  Seaburne,  Richard  Wright. 

SAME.  150  acs.  Same  County,  date 
&  page.  Being  a  neck  of  land  upon  the 
E.  side  of  Eliz.  Riv.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Wil- 
liam Wheeler,  Tho.  Leager,  Grace  West. 

CHRISTOPHER  BURROUGHS,  200 
acs.  Eliz.  Citty  Co.,  4  May  1636,  p. 
341.  Nly.  on  land  of  Capt.  Adam 
Thorroughgood,  Ely.  on  the  river  Cheso- 
peiacke  alias  Lyn  haven,  Sly.  along 
same  &  Wly.  into  the  maine  woods.  50 
acs.  for  his  own  per.  adv.,  50  acs.  for 
trans,  of  his  brother  William  Burroughs, 
50  acs.  for  trans,  of  his  sister  Ann 
Burroughs  &  50  acs.  for  trans,  of  a 
servt.  called  John  Phillipps. 

THOMAS  WRAY,  50  acs.  Chas.  Riv. 
Co.,  4  May  1636,  p.  341.  Upon  the 
back  Cr.  of  the  new  poquoson  river, 
N.  E.  upon  Humphry  Loyds  land,  N.  W. 

upon  land  of  Thomas ,  S.  W.  upon 

land  of  Gilbert  Symons.  Due  for  his 
owne  per.  adv. 

ROBERT  WEST,  100  acs.  Eliz.  Citty 
Cr.,  4  May  1636,  p.  342.  About  2  or 
3  mi.  up  the  narrow  of  the  back  river 
upon  Ely.  side  of  the  little  Otterdamm, 
Wly.  upon  same  &  land  of  John  Graves, 
Ely.  upon  land  of  Capt.  Adam  Thorow- 
good,  Slv.  upon  sd.  river  &  Nly.  into 
the  maine  woods.  Trans,  of  2  pers: 
John  Reeves,  Symon  Mondye. 


THOMAS  WATTS,  50  acs.  Eliz. 
Citty  Co.,  5  May  1636,  p.  342.  Upon 
the  back  river,  Ely.  upon  the  broad  Cr. 
adj.  Capt.  Thomas  Purifyes,  Nly.  upon 
land  of  Nicholas  Hill  a  small  cr.  run- 
ning between,  Sly.  upon  land  of  John 
Branch  a  small  cr.  running  between  & 
Wly.  into  the  woods.  Due  for  per.  adv. 
of  his  now  wife  Lyddia  Watts. 

GILBERT  SYMONS,  100  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.  Co.,  5  May  1636,  p.  343.  At  the 
new  Poquoson,  E.  upon  Augustine 
Warner,  W.  uoon  Mr.  Worlidge,  N. 
upon  Phettiplace  Cloyse  &  S.  upon 
Samuell  Bennett.    Trans,  of  2  pers.* 

JOHN  LAYDON,  200  acs.  Warwick 
Riv.  Co.,  5  May  1636,  p.  343.  100  acs. 
adj.  the  persimmon  ponds  lying  from  the 
old  Poquoson  river,  E.  from  the  path 
going  to  the  new  Poquoson  from  Nut- 
meg quarter  into  the  woods,  W.  from 
the  persimmonds  to  the  Otterdamms  N. 
The  other  100  acs.  from  the  old  Poquo- 
son damms  to  the  new  Poquoson  N. 
from  the  old  Poquoson  Riv.,  E.  from 
the  path  going  from  Nutmeg  quarter 
to  the  new  Poquoson  into  the  woods  W. 
Due  for  the  per.  adv.  of  himselfe  & 
his  wife,  being  Ancient  Planters  before 
the  govmt.  of  Sir.  Thomas  Dale. 

SAME.  100  acs.  Same  Co.  &  date, 
p.  344.  Bounded  S.  W.  upon  James 
Riv.,  N.  E.  into  the  woods,  N.  W.  up- 
on Merrve  point  &  S.  E.  along  the  water 
side.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Tho.  Watts, 
Robert  Newman. 

SAME.  250  acs.,  same  Co.  &  page. 
6  Mar.  1636.  S.  W.  upon  James  Riv., 
N.  E.  into  the  woods,  N.  W.  upon  John 
Powells  land  &  S.  E.  upon  Mr.  Strattons 
land.  Trans,  of  5  pers:  Wm.  Welbon 
(or  Welton),  Jonathan  Wake,  James  an 
Irishman,  Edward  Walker,  John  Morris. 

SAME.  700  acs.,  6  May  1636,  p.  345. 
500  acs.  lying  by  Burrowes  his  neck, 
bearing  Ewd.  from  it,  joyning  to  the 
widdowe  Tompsons  land  now  in  pos- 
session of  Georg  Hall,  W.  S.  into  the 
woods,  &  N.  upon  the  old  Poquoson 
river.  200  acs.  upon  the  sd.  river  N., 
W.  from  Smiths  neck,  E.  from  the  great 
Otterdamms,  N.  into  the  woods  towards 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


39 


the  new  Poquoson,  S.  towards  the  old 
Poquoson  &  against  Burrows  neck  on 
the  N.  side  of  the  river.  500  acs.  due 
upon  a  consideration  expressed  in  an 
order  of  Ct.  dated  29  Feb.  1631  &  200 
acs.  for  trans,  of  4  pers:  Virginia  Lay- 
don,  Tho.  Clooke,  Henry  Bradly,  Robt. 
Walton,  Symon  Abbott.  NOTE:  Re- 
newed by  Sir  John  Harvey  &  but  500 
acs.  mentioned  in  the  pattent.  Test: 
Tho.  Cooke. 

JOANE  BENNETT,  Widdow,  450 
acs.  Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  6  May  1636,  p. 
346.  Upon  the  new  Poquoson  river,  E. 
towards  the  Baye,  W.  into  the  woods, 
N.  upon  the  Pinye  Sw.  &  S.  upon  Robert 
Thresher.  50  acs.  due  for  her  per.  adv. 
&  400  acs.  for  trans,  of  8  pers:  Ann 
Winter,  Jon.  Rocto,  Jon.  Marshall,  Tho. 
Prewitt,  Andrew  Chant,  Jon.  Morris, 
Pole  Carplights. 

RICHARD  FREELAND,  200  acs. 
Warwicksquioake  Co.,  6  May  1636,  p. 
346.  100  acs.  adj.  land  of  Thomas  Jor- 
dan on  the  N.  side  of  Warresqueick 
Riv.,  running  N.  W.  into  the  woods; 
the  other  100  acs.  on  the  S.  side  of  sd. 
river  adj.  land  of  Edward  Rogers. •»  50 
acs.  for  his  own  per.  adv.  &  150  acs. 
for  trans,  of  his  wife  &  2  children.* 

CAPT.  CHRISTOPHER  CAL- 
THROPPE,  1000  acs.  Chas.  Riv.  Co., 
6  May  1636,  p.  347.  At  the  new 
Poquoson,  E.  upon  Calthropps  Cr.,  Wly. 
toward  John  Powells  Cr.,  N.  upon  the 
river  &  Sly.  into  the  woods.  500  acs. 
graunted  by  order  of  court  29  June 
1631  &  500  acs.  for  trans,  of  10  pers: 
Robt.  Lucas,  Wm.  Debnam,  Tho. 
Powell,  William  Oakely,  Henry  Bullard, 
Christopher  Copeland,  Robert  Seeker,  Jon. 
Burges,   Jon.   Merler,    Henry   Goodson. 

WILLIAM  WORLITCH,  150  acs. 
Warwick  Co.,  comonly  called  the  broad 
neck,  7  May  1636,  p.  347.  Sly.  upon 
land  of  Edward  Waters  &  Persivall  lb- 
bison,  W.  upon  the  Otterdamms,  N.  in- 
to the  woods  &  Ely.  toward  blunt  point. 
Due  by  deed  of  sale  from  Edward 
Waters,  Gent.,  late  of  Eliz.  Citty,  15 
Jan.  1629.  The  sd.  50  acs.  being  a 
second  devdt.  graunted  unto  Persivall 
Ibbison  6  Mar.   1620;  the  100  acs.  be- 


ing alsoe  a  second  devdt.  granted  to  sd. 
Waters  24  Aug.  1624. 

ELIZABETH    HAWKINS    &    

HAWKINS,  her  sonn,  300  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.  Co.,  9  May  1636,  p.  348.  150  acs. 
lying  S.  E.  upon  the  New  Poquoson 
Riv.,  W.  Nly.  into  the  woods,  N.  E. 
upon  the  Cr.  parting  this  &  Mr.  John 
Cheesemans  land  &  W.  Sly.  upon  the 
pinye  baye.  The  other  150  acs.  called 
the  Nutt  tree  neck  lying  S.  E.  into  the 
river,  N.  W.  int  othe  woods  &  Wly. 
upon  Harwoods  Cr.  Due  according  to 
the  will  of  Thomas  Hawkins,  husband 
&  father  of  the  aforesaid  parties,  to 
whom  it  was  due  for  trans,  of  6  pers: 
Roger  Blackwell,  Richard  Jennings, 
Richard  Baker,  Geo.  Collect,  Wm. 
Mitchell,  Tho.  Butlinge. 

SAMUELL  EDMONDS,  350  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  9  May  1636,  p.  349.  E.  up- 
on land  of  Jerimiah  Clements,  Nly.  up- 
on the  mouth  of  upper  Chippoecks  neck, 
W.upon  land  of  William  Rookins,  Sly.  in- 
to the  woods.  Due  for  trans,  of  7  pers: 
Robert  Annis,  Sarah  Senior,  John  Senior, 
Alexander  Osberton,  William  Cunning- 
ham, Roger  Lucas,  Joane  Godbrey. 

WILLIAM  ROOKINS,  150  acs. 
James  Citty  Co.,  9  May  1636,  p.  349. 
Lying  Wly.  upon  the  upper  Chippoecks 
Cr.,  Nly.  upon  James  Riv.,  Ely.  upon 
land  of  Samuell  Edmonds  &  Sly.  into 
the  maine  woods.  Said  land  called  by 
the  name  of  the  flying  point.  50  acs. 
for  the  per.  adv.  of  his  wife  Jane  Baxter 
&  100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Robert 
Risby,  John  Allen.  Renewed  by  Sir 
John    Harvey.    Test:    Tho.    Cooke,   Clr. 

JOHN  OBERRY,  100  acs.,  9  May 
1636,  p.  350.  Neare  the  head  of  Kethes 
Cr.,  S.  upon  land  of  Edward  Hall,  W. 
by  N.  into  the  woods,  N.  upon  the 
head  &  E.  upon  sd.  Cr.  50  acs.  for  the 
per.  adv.  of  his  wife  Rose  Strechy 
(Stretchey)  &  50  acs.  for  trans,  of  1 
servant  called  Henry  Smithock.  Re- 
newed in  the  name  of  Rose  Oberry,  his 
wife.    Test:  Tho.  Cooke,  CI. 

'  EDWARD  ROGERS,  300  acs.  War- 
risquieke  Co.,  14  May  1636,  p.  350. 
N.  upon  the  Crosse  Cr.,  butting  upon 
land  of  Thomas  Jorden  a  small  Cr.  run- 


40 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


ing  between  &  Sly.  into  the  woods  near 
unto  a  path  that  crosseth  the  head  of 
sd.  Cr.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Joane  Davis, 
Christ.  Thorpe,  Nich.  White,  Jon. 
Bordman,  John  Home,  Tho.  Bulmer. 

ALICE  EDLOE,  Widdowe,  350  acs. 
Henrico  Co.,  10  Nov.  1635,  p.  351. 
Between  Harrow  Attocks  &  the  falls  on 
the  same  side  of  the  river  that  Harrow 
Attocks  lyeth  some  2l/2  mi.  from  thence 
or  thereabouts  joyning  to  the  great  Sw., 
N.W.  upon  the  river  &  E.  upon  sd.  Sw. 
towards  the  falls.  50  acs.  for  her  owne 
per.  adv.  &  300  acs.  for  trans,  of  6  pers.* 

HANNAH  BOYSE,  daughter  &  heire 
of  Luke  Boyse  late  of  Henrico,  300  acs. 
in  sd.  Co.,  11  Nov.  1635,  p.  351. 
Bounded  upon  the  river  N.  W.  &  joyn- 
ing upon  the  land  of  Alice  Edloe  her 
mother  E.  50  acs.  due  in  right  of  her 
father  for  his  per.  adv.,  50  acs.  for  her 
owne  per.  adv.  &  200  acs.  for  trans,  of 
4  servts.,  by  her  sd.  father:  Tho.  Lewis, 
Robert  Hallum,  Joseph  Ryall,  Edward 
Holland,  Oliver  Allen. 

CHENEY  BOYSE,  1550  acs.  Chas. 
Citty  Co.,  last  of  May  1636,  p.  352.  N. 
upon  the  Lime  hill  Sw.,  W.  upon  Mer- 
chants Hope  Cr.,  E.  into  the  maine 
woods  &  S.  towards  the  head  of  sd.  Cr. 
100  acs.  due  as  being  an  Ancient  Plan- 
ter before  the  time  of  Sir  Thomas  Dale, 
&  1450  acs.  for  trans,  of  29  pers:  Rich- 
ard Williams,  Lawrence  Woaker,  Tho. 
Harris,  Tho.  Wheeler,  Christ.  Rippin, 
Jon.  Tomlinson,  Joane  Tomlinson,  Jon. 
Mason,  Jon.  Walker,  Christopher  Eusell, 
Jon.  Liscott,  Oliver  Bishopp,  Israeli 
Johnson,  Humphry  Jones,  Gilbert  Dow- 
son,  Nicho.  Shawe,  Wm.  Baxter,  Daniel! 
Collier  (or  Coblier),  Wm.  Wale,  Wm. 
Thorncomb,  Jon.  Cole,  Eliz.  Greene, 
Eliz.  Phillipps,  Katherine  Yorke,  Jon. 
Swifte,  Margery  Parr,  Daniell  Murry, 
Morgin  Rosier,  Wm.  Holland. 

JOHN  BAKER,  50  acs.  in  Varinae, 
upon  the  2  mile  Cr.,  Henricoe  Co.,  last 
day  of  May  1636,  p.  352.  Butting  S. 
W.  upon  land  in  possession  of  sd.  Baker 
&  William  Dawkes  parted  with  the  sd. 
Cr.,  S.  E.  towards  the  maine  river,  adj. 
N.  E.  to  land  of  Seath  Ward  &  N.  W. 
into    the    woods.    Due   for   trans,    of    1 


servt.  called  John  Baldwin  (Baldwyn). 
Note:  Renewed  17  Nov.  1643  in  the 
name  of  Seth  Ward  &  a  pattern  for  150 
acs.  dated  13  Feb.  1635  graunted  to  sd. 
Ward  &  150  (acs.)  added  unto  them. 
Test:  Samll.  Abbott,  Clr. 

EDWARD  MINTER,  300  acs.,  last 
day  of  May  1636,  p.  353.  At  the  upper 
Chippoecks  Cr.  on  the  W.  side  of  a 
great  Sw.  parting  this  from  land  of 
Benjamin  Harrison,  Ely.  upon  sd.  Sw., 
Wly.  to  land  of  Jerimiah  Clements, 
abutting  Nly.  on  the  maine  Riv.  &  Sly. 
into  the  woods.  50  acs.  for  trans,  of 
his  now  wife  Grace  Minter  &  50  acs. 
for  trans,  of  1  servt.  called  Richard 
Hyfle  (Hide)  ;  200  acs.  by  deed  of  sale 
from  Charles  Foard  (Ford),  to  whom 
it  was  due  for  trans,  of  4  pers:  Ann 
Emmerton,  Hen.  Patrick,  Edward 
Young,  Jon.  Cooper,  servants  to  Ch. 
Ford.  Note:  This  pattent  surrendered 
&  renewed  by  Sir  John  Harvy.  Rich. 
Kemp,  Seer. 

WILLIAM  HATCHJER,  200  acs. 
Henricoe  Co.,  1  June  1636,  p.  353. 
S.  E.  upon  Appomattuck  River,  S.  W. 
with  a  small  Cr.,  N.  E.  towards  Pearse 
his  stile  Cr.  &  N.  W.  into  the  woods 
adj.  neare  to  land  of  Elizabeth  Ward, 
Widdowe.  50  acs.  for  his  own  per. 
adv.  &  150  acs.  for  trans,  of  3  pers: 
Richard  Radford,  John  Winchester, 
Alice  Emmerton. 

JOHN  DUNSTON,  250  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  1  June  1636,  p.  354.  In 
Hogg  Island  maine,  E.  upon  land  of 
Robert  Sheppard,  beg.  at  a  great  Sw.  N. 
upon  Chippoecks  Cr.,  S.  into  the  woods 
&  W.  upon  the  head  of  sd.  Cr.  50  acs. 
for  the  per.  adv.  of  his  wife  Cicely 
Dunston,  &  200  acs.  for  trans,  of  4 
pers:  Richard  Wellman,  Edward  Ingle- 
ston,  Garrett  Hewes,  Wm.  Taylor. 

SAME.  600  acs.  in  same  location, 
same  date  &  page.  Beg.  upon  a  valley 
comeing  out  of  the  great  swamp  called 
the  Arroe  Reed  Sw.  lying  N.  W.  above 
the  head  of  Chippokes  Cr.,  S.  E.  into 
the  woods,  Sly.  by  said  Sw.  &  N.  E.  up- 
on sd.  valley.  Trans,  of  12  pers:  Tho. 
Woodall,  John  Garrett,  Merma.  Kitson, 
Fr.     Furbush,     Eliz.     Sames,     Winifrid 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


41 


Newett,  Rose  Hill,  Richard  Sharp,  Ed- 
ward Hunt,  Wm.  Hedge,  Martin  Ham- 
mon,  Jon.  Harcocke. 

PETER  JOHNSON,  600  acs.  War- 
risquicke  Co.,  1  June  1636,  p.  354. 
Lying  N.  E.  &  S.  W.  along  the  S.  side 
of  Warrisquick  Cr.,  upon  the  head  of 
same  &  butting  upon  Nanzemund  river. 
100  acs.  due  by  surrender  from  John 
Day  for  his  owne  per.  adv.  &  trans,  of 
1  servant;  150  acs.  by  surrender  from 
Ambrose  Meader  due  to  him  for  his 
per.  adv.,  his  wife  &  1  servant  ;150  acs. 
due  sd.  Johnson  for  trans,  of  3  servts; 
200  acs.  by  surrender  from  Gabriel  1 
Wilsonn  &  due  to  him  for  trans,  of  4 
pers.,  the  names  of  his  &  all  the  afore- 
said pers.  being  in  the  records  enrolled 
under  this  pattent:  Peter  Johnson,  Jon. 
Day,  Jon.  Powell.  Ambrose  Mader, 
Gabriell  Wilsonn,  Jon.  Baker,  Ann 
Sharp  his  wife.  Note:  Renewed  in  the 
name  of  Robert  Brasseur  &  Peter  Rey. 
Test:   Tho.  Cooke,  Clr. 

MARY  BOXE,  Widdowe,  300  acs. 
Henrico  Co.,  1  June  1636,  p.  355.  S.  E. 
upon  Appamattock  Riv.,  S.  W.  upon 
land  of  Elizabeth  Ward,  N.  E.  towards 
Pearse  his  stile  Cr.  &  N.  W.  into  the 
woods.  100  acs.  in  right  of  her  late 
husband  John  Boxe  as  being  an  Ancient 
Planter  &  200  acs.  in  right  of  her  sd. 
husband  to  whom  it  was  due  for  trans, 
of   the   sd.   Mary  &   3    servts:    Thomas 

Neale,  Edward ,  Holland  Williams. 

Note:  Renewed  in  the  name  of  Mary 
Box   the    daughter.    Rich.    Kemp,    Seer. 

WILLIAM  WELLS,  50  acs.  Eliz.  Citty, 
last  day  of  March  1636,  p.  356.  Neare 
the  head  of  Hampton  Riv.,  S.  upon  land 
of  William  Stafford,  E.  upon  land  of 
John  Place.    Due  for  his  owne  per.  adv. 

JOHN  PLACE,  150  acs.  Eliz.  Citty 
Co.,  last  day  of  March  1636,  p.  356. 
At  the  head  of  Hampton  Riv.,  E.  upon 
land  of  William  Wells  &  W.  upon 
land  of  Thomas  Lully.  50  acs.  for  the 
per.  adv.  of  his  wife  Mary  Place  &  100 
acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Peter  Beesely, 
Richard  Freeman. 

NATHAN  MARTIN,  500  acs.  Hen- 
rico Co.,   being   called   the  great   feild. 


last  day  of  May  1636,  p.  356.  S.  upon 
the  river,  N.  into  the  woods,  E.  upon  a 
Cr.  running  by  the  great  Swamp  &  W. 
upon  the  maine  to  a  marked  oake  over 
against  the  fallen  Cr.  50  acs.  for  his 
owne  per.  adv.,  200  acs.  by  surrender 
from  Benjamine  Carrall,  to  whom  it 
was  due  for  trans,  of  4  pers;  100  acs. 
by  surrender  from  Robert  Hollom,  due 
to  him  for  trans,  of  2  servts.,  50  acs.  by 
surrender  from  Thomas  Harris  due  for 
trans,  of  1  servt.,  &  100  acs.  by  sur- 
render from  William  Farrer,  Esqr.,  due 
for  trans,  of  2  servts.,  whose  names  as 
alsoe  the  aforementioned  persons  are 
mentioned  under  this  pattent:  Nathan 
Martin,  Edward  Ellis,  Jonathan  Daw- 
son, Eliza.  Tally,  Alex.  Norey,  Rich. 
Goodall,   John   Holloway,   John   North. 

THOMAS  PRIVETT,  50  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.  Co.,  2  June  1636,  p.  357.  Being 
a  neck  of  ground  upon  the  new  poquo- 
son  river,  W.  upon  William  Clerke,  a  Cr. 
parting  them,  E.  upon  Thomas  Harwood, 
a  Cr.  parting  them.    Trans,  of  1  servt.* 

JOSEPH  MOORE,  200  acs.  Eliz. 
Citty  Co.,  2  June  1636,  p.  357.  At  the 
old  Poquoson  Riv.,  bounded  upon  the 
W.  side  with  footeball  quarter  Cr.,  adj. 
land  of  Thomas  Symons  on  the  E.  side 
with  Moores  Cr.,  extending  into  the 
woods  N.  Wly.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Gil- 
bert Reynalds,  Wm.  Richards,  Barbary 
Chapman,  Mary  Shorten.  Note:  This 
pattent  surrendered  &  renewed  by  Sir 
John  Harvey. 

ROBERT  HOLLOM,  1000  acs.  Hen- 
rico Co.,  2  June  1636,  p.  358.  Sly. 
upon  land  of  Edward  Osborne,  Wly. 
upon  the  maine  river,  Nly.  towards  the 
falls  &  Ely.  into  the  maine  woods,; 
said  land  lying  right  opposite  against 
the  fallen  Cr.  Trans,  of  20  pers: 
James  Place,  Rich.  Ferris,  Noba  Perfitt, 
Jon.  Nicholas,  Richard  Baly,  Edwd. 
Holland,  Tho.  Smith,  Uriah  Clarke, 
Francis  Vissell,  Humphry  Grizell.  John 
Read,  Rich.  Dixon,  James  Reddey, 
Barth.  Cooke,  Mary  Allen,  Humphry 
Cassell,  James  Hormer,  Tho.  More- 
thorpe,  &  2  Negroes,  all  servants. 

EDWARD  OSBORNE,  Gent.,  400 
acs.  Henrico  Co.,  2  June  1636,  p.  358. 


42 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Sly.  joyning  upon  the  "Teat  Sw.,  Wly. 
upon  the  maine  river,  Nly.  towards  the 
falls  &  Ely.  into  the  maine  woods.  50 
acs.  for  his  owne  per.  adv.  &  350  acs. 
for  trans,  of  7  pers:  Robert  James, 
William  Howe,  Richard  Hitchcox, 
Leon.  Boloe,  Robert  Ellom,  Charles 
Steward,  Richard  Bumpass. 

EDWARD  LOYD,  400  acs.  in  the 
Westermost  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  30  Mar. 
1636,  p.  359.  Bounding  W.  upon  land 
of  Cornelius  Loyd,  E.  upon  land  of 
John  Sipsey,  S.  into  the  woods  &  N. 
into  the  river.    Trans,  of  4  pers.* 

WILLIAM  CARTER,  700  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  about  3  mi.  from  James  Riv., 
20  May  1636,  p.  359;  beg.  at  a  reedy 
sv/ampe,  butting  Ely.  upon  same,  Sly. 
into  the  maine  woods,  &  Wly.  upon  the 
rich  neck  otherwise  upon  Sunken  Marsh, 
&  Nly.  upon  James  Riv.  50  acs.  for  the 
per.  adv.  of  his  first  wife  Avis  Turtley, 
50  acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of  his  second 
wife  Ann  Mathis  &  50  acs.  for  the  per. 
adv.  of  his  now  wife  Alice  Croxon  & 
550  acs.  for  trans,  of  11  servts:  Wm. 
Antherson,  Andrew  Robinson,  Rich. 
Cooke,  Fr.  Bick,  Rich.  Bick,  Alice  Wat- 
kins,  Alice  Johnson,  Eliza.  Johnson, 
Henry  Snow,  Nich.  Burnett,  Edward 
Bland.  Note:  Surrendered  &  renewed  by 
Sir  John  Harvey,  Test:  Tho.  Cooke,  Clr. 

WILLIAM  CARTER,  100  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  20  May  1636,  p.  359.  Being 
a  neck  of  land  neare  unto  the  head  of 
Lower  Chippokes  Cr.,  E.  upon  same,  S. 
upon  land  of  Robert  Sheppard,  &  N. 
towards  James  Riv.  Trans,  of  2  servts: 
Michaell  Siler,  Rich.  Crich. 

HENRY  COLEMAN,  100  acs.  Eliz. 
Citty  Co.,  10  Mar.  1635,  p.  360.  At 
the  old  Poquoson  called  by  the  name 
of  the  footeball  quarter,  S.  upon  the 
old  Poquoson  Riv.,  N.  into  the  woods 
&  E.  upon  boare  quarter.  50  acs.  for 
the  per.  adv.  of  his  wife  Katherine 
Coleman  &  50  acs.  for  trans,  of  1  servt: 
Jaques  Dela  Rey.  (Note:  Marginal  ref- 
erence and  general  index  given  this 
name  as  William  Coleman). 

GEORG  SALSBURY,  500  acs.  War- 
risquick    Co.,    last    of    Apr.    1636,    p. 


360.  N.  E.  upon  Warrisquick  Riv.,  S. 
W.  upon  the  same  &  S.  E.  into  the 
woods.  Graunted  by  order  of  Court 
dated  at  James  Citty  the  4  Dec.  1634. 
Note:  Surrendered  &  renewed  by  Sir 
John  Harvey.    Rich.  Kemp,  Seer. 

ROBERT  LUCAS,  150  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.   Co.,   last   day  of  Aprill    1636,   p. 

360.  N.  upon  the  new  Poquoson  Riv., 
S.  into  the  woods,  E.  upon  the  damms 
adj.  land  of  John  Powell,  dee'd.,  &  W. 
into  the  woods.  Trans,  of  3  servts:  John 
Lewen,  Richard  Abberlyn,  John  Taylor. 

RICHARD  CREEDLE,  150  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.   Co.,   last   day   of  Aprill    1636,   p. 

361.  Upon  a  br.  of  a  Cr.  of  the  new 
Poquoson,  butting  W.  upon  land  of 
Thomas  Wray,  running  to  a  Cr.  upon 
the  N.  E.  side  &  extending  into  the 
woods  E.  Sly.  Due  by  deed  of  sale 
from  Katherine  Powell,  widdow,  19  Apr. 
1636,  to  whom  it  was  due  for  trans,  of 
3  servts.* 

SAME.  100  acs.  Same  County,  date 
&  page.  At  the  new  Poquoson,  Wly. 
upon  a  Cr.  opposite  to  the  plantation 
of  Thomas  Symons,  bounded  on  the 
N.  E.  with  land  of  Thomas  Rey  &  ex- 
tending into  the  woods  E.  Sly.  50  acs. 
for  trans,  of  1  servt.*,  and  50  acs.  by 
surrender  from  Katherine  Powell,  wid- 
dowe,  dated  19  Apr.  1636,  to  whom  it 
was  due  for  trans,  of  1  servt.* 

JOHN  BRIDGES,  200  acs.  Warres- 
quick  Co.,  4  June  1636,  p.  362.  Run- 
ning from  W.  side  of  Warrisquick  Riv. 
by  a  little  Cr.  that  runneth  by  the  land 
of  Thomas  Jordan  towards  the  W.  & 
N.W.  into  the  woods.  Trans,  of  4  pers.* 

WILLIAM  PARKER,  350  acs.  War- 
risquicke  Co.,  last  day  of  May  1636,  p. 

362.  Beg.  at  a  little  Cr.  on  the  S.  side 
of  Nanzemund  Riv.,  N.  W.  upon  sd. 
river  against  Dumplinge  Island  &  S.  E. 
into  the  woods.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  John 
Gately,  John  Middep,  Jane  Veale,  Mary 
Harford,  John  Freethorne,  Mary  Waters, 
William  Golding. 

JOHN  DANSEY,  350  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  4  June  1636,  p.  362.    A  mile 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


43 


up  Chichahominy  Riv.  on  the  N.  W. 
side  called  by  the  Clay  banke,  the  point 
butting  S.  E.  upon  the  sd.  river  right 
opposite  against  the  sunken  marshes, 
extending  N.  W.  backward  into  the 
woods  next  adj.  upon  the  W.  side  of 
Tanks  Pasbye  hayes  Cr.  50  acs.  for  the 
per.  adv.  of  his  wife  Alice  &  300  acs. 
for  trans,  of  6  pers:  John  Browne,  John 
Crowelden,  John  Deane,  Cutberd  Rich, 
John  Walers,  Hester  Brotherston. 

SAME.  100  acs.  Same  county  & 
date,  page  363.  Being  a  point  joyning 
to  land  graunted  to  him,  pointing  to 
Checkroes  neck.  Trans,  of  2  servts: 
James  John,  John  Way. 

JOHN  LARTHROPPE,  250  acs. 
James  Citty  Co.,  last  day  of  March 
163.6,  p.  363.  Upon  the  head  of  Kethes 
Cr.,  Nly.  from  the  Cr.,  Ely.  from  the 
maine  br.  &  runing  N.  E.  into  the 
woods.  100  acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of 
himself  &  his  wife  Bridgett  Larthroppe 
&  150  acs.  for  trans,  of  3  servts:  Jon. 
Howgate,  Hen.  Jackson,  Robert  Jackson. 

LEWIN  DENWOOD,  150  acs.  Ac- 
comack Co.,  18  June  1636,  p.  364.  W. 
upon  land  of  Dennis  Lane,  E.  &  W. 
along  the  Northerne  inside  of  the  old 
plantation  Cr.  &  runing  Nly.  into  the 
woods.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  William  Alli- 
son, Thomas  Harrison,  Robert  Lawson. 

GEORG  TRAVELLOR,  500  acs.  Ac- 
comack Co.,  18  June  1636,  p.  364.  S. 
E.  &  by  S.  on  the  old  plantation  Cr., 
N.  W.  by  N.  into  the  woods,  &  Wwd. 
on  land  of  John  Jenkins.  100  acs.  for 
the  per.  adv.  of  himself  &  wife  Alice 
Travellor  &  400  acs.  for  trans,  of  8 
pers:  John  Browne,  Alice  Jones,  Wm. 
Drew,  John  Ursly,  Jon.  Michell,  Wini- 
frid  Longrave,  Wm.  Sprason,  John  Essex. 

JOHN  NEALE,  1500  acs.  Accomack 
Co.,  18  June  1636,  p.  365.  Beg.  at  the 
long  point  on  the  seaboard  side,  along 
the  same  in  breadth  abutting  S.  E.  upon 
Smiths  Island  &  N.  W.  into  the  woods. 
Trans,  of  30  pers:  Ann  Alport,  Rich- 
ard Wilsonn,  John  Manly  (or  Manby), 
Edward  Paskins,  Geo.  Bowles,  Jon. 
Curtis,  Pearce  Neale,  Robert  Pearce, 
Abra.    Panthurst,    Edwd.    Gill,    Gilbert 


Bennett,  David  Witherby,  James  Head, 
Phillipp  Langfeild,  James  Pattison, 
Bryan  Kelly,  Rich.  Smith,  Katherine 
Smith,  Eliz.  Pistole,  Robert  Pistole,  Wm. 
Parry,  Edwd.  Daniell,  Tho.  Addams, 
Wm.  Pearce,  Elias  Harman,  Ann  Prosser, 
Eliz.  Sherly,  Wm.  Shaw,  Henry  Robinson. 

SAME.  500  acs.  Accomack  Co.  upon 
Smiths  Island,  same  date  &  page.  Adj. 
his  own  land.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  John 
Hendrye,  James  Hutchinson,  Henry  War- 
ner, Richard  Harris,  Peter  Warrenford, 
Antho.  Stensby,  Richard  Grayes,  Robert 
Stackhowse,  Tho.  Sadler,  Tho.  Michell. 

WILLIAM  MELLING,  100  acs.  Ac- 
comack Co.,  20  June  1636,  p.  366.  At 
the  head  of  the  old  plantation  Cr.,  beg. 
at  the  Cabin  branch,  running  Nly.  along 
the  same  &  Ely.  along  the  head  br.  into 
the  woods  towards  pynie  swampe.  50 
acs.  for  his  per.  adv.  &  50  acs.  by  as- 
signment from  William  Morton,  to 
whom  it  was  due  for  his  per.  adv. 

JAMES  BERRY,  350  acs.  Accomack 
Co.,  20  July  1636,  p.  366.  At  Magatie 
bay  butting  upon  the  lands  of  John 
Ascome,  Swd.  along  the  bay  &  Ewd. 
into  the  maine  woods.  100  acs.  for  the 
per.  adv.  of  himself  &  wife  Elizabeth 
Berry  &  250  acs.  for  trans,  of  5  pers: 
Henry  Lee,  Mary  Nelsom,  Jos.  Hally, 
Mary  Nablett,  Robert  Man. 

JOHN  FURBUSH  (Forbush),  100 
acs.  Accomack  Co.,  20  June  1636,  p. 
366.  Swd.  along  the  bay,  E.  into  the 
maine  woods,  &  abutting  upon  land  of 
Edmond  Scarborrough.  Trans,  of  2 
pers:    John   Lewis,   Christopher  Dixon. 

THOMAS  SMITH,  150  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  24  June  1636,  p.  367.  Upon 
the  fishing  point  neck  neare  adj.  to 
land  of  William  Berryman,  a  small 
swamp  between,  N.  W.  by  N.  up  a  Cr. 
into  the  woods  E.  &  N.,  &  S.  W.  upon  the 
Cr.  parting  the  neck  &  Henry  Bagwells 
land.  100  acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of  him- 
self &  wife  Sarah  Smith  &  50  acs.  for 
the  per.  adv.  of  his  daughter  Ann  Smith. 

WILLIAM  BIBBY,  400  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  24  June  1636,  p.  367.  S. 
side  of  Kings  Cr.,  Wly.  on  Capt.  Epps 


44 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


land,  Ely.  along  the  Cr.  &  Sly.  towards 
the  old  plantation  Cr.  100  acs.  for  the 
per.  adv.  of  himself  &  wife  Mary  Bibby 
&  300  acs.  for  trans,  of  6  pers:  Jon. 
Leech,  Chri.  Colert,  Wm.  Steven,  Arch 
Richards,  John  Fitz  Garrell,  Anne  Gcdon. 

CAPT.  CHRISTOPHER  CAL- 
THROPP,  100  acs.,  being  a  second 
devdt.,  according  to  a  graunt  signed  by 
Sir  Georg  Yeardly  to  John  Hudleston, 
Marriner,  26  Apr.  1621  &  assigned  by 
Richard  Cox,  Atty.  to  sd.  Hudleston,  to 
sd.  Calthropp.  5  July  1636,  p.  368. 
Adj.  to  the  first  devdt.,  whose  bounds 
were,  viz:  W.  upon  Waters  his  Cr.,  E. 
upon  land  of  Robert  Hutchins,  S.  upon 
the  river  &  N.  into  the  woods. 

SAME.  100  acs.  Chas.  Riv.  Co., 
same  date  &  page.  Within  the  new 
Poquoson  at  the   head  of  Powells  Cr., 


Nly.  upon  sd.  Cr.,  Sly.  into  the  woods, 
Wly.  upon  a  br.  of  said  Cr.  &  Ely.  to 
land  formerly  graunted  to  him.  Trans, 
of  2  pers:  Christopher  Watts,  Senr., 
Christopher  Watts,  Junr. 

JOHN  CHANDLER,  1000  acs.  Eliz. 
Citty  Co.,  6  July  1636,  p.  368.  Bound- 
ed on  W.  with  Harris  his  Cr.,  E.  to- 
wards Point  Comfort  Cr.,  N.  upon  a 
bay  being  on  the  inside  of  the  broaken 
Islands  &  S.  into  the  maine  woods.  50 
acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of  his  now  wife 
Elizabeth  Chandler  &  950  acs.  for  trans, 
of  19  pers:  Tho.  Herrick,  Senr.,  Tho. 
Herrick,  Junr.,  Georg  Chowning,  Jon. 
Fisher,  Sarah  Hatcher,  Joane  Bayly, 
Robert  Davis,  John  Udall,  Wm.  Blaye, 
Marga.  Archellon,  Eliz.  Garrett,  Tho. 
Bloyse,  Jon.  Roads,  Wm.  Whitfeild, 
Jon.  Christer,  Luke  Richardson,  Ralph 
Hunt,  Tho.  Bales,  Jane  Catesby. 


By  the  Govern0'  and  Cap1  Gener11  of  Virginia 

To  all  to  whome  these  p(re)sents  shall  come  I  Capt.  John  West  Esqr. 
Governor  &c.  send  greeting  &c.  Whereas  the  Usuall  policy  &  Custome  of  all 
Nations  but  in  more  espetiall  manner  of  the  State  of  England  have  as  well  in 
antient  as  Moderne  times  for  the  safeguard  and  securitie  of  the  Inland  Country 
afforded  &  indued  the  frontier  Inhabitants  w(i)th  diverse  priviledges  and  imuni- 
ties  tending  to  the  inabling  them  to  make  the  better  resistance  against  both  open 
invasions  and  sudden  incursions  of  the  neare  confining  and  Contiguous  Enemie 
according  to  the  rules  of  Justice  and  Equity  poising  thereby  and  ballancing  their 
greater  &  more  immenent  share  of  danger  w(i)th  the  guerdon  and  reward  of 
spetiall  and  p(ar)ticular  &  profitt  in  Imitacon  whereof  the  Governor  &  Councell  by 
order  of  Court  bearing  date  at  James  Citty  the  8th  of  October  1630  for  the 
securing  and  taking  in  of  a  tract  of  Land  called  the  forrest  bordering  upon  the 
cheife  residence  of  the  Pamunky  King  the  most  dangerous  head  of  the  Indian 
Enemie  did  after  much  consultacon  thereof  had  decree  and  sett  downe  severall 
p(ro)porcons  of  land  for  such  Comaunder  and  fiftie  acres  by  polle  for  all  other 
p(er)sons  whoe  the  first  yeare  and  five  and  twentie  acres  by  pole  for  all  such 
whoe  the  second  yeare  should  adventure  or  bee  adventured  to  seate  and  inhabite 
on  the  Southerne  side  of  Pamunkye  river  now  called  Charles  river  and  then  knowne 
by  the  Indian  name  of  Chiscake  as  a  reward  and  encouragment  for  such  their 
undertaking  as  by  the  said  order  more  at  large  appeareth  NOW  KNOW  yee  that 
I  the  said  Capt.  John  West  Esqr.  doe  w(i)th  the  consent  of  the  Councell  of  State 
accordingly  give  and  grant  unto  *   *   *    P.  B.  1,  p.  369. 


JOHN     CHEW,     gent.,      500     acs.       pers.    to    the    said    Chas.    Riv.    6    July 


Chas.  Riv.  Co.  upon  the  maine  river 
N.  &  by  E.,  upon  English  his  Cr. 
W.  &  by  N.,  upon  Clarksons  Cr., 
S.  &  by  W.,  upon  a  neck  of  land 
E.  &  by  S.  Due  according  to  aforesd. 
order     for     adv.     of     himselfe     &     9 


1636,  p.  369. 

SAME.  700  acs.  Same  location,  & 
page,  7  July  1636.  Adj.  the  above 
tract.  Trans,  of  14  pers:  William 
Winifrett,  Georg  Goodin,  Tho.  Tomp- 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


45 


kins,  John  Vaughan,  Robert  Parr,  Chri. 
Evans,  Ann  Waterman,  Arnall  Freez, 
Walter  Haslewood,  John  Weston,  Tho. 
Winard,  Jon.  Chew,  1622,  Jon.  Chew, 
1623,  1  Negro  Woman. 

WILLIAM  ARMESTEAD,  450  acs. 
Eliz.  Citty  Co.,  7  July  1636,  p.  370. 
S.  E.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Southell,  N.  E. 
upon  land  of  John  Branch,  E.  upon  the 
Cr.  &  W.  into  the  woods.  Trans,  of  9 
pers:  Ann  his  wife,  Rowland  Owen, 
Rich.  Clements,  Robt.  Glenister,  Yorath 
Dane,  Rich.  Banks,  Robt.  Kendall,  Andr. 
Strecher,  Gilbert  Guy. 

RICHARD  BENNETT,  Gent.,  350 
acs.,  7  July  1636,  p.  371.  Being  a  neck 
of  land  lying  neare  a  mile  within  Sandy 
Cr.,  being  the  first  Cr.  to  the  Wwd.  of 
Craney  point,  S.  W.  into  the  woods, 
N.  E.  towards  the  maine  river,  beg.  at 
3  great  pines,  the  Cr.  goeing  in  or  out 
of  the  maine  river  bet.  Nanzemund  & 
Elizabeth  Rivs.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  Tho. 
Jefferies,  Wm.  Ford,  Jon.  Jolly,  Robt. 
Farthin,  James  Willett,  Tho.  Bennett, 
John  Robinson. 

THOMAS  MARKHAM,  300  acs. 
Henrico  Co.,  11  July  1636,  p.  371.  N. 
upon  the  4  Mi.  Cr.,  W.  upon  the  river, 
E.  upon  the  maine,  S.  upon  Curies 
joyning  upon  Baylys  land.  100  acs.  in 
right  of  his  wife  Susan  the  relict  of 
Robert  Greenleafe,  to  whom  100  acs. 
was  due  as  being  an  Ancient  Planter 
before  the  govmt.  of  Sir  Thomas  Dale; 
50  acs.  for  her  own  per.  adv.,  50  acs. 
for  the  per.  adv.  of  sd.  Markham  &  100 
acs.  for  his  trans,  of  2  pers:  John 
Foker,  Richard  Wall.  Renewed,  by  Sir 
John  Harvey. 

EDWARD  SPARSHOTT,  200  acs. 
Chas.  Citty  Co.,  11  July  1636,  p.  372. 
At  Merchants  Hope  Cr.,  upon  the  S. 
side  of  his  former  pattern  land.  100 
acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of  himselfe,  &  his 
son  Edward  Sparshott  &  100  acs.  for 
trans,  of  2  pers:  Jerimiah  Hayles,  Jeri- 
miah  Watts.  Note:  Renewed  &  another 
pattern  of  100  acs.  with  addition  of  50 
acs.  in  one  pattern  by  Sir  John  Harvey. 
Rich.  Kemp,  Sec. 

HUMPHRY  ENGLAND,  200  acs. 
James  Citty  Co.,  12  July  1636,  p.  372. 


Being  a  neck  of  land  in  Chichahominy 
Riv.  adj.  land  of  John  Dancy  pointing 
to  Checkeroes  necke,  beg.  at  a  reedy 
swamp,  Nwd.  up  sd.  river.  Due  for 
per.  adv.  of  himselfe,  his  wife  Mary 
England,  his  brother  John  England  & 
his  sonn  Humphry  England. 

ELIZABETH  PACKER,  (or  Parker), 
Widdowe,  500  acs.  Henrico  Co.,  12 
July  1636,  p.  373.  Betweene  Curies  & 
Varinaes,  S.  upon  the  maine  river,  E. 
upon  the  4  Mi.  Cr.,  W.  towards  the  3 
Mi.  Cr.  &  N.  into  the  woods.  Due  in 
right  of  her  late  husband  Serjeant  Wil- 
liam Sharpe,  whoe,  as  by  certificate  from 
the  Ct.  of  Henrico  dated  25  Apr.  1636, 
transported  9  servants  &  2  Negroes: 
Rich.  Vase,  John  Thomas,  Lewis  Jones, 
Leon.  Laughton,  Willi.  Cooke,  Peter 
Whadsey,  Edward  Jones,  Jon.  Ward, 
Wm.  Woolley. 

THOMAS  CURTIS,  300  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.  Co.,  14  July  1636,  p.  373.  N.  up- 
on the  new  Poquoson  river,  S.  into  the 
woods,  W.  upon  John  Hayney  branch 
&  E.  upon  the  Gleabland.  200  acs.  due 
by  deed  of  sale  from  John  Davis  &  100 
acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Jon.  Hecher 
(or  Hether),  Jon.  Roberts. 

WILLIAM  EYRES,  150  acs.  Warris- 
quicke  Co.,  14  July  1636,  p.  373.  Up- 
on the  maine  river,  beg.  at  a  Cr.  & 
being  an  island  called  the  long  pond, 
runing  by  the  river  S.  by  E.  downward 
&  N.  by  W.  upwards.  50  acs.  graunted 
by  order  of  Ct.  6  Dec.  1634  for  his  own 
per.  adv.  &  100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2 
pers:   Robert  Stanney,  John  Wood. 

JERIMIAH  DICKINSON,  (Dicken- 
son) 200  acs.  James  Citty  Co.,  14  June 
1636,  p.  374.  Adj.  lands  of  Benjamine 
Harrison  &  Jerimiah  Clements  &  S.  into 
the  woods.    Trans,  of  4  pers.* 

SAME.  300  acs.  Same  county,  date 
and  page.  Upon  upper  Chippoecks  Cr., 
beg.  at  Swann  Bay,  joyning  upon  a 
swamp,  runing  E.  into  the  maine  woods, 
N.  toward  the  river  mouth  &  S.  up  sd. 
creek.  Trans,  of  6  pers.*  Note:  These 
2  pattents  renewed  &  graunted  in  one 
patent  by  Sir  John  Harvey.  Rich. 
Kemp,  Seer. 


to 


46 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


HENRY  WILLIAMS,  150  acs.  Acco- 
macke  Co.,  6  Sept.  1636,  p.  375.  On 
the  old  plantation  Cr.,  E.  into  the 
woods,  W.  on  the  maine  Cr.,  N.  on 
land  of  Henry  Charlton  &  S.  W.  on 
the  fishing  point.  100  acs.  as  being  an 
Ancient  Planter  in  the  time  of  Sir  Tho- 
mas Dale  &  50  acs.  for  trans,  of  Susan 
Andrewes.  Note:  Renewed  &  50  acs. 
added.    Test:    Tho.  Cooke. 

WILLIAM  ROPER,  150  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  6  Sept.  1636,  p.  375.  Being 
a  small  neck  of  land  betweene  lands  of 
John  Dennis  &  Henry  Charlton,  S.  by 
E.  upon  the  maine  woods,  &  N.  by  W. 
into  the  maine  Cr.  50  acs.  for  his  own 
per.  adv.  &  100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2 
servts:    Wm.  Jacob,   Georg   Cottington. 

ROBERT  DRAKE,  200  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  8  Sept.  1636,  p.  376.  Beg. 
from  the  half  way  tree,  runing  S.  E. 
into  the  woods  &  W.  upon  the  maine 
baye.  Due  in  right  of  his  late  father 
Robert  Drake  whoe  at  his  owne  costs 
did  transporte  himselfe,  the  sd.  Robert 
his  sonn,  Joane  Drake  his  wife  &  Eliza- 
beth Drake  his  daughter. 

THOMAS  HUNT,  50  acs.  Accomack 
Co.,  8  Sept.  1636,  p.  376.  Within  the 
old  plantation  Cr.,  joyningWly.  to  land 
of  Thomas  Smith.  Due  for  his  per.  adv. 

EDWARD  DREW,  300  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  8  Sept.  1636,  p.  376.  N.  W. 
upon  the  river,  Nly.  upon  land  of  Mr. 
John  Howe,  Sly.  upon  land  of  Thomas 
Powell  &  E.  S.  E.  into  the  woods. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  John  Ripley,  Peter 
Higgison,  Richard  Wanes,  Georg  Hall, 
Thomas   Stidwell,  William  Carter. 

JOHN  HARLOW,  (Harlowe)  300 
acs.  Accomack  Co.,  9  Sept.  1636,  p. 
377.  In  the  old  plantation  Cr.  W.  on 
the  maine  Cr.,  N.  upon  land  of  Henry 
Charlton,  E.  into  the  woods  &  S.  on  the 
fishing  point  Neck.  50  acs.  for  his  own 
per.  adv.  &  250  acs.  for  trans,  of  5 
pers:  Ann  Harlow  his  wife,  Agnis  Har- 
low his  sister,  Step.  Harlow  his  son, 
Mathew  Peake,  William  Cale. 

THOMAS  GASKINS,  300  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  9  Sept.  1636,  p.  377.    W.  & 


N.  on  the  maine  Cr.  of  the  olf  planta- 
tion, N.  from  the  fresh  spring,  E.  into 
the  woods  &  N.  into  the  woods.  50 
acs.  for  his  per.  adv.  &  250  acs.  for  the 
trans,  of  5  pers:  Josias  Gambling, 
Josias  Gaskins,  Eliz.  Gaskins,  Alice 
Gaskins,  Mary  Gaskins. 

JOHN  WILKINS,  1300  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  9  Sept.  1636,  p.  378.  On 
the  E.  side  of  Nansamund  Riv.,  beg.  on 
the  S.  side  of  the  first  br.,  running  S. 
W.  by  W.  along  the  Cr.,  E.  S.  E.  into 
the  woods,  N.  E.  upon  land  of  Mr. 
White  &  butting  W.  upon  land  of 
James  Knott.  50  acs.  for  his  own  per 
adv.  &  1250  acs.  for  trans,  of  25  pers: 
Bridgett  Craft,  Agnis  Medlam  Rosomae 
Yetman,  Henry  Medcalfe,  Georg  Lee, 
Paul  Trendall,  Tho.  Vincent,  Joane  Har- 
man,  Richard  Ganes,  Mary  Wells,  David 
Kiffin,  Wm.  Woolfe,  Richard  Leake, 
Wm.  Hutchinson,  Antho.  Stensby, 
Robert  Stackhowse,  William  Willbourne, 
Michaell  Bryant,  William  Cozier,  Row- 
land Raine,  Edward  Writt,  Stephen  Bar- 
nett,  William  Crossman,  Thomasin,  a 
maid,  his  Negroe. 

GEORG  HOLMES,  200  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  12  Sept.  1636,  p.  378.  Beg. 
at  a  great  Sw.  which  lyeth  on  the  N. 
side  of  the  land  of  Samuell  Snead,  N. 
into  the  woods  &  joyning  Wly.  on  land 
of  Mr.  Harwood.  100  acs.  for  the  per. 
adv.  of  himself  &  wife  Rebecca  Holmes 
&  100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2  servts:  Tho- 
mas Browne,  Robt.  Sharpe. 

RICHARD  PEIRCE,  600  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  12  Sept.  1636,  p.  379.  Be- 
ing a  neck  of  land  on  the  S.  side  of 
Chichahominy  Riv.  neare  Warrany  old 
landing  place,  Nly.,  Wly.  &  Ely.  upon 
the  river  &  SI"  into  the  maine  woods. 
50  acs.  due  in  right  of  his  now  father 
Thomas  Ward;  &  550  acs.  in  right  of 
his  late  father  Richard  Peirce,  to  whom 
sd.  550  acs.  was  due  for  trans,  of  11 
pers:  Thomas  Warne,  Christo.  Young, 
Thomas  Causby,  John  Woodall,  Georg 
Barker,  Rich.  Bucktrell,  Jon.  Carter, 
John  Wright,  Nich.  Martin,  Michaell 
Spurrier,  Christ.  Young. 

SAMUELL  CURBY,  200  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  12  Sept.  1636,  p.  379.    S.  W. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


47 


upon  a  Cr.  called  Tanks  Pasby  hayes 
Cr.,  bounded  on  the  upper  side  with 
the  mouth  of  a  Cr.  that  runs  crosse  the 
neck,  on  the  lower  side  with  a  peice  of 
marsh  runing  into  the  woods  &  butting 
N.  E.  on  Chichahominy  Riv.  100  acs. 
by  deed  of  sale  from  Alexander  Stomer 
9  July  1636,  to  whom  it  was  due  for 
trans,  of  2  servants,  &  the  other  100 
acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Alice  Curby 
his  wife,  Rich.  Pettit,  Robert  Pitwell, 
Sampson  Doubte. 

JOHN  BRIDGES,  250  acs.  Warris- 
quick  Co.,  13  Sept.  1636,  p.  380. 
Joyning  to  the  N.  side  of  his  former 
pattern  land,  abutting  on  the  N.  W. 
side  of  Warrisquick  Riv.,  &  into  the 
woods  N.  W.  by  N.  50  acs.  for  his 
per.  adv.  &  200  acs.  for  the  trans,  of  4 
pers.*  Note:  August  the  12th  1663 
this  pattent  was  made  over  in  John 
Gatlin    his    name.    Test:    Fr.    Kirkman. 

JUSTINIAN  COOPER,  1050  acs. 
Warrisquick  Co.,  13  Sept.  1636,  p.  380. 
N.  W.  upon  the  head  of  Lawnes  Cr., 
S.  E.  upon  the  back  Cr.,  N.  E.  upon  his 
dwelling  howse  &  S.  W.  into  the  woods. 
50  acs.  for  his  per.  adv.  &  1000  acs.  for 
trans,  of  20  pers:  Justinian  Cooper,  Rich. 
Cosey,  Nich.  Man,  John  Curtis,  John 
Coker,  Henry  Bonney,  James  Smith,  Geo. 
Stacy,  Wm.  Redman,  Geo.  Archer,  Wra. 
Bannister,  Wm.  Cooke,  Samll.  Eldrige, 
Wm.  Nesse,  Mary  Clinton,  Jon.  Davis, 
Robert  Radye,  Rich.  Smith,  Wm.  Under- 
wood, Henry  Rouncifull,  Clement  Evans. 

CHRISTOPHER  BRANCH,  100  acs. 
Henrico  Co.,  14  Sept.  1636,  p.  381. 
Ely.  upon  the  river  over  against  Har- 
row Attocks,  Wly.  upon  the  head  of 
Proctors  Cr.,  Sly.  upon  the  mouth  of 
same  &  Nly.  upon  the  second  Cr.  Due 
by  exchange  from  James  Place,  to  whom 
it  was  due  for  trans,  of  2  servts:  Rich- 
ard Peirce,  James  Hunt.  Note:  Re- 
newed &  350  acs.  added. 

THOMAS  ALLEN,  550  acs.  Eliz. 
Cittie  Co.,  14  Sept  1630,  p.  381.  Beg. 
Ely.  upon  the  first  br.  that  extends  Sly. 
out  of  the  Long  Cr.  upon  the  E.  side  of 
Chisopeiacke  Riv.,  up  the  sd.  Cr.  into 
the  woods  Sly.,  Wly.  towards  the  great 


Indian    feild    &    Nly.    along    sd.    Cr. 
Trans,  of  11  pers.* 

WILLIAM  RAINSHAW,  150  acs. 
Eliz.  Citty  Co.,  14  Sept.  1636,  p.  382. 
Being  a  neck  of  land  some  3  mi.  up 
Eliz.  Riv.,  bounding  Sly.  into  the  woods, 
Nly.  upon  the  maine  river,  Ely.  &  Wly. 
upon  a  Cr.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  James 
Ashf  eild,  William  Boyer,  Nicholas  Berrye. 

THOMAS  BEAST,  200  acs.  Eliz. 
Citty  Co.,  15  Sept.  1636,  p.  382. 
Bounding  upon  Harris  Cr.  W.,  beg.  at 
a  br.  of  a  Cr.  joyning  land  of  Michaell 
Peasly,  N.  against  land  of  Ralph  Os- 
borne, S.  to  land  of  Mr.  Bonall  &  E. 
into  the  woods.  50  acs.  for  his  per. 
adv.  &  150  acs.  for  trans,  of  3  pers: 
Tho.  Beast,  Mary  Beast  his  wife,  Rich- 
ard Beast  his  son. 

CHRISTOPHER  REYNOLDS,  450 
acs.  Warrisquick  Co.,  15  Sept.  1636,  p. 
382.  Bounded  with  a  back  Cr.  runing 
Ewd.  behind  the  Pagan  shore  some  3 
mi.  upwards  the  land  lying  on  the  S. 
side  of  the  Cr.  &  old  Indian  feild  be- 
longing to  the  land,  also  runing  into 
the  woods  S.  W.  &  lying  on  the  main 
Cr.  N.  E.    Trans,  of  9  servants.* 

WILLIAM  RAINSHAW,  100  acs. 
Eliz.  Citty  Co.,  15  Sept.  1636,  p.  383. 
Being  a  neck  of  land  some  2  mi.  up 
Eliz.,  Riv.,  Sly.  upon  same,  Nly.  into 
the  woods,  Ely.  &  Wly.  upon  a  small 
Cr.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Christopher 
Hunt,  Richard  Snead. 

JOHN  ROBERTS,  100  acs.  Eliz. 
Citty  Co.,  16  Sept.  1636,  p.  383.  Being 
a  neck  of  land  bounding  Ely.  upon  the 
S.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.  Trans,  of  2  pers: 
Dorothy  Davis,  Isaac  Merry. 

HUMPHRY  SCOWNE,  100  acs. 
Warrisquick  Co.,  16  Sept.  1636,  p.  383. 
On  S.  side  of  Nanzamund  Riv.,  be- 
tweene  land  of  Joseph  Sammond  &  John 
Gerry,  runing  S.  E.  into  the  woods, 
N.  W.  upon  the  river  S.  W.  &  N.  E. 
along  the  banck  of  the  maine  river,  the 
sd.  land  being  a  thickett.  50  acs.  for 
his  per.  adv.  &  50  acs.  for  trans,  of 
1  servt:  William  Edwards. 


48 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


SAME.  200  acs.  Same  Co.  &  date,  p. 
384.  Betweene  land  of  Mr.  Richard 
Bennett  &  land  of  Francis  Hoofe,  Tun- 
ing W.  into  the  woods,  E.  upon  the 
river,  &  N.  &  S.  along  the  Cr.  side. 
Trans,  of  4  pers.* 

OLIVER  PR  YE  (also  written  Sprye), 
50  acs.  Warrisquick  Co.,  16  Sept.  1636, 
p.  384.  Lying  neare  unto  land  graunted 
to  him  by  pattent,  extending  toward  the 
river  mouth,  riming  N.  E.  along  the 
banke  of  the  maine  river,  N.  W.  into  the 
woods,  S.  E.  upon  Nanzamund  Riv.  be- 
ing on  the  N.  side.    Due  for  his  per.  adv. 

THOMAS  BURBAGE,  300  acs.  Eliz. 
Citty  Co.,  16  Sept.  1636,  p.  385.  Join- 
ing upon  land  of  John  Sipsey  in  Eliz. 
Riv.,  lying  N.  upon  sd.  river  &  S.  into 
the  woods,  being  in  twoe  necks.  Parte 
of  1000  acs.  graunted  sd.  Burbage  by 
->rder  of  court  the  11th  June  1636. 

SAME.  200  acs.  Warrisquick  Co.,  16 
Sept.  1636,  p.  385.  About  a  mile  up 
on  the  S.  side  of  Nansamund  Riv.,  beg. 
at  a  Cr.,  extending  S.  E.  along  the  maine 
river  towards  Eliz.  Riv.  unto  another 
Cr.,  S.  W.  into  the  woods  &  N.  E.  upon 
the  river.  Parte  of  1000  acs.,  as  above. 
Note:  This  pattent  renewed  &  100  acs. 
added.    Tho.  Cooke,  Clr. 

WILLIAM  MORGAN,  350  acs. 
James  Citty  Co.,  18  Sept.  1636,  p.  385. 
Being  a  small  island  in  Chichahominy 
Riv.,  lying  Ely.  in  the  maine  woods,  W. 
upon  the  river,  N.  upon  a  creek,  Sly. 
downe  the  river  butting  against  the 
Poyney  point.  Due  in  right  of  his  now 
wife  Margarett  Morgan  late  widdowe 
to  Richard  Sanders  of  Neck  of  Land,  to 
whom  it  was  due  for  trans  .of  sd.  Mar- 
garett &  6  pers.* 

RANDALL  HOLT,  400  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  18  Sept.  1636,  p.  386.  Above 
the  head  of  the  lower  Chippoecks  Cr., 
Nly.  upon  a  point  of  the  wood  on 
Chippoecks  side,  Sly.  upon  a  Sw.  with 
a  small  runn  neare  land  of  John  Duns- 
ton,  Ely.  towards  head  of  sd.  Cr.  & 
Wly.  along  a  great  Sw.  into  the  woods. 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  Thomas  Read,  Willi. 
Lee,  Ann  Evans,  John  Harris.  (Other 
names  not  given.)  Note:  Renewed  by 
Sir  John  Harvey  in  his  name. 


STEPHEN  WEBB,  150  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  18  Sept.  1636,  p.  386.  At 
the  Lower  Chippoecks  Cr.  neare  upon 
a  mile  from  the  fore  river,  N.  upon  a 
Sw.  towards  sd.  river,  E.  upon  sd.  Cr., 
S.  upon  land  of  William  Carter  &  W. 
upon  Sunken  Marsh.  Trans,  of  3  pers: 
Richard  Tarling,  Georg  Toulson,  Wal- 
ter Lest.  Note:  This  pattent  renewed 
by  sd.  Webb  wherein  hee  hath  put  a 
pattent  bearing  date  the  second  of 
March  1638  for  250  acres  &  added  to 
them  100  acs.  more.  Test:  Samll. 
Abbott,  Clr. 

SAMUELL  STEPHENS,  2000  acs. 
Eliz.  Citty  Co.,  20  Sept.  1636,  p.  387. 
Being  a  neck  of  land  stretching  Ewd. 
upon  the  maine  baye  of  Chisopeian, 
bounded  S.  with  Harris  his  Cr.,  Nly. 
with  the  back  river  &  Wwd.  upon  land 
late  in  the  tenure  of  Walter  Hodgskins; 
said  neck  conteyning  by  estimation  be- 
tween 1500  &  2000  acs.  Due  by  right 
of  descent  from  his  father  Capt.  Rich- 
ard Stephens  by  order  of  Court,  27  of 
April  1630.  Provided  notwithstanding 
in  this  sd.  graunt  that  according  to  the 
rules  of  justice  &  Equity  &  according  to 
the  course  of  the  law  of  England  Eliza- 
beth Stephens  Mother  of  the  sd. 
Samuell  shall  possess  &  enjoy  her  own 
proper  use  &  benefltt  the  third  of  the 
sd.  land  by  these  presents  graunted  with 
all  the  profitts  &  revenues  thereto  be- 
longing during  her  naturall  life. 

SAME.  500  acs.  Warwick  River  Co., 
same  date  &  page.  Towards  the  head 
of  Blunt  point  river,  Sly.  on  land  of 
John  Bainham  &  Nly.  toward  the  head 
of  sd.  river.  Due  as  above  mentioned 
&  alsoe  by  deed  of  sale,  dated  22  Nov. 
1631  from  Richard  James,  Clarke,  then 
Atty.  to  Capt.  Wm.  Clayborne,  which 
was  alsoe  graunted  unto  sd.  Clayborne 
by  order  of  Ct.,  8  May  1626.  Provided 
&c.  as  above.  Note:  Renewed  by  Rich- 
ard Kemp,  Esqr.,  Governor,  24  Sept. 
1644  in  the  name  of  sd.  Stephens  &  750 
acres  added.    Test:    Samll.  Abbott,  Clr. 

WILLIAM  JULIAN,  600  acs.  Eliz. 
Citty  Co.,  4  July  1636,  p.  388.  Parte 
of  same  being  3  necks  of  land  upon  the 
entrance  into  Eliz.  Riv.  on  the  Eastern 
br.  conteyning  400  acs.,  W.  upon  a  Cr. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


49 


joyning  to  Francis  Mason,  N.  into  the 
woods,  S.  upon  the  river  &  E.  upon  a 
small  Cr.  further  up  the  br.  Another 
neck  conteyning  200  acs.  upon  the  S. 
turning  of  sd.  river,  E.  upon  a  Cr.,  S. 
upon  a  Cr.  &  N.  into  the  woods.  Due 
for  trans,  of  12  pers:  Peter  Payton,  Ed- 
ward Clayborne,  Ann  Stephenson, 
Methew  Wynn,  William  Crooke,  Wil- 
liam Berry,  Antho.  Hewett,  Rachell 
Freeze,  Charles  Rose,  Wm.  Hill,  Ed- 
ward Owen,  Sarah  Leverick. 

JOHN  GATER,  300  acs.  Eliz.  Citty 
Co.,  21  Sept.  1636,  p.  389.  Being  a 
neck  of  land  on  the  E.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv. 
upon  the  N.  side,  bounding  Sly.  on  sd. 
river.,  Nly.  into  the  woods,  Wly.  upon 
a  Cr.  &  Ely.  upon  a  Cr.  called  "dun 
out  of  the  moier."  50  acs.  for  his  own 
per.  adv.  &  250  acs.  for  trans,  of  his 
wife  Joane  Gater  &  4  pers:  Tho.  Hale, 
Christo.  Burston,  Edward  Bosaker, 
Thomas  Rouse.    Renewed. 

SAME.  300  acs.  Same  county,  date 
&  page.  Sly.  upon  the  river,  being  a 
neck  of  land  in  Eliz.  Riv.,  Nly.  into 
the  woods,  Ely.  &  Wly.  upon  a  Cr. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  William  Presbury, 
Richard  Tysley,  Thomas  Merrideth, 
Francis  Merrideth,  Thomas  Meades, 
Robert  .    Renewed. 

SAME.  200  acs.  Same  county,  date 
&  page.  Being  a  neck  of  land  upon  the 
E.  side  of  Eliz.  Riv.  Due  for  trans,  of 
4  pers:  Henry  Geiles.  (Other  names 
not  given.) 

RICHARD  VAUSON,  50  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.  Co.,  22  Sept.  1636,  p.  390.  E.  up- 
on the  new  Poquoson  Riv.,  W.  into  the 
woods,  N.  upon  Francis  Laugher  &  S. 
upon  the  river.  Due  by  covenant  from 
his  master  Capt.  Michaell  Marshott,  10 
bee  performed  by  him  after  the  expira- 
tion of  his  service. 

FRANCIS  LAUGHER,  50  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.  Co.,  22  Sept.  1636,  p.  390.  E. 
upon  the  New  Poquoson  Riv.,  W.  into 
the  woods,  S.  upon  Richard  Vauson  & 
N.  upon  Hawkins  his  Neck.  Due  by 
covenant  from  his  Master  Capt.  Michaell 
Marshott  to  bee  performed  by  him  after 
the  expiration  of  his  service. 


NATHANIELL  CLARKE,  100  acs. 
Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  22  Sept.  1636,  p.  390. 
S.  upon  the  New  Poquoson  Riv.,  N. 
into  the  woods,  W.  upon  a  Cr.  adj.  to 
William  Clarke  &  E.  upon  a  Cr.  adj. 
Thomas  Harwood.  Due  by  right  of 
descent  from  his  father  Edward  Clarke, 
as  being  an  Ancient  Planter  in  the  time 
of  the  govmt.  of  Sir  Thomas  Dale. 

WALTER  HACKER,  600  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.  Co.,  23  Sept.  1636,  p.  391.  N. 
upon  the  New  Poquoson  Riv.,  S.  into 
the  woods,  E.  upon  Thomas  Curtis  his 
Cr.  &  W.  upon  the  land  of  Robert 
Lucas.  Due  for  trans,  of  Alice  Hacker 
his  now  wife  &  11  pers:  John  Powell, 
Thomas  Powell,  Georg  Haverell,  Rich- 
ard Pate,  1  Negro,  John  Williams,  John 
Figg,  Thomas  Jones,  John  Bradbury, 
Henry  Crow,  Thomas  Wingfeild. 

JOSEPH  JOLLY,  350  acs.  Chas.  Riv. 
Co.,  23  Sept.  1636,  p.  391.  S.  upon  the 
New  Poquoson  Riv.,  N.  int  othe  woods, 
E.  upon  land  of  William  Clarke  &  W. 
upon  land  of  John  Watson.  50  acs.  for 
his  own  per.  adv.  &  300  acs.  for  trans, 
of  Margery  his  wife  &  5  pers:  Andrew 
Howell,  Nathaniell  Clarke,  John  Boarne, 
Nicholas  Porter,  Sarah  Jones. 

WILLIAM  RAVENETT  (Ravennett), 
250  acs.  Warwick  Riv.  Co.,  23  Sept. 
1636,  p.  392.  Sly.  upon  the  land  of 
Richard  Wilcocks,  S.  E.  upon  the  Mill 
at  the  head  of  Warwick  Riv.,  Nly.  along 
a  great  swamp  called  Hucklebury  Sw. 
Trans,  of  5  pers:  George  Olliver,  Cle- 
ment Wheydon,  John  Owberry,  John 
Read,  John  Evans. 

WILLIAM  CLARKE,  450  acs.  Henri- 
co Co.,  29  Sept.  1636,  p.  392.  In  Apa- 
mattuck  Riv.  on  the  Swife  Cr.,  beg.  at  a 
little  Cr.  lying  N.  E.  thereupon  &  S.  E. 
into  the  river,  N.  W.  into  the  maine 
woods;  50  acs.  thereof  being  allowed 
for  a  small  Island  therein  with  a  Swamp 
&  Marsh  thereunto  belonging.  Trans, 
of  9  pers:  Ellins  Burkett,  Allen  Tucker, 
Symon  Richardson,  Lawrence  Farbarne, 
Hump.  Bell^Laur^Jackson,  Elizabeth  Col- 
lins, Nicholas  Browne,  Samuell  Church. 

SAME.  1100  acs.  Same  County  & 
date,  p.  393.    Beg.  at  a  little  Cr.  &  lying 


50 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


N.  thereupon,  E.  upon  the  maine  Riv. 
&  W.  into  the  woods;  100  acs.  to  be 
allowed  for  the  marshes  &  swamps 
thereunto  belonging.  Due  in  right  of 
his  now  wife  Dorothy  Garner,  late 
widdowe  to  Edward  Garner,  to  whom 
it  was  due  for  trans,  of  22  pers:  Eliz. 
Willis,  Edmund  Pullum,  Thomas  Law- 
ley,  Thomas  Somersale,  John  Humphry, 
Barr.  Farthing,  John  Melder,  William 
Everedge,  John  Wall,  Nich.  Pledge, 
Robert  Currant,  Thomas  Cooper,  Charles 
Maxney,  Richard  Jenings,  Oliver  Den- 
nington,  Nich.  Oliver,  William  & 
Teage,  Irishmen,  Joane  Bullock,  Eliz. 
Curtis,  Izabell  Stubbs,  Hester  Partridge. 

JOHN  ORCHARD,  100  acs.  James 
Citty   Co.,    last   day   of   Sept.    1636,    p. 

393.  Upon  the  W.  side  of  Chicka- 
hominy  Riv.  at  Swan  howse  point,  N.E. 
upon  sd.  Riv.  &  W.  into  the  maine 
woods.  50  acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of  his 
now  wife  Ann  Orchard  &  50  acs.  for 
trans,  of  1  servt.  William  Oxford. 

WALTER  DANIELL,  100  acs.  James 

Citty   Co.,    last   day   of   Sept.    1636,    p. 

394.  In  Martins  Hundred,  joyning  W. 
upon  land  of  Thomas  Smith,  S.  upon  a 
br.  of  Kethes  Cr.  &  E.  into  the  woods. 
Trans,  of  2  pers:  Thomas  Jenings,  Rich- 
ard Wright.    Renewed. 

CORNELIUS  LOYD,  800  acs.  Eliz. 
Citty  Co.,  2  June  1635,  p.  394.  Upon 
the  S.  side  of  the  Westermost  br.  of 
Eliz.  Riv.,  bounding  Nly.  into  the 
woods,  Sly.  upon  sd.  Riv.,  E.  upon 
Merchants  Cr.  &  W.  upon  Muddy  Cr. 
Trans,  of  16  pers.* 

MR.  FRANCIS  TOWERS,  200  acs. 
in  the  Wwd.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  one  mile 
up  the  same,  butting  with  a  point  upon 
the  Riv.  South  &  runing  N.  into  the 
woods  with  a  Cr.  on  the  upper  side  & 
a  baye  on  the  lower  side.  16  Jan.  1636, 
p.  394. 

MRS.  ELIZABETH  STEPHENS, 
1000  acs.  Chas.  Citty  Co.,  15  Oct.  1636, 
p.  395.  Knowne  &  called  by  the  name 
of  Flowerdeu  hundred,  being  bounded 
from  the  Cr.  of  the  same  name,  downe 
the  maine  river  unto  the  Spring  Sw., 
being  W.  into  the  woods  &  lying  alongst 


the  S.  side  of  the  maine  river  over 
against  Weyonoake.  Due  in  right  of 
descent  from  her  father,  Abraham  Pear- 
sey,  late  of  Va.,  and  is  a  part  of  her 
share  &  portion  of  inheritance  as  coheir 
from  her  sd.  father,  to  whom  sd.  land 
was  due  by  purchase  from  Sir  Georg 
Yeardley,  as  by  deed  dated  5  Oct.  1624. 

THOMAS  BENSTEED  (Beansteed), 
50  acs.  Eliz.  Citty  Co.,  comonly  called 
Pascalls  neck,  28  Sept.  1636,  p.  395. 
Lying  S.  upon  Point  Comfort  Cr.,  E. 
upon  Fox  hill,  W.  upon  the  Indian 
Stone  (or  Stove)  &  N.  into  the  woods. 
Due  for  per.  adv.  of  his  wife  Mary. 

JOHN  GOOKIN,  Gent.,  500  acs,  17 
Oct.  1636,  p.  396.  Beg.  at  Mossey 
point,  W.  upon  Nanzamund  river,  E. 
into  the  woods,  &  S.  adj.  the  Gleabland. 
Trans,  of  10  pers:  Thomas  Box,  Junr., 
Peter  Norman,  Mary  Norman,  John 
Butler,  John  Burden,  Robert  Hodges, 
John  Carpenter,  Edwd.  Morgan,  John 
London,  Wm.  Pensint  (or  Pensuit). 
Note:  The  whole  quantitie  renewd  18 
Feb.  1638.    Tho.  Cooke,  CI. 

JAMES  VANERIT,  1000  acs.  Eliz. 
Citty  Co,  17  Oct.  1636,  p.  396.  For 
the  breadth  from  Sandy  Bay  along  point 
Comfort  Cr.  N.  E.  &  into  the  woods 
S.  W.  Due  by  purchase  from  Stafferton 
(first  name  not  mentioned)  to  whom  it 
was  due  for  trans,  of  20  pers:  Georg 
Woodcock,  John  Wilcocks,  Abr.  Iveson, 
Hugh  Lawson,  Hen.  Jefferys,  Jon. 
Haward,  Tho.  Martin,  Wm.  James,  Hen. 
Walker,  Chri.  Ward,  Jon.  Holmes,  Geo. 
Clarke,  Wm.  Whitehurst,  Jon.  Tingy, 
Jon.  Sanders,  Chr.  Dawsey,  Fr.  Den- 
marke,  Rowd.  Vaughan,  Rachell  Adams, 
Jon.  Newman. 

WILLIAM  LAYTON,  200  acs.  on  the 
S.  side  of  Chisapeian  Baye  within  the 
Territorie  of  Lynhaven,  N.  upon  land 
of  Capt.  Adam  Thorogood,  E.  into  the 
woods,  S.  up  the  main  river  of  Lyn- 
haven alias  Chisopeian  &  Nly.  upon 
same.  18  Oct.  1636,  p.  397.  50  acs. 
for  the  per.  adv.  of  his  wife  Elizabeth 
Layton  &  for  trans,  of  3  pers:  Isaac 
Woorgen,  Samuell  Ellis,  John  Baker. 

EDWARD  TONSTALL,  450  acs. 
Henrico  Co,  21  Nov.  1636,  p.  397.  In 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


51 


Appamattock  Riv.,  bounding  N.  upon 
Henry  Miller,  W.  upon  the  river,  E. 
upon  the  maine  woods.  150  acs.  for 
his  own  per.  adv.  &  trans,  of  2  pers.,  & 
300  acs.  in  right  of  his  now  wife 
Martha,  due  to  her  from  her  former 
husband  Nicholas  Greenhill,  whoe 
trans,  for  sd.  Martha  &  5  pers:  Jon. 
Gill,  Richard  Clavton,  Robert  Rowden, 
James  Barker,  Tho.  Thurten,  James 
Morris,  Joane  Huggeson. 

EDWARD  OLIVER,  50  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  21  Nov.  1636,  p.  397.  In 
Tompsons  baye,  beg.  beyond  Pasbye 
hayes  cleare  ground  lying  N.  upon  the 
maine  river,  S.  into  the  woods  between 
twoe  swamps.  Due  by  gift  from  Sir  John 
Harvey  to  Ann  Cordwell  his  now  wife. 

ROBERT  NEWMAN,  50  acs.,  22  Nov. 
1636,  p.  398.  At  Nanzamund  River  be- 
tweene  his  now  dwelling  howse  &  the 
land  (or  howse)  of  Francis  Hoofe.  Due 
for  trans,  of  one  servant  named  Job 
JefTerys. 

HANNIBALL  FLETCHER,  150  acs. 
James  Citty  Co.,  22  Nov.  1636,  p.  398. 
At  the  lower  Chippokes  Cr.  on  the 
maine  side,  N.  E.  from  2  little  creeks, 
Sly.  towards  Lawnes  Cr.,  Nly.  to  Chip- 
pokes  Cr.,  Wly.  into  the  maine  woods 
&  Ely.  towards  James  Riv.  Trans,  of  3 
pers:  Robert  Tenman,  Jarret  Beckweth, 
Phillipp  Oatelep. 

JOHN  YATES,  150  acs.,  24  Nov. 
1636,  p.  399.  Being  a  neck  of  land 
upon  the  E.  side  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  the  S. 
br.  thereof,  bounded  S.  W.  to  the  woods 
towards  the  maine  river  &  N.  Wly. 
into  the  woods.  Trans,  of  himselfe, 
wife  Joane  Yates  &  Richard  Yates. 

WILLIAM  FOOKES,  450  acs.,  24 
Nov.  1636,  p.  399.  At  Nanzamund 
Riv.,  N.  E.  joyning  to  land  of  Mr. 
Daniell  Gookins,  S.  W.  upon  a  Cr. 
runing  into  the  woods,  S.  E.  upon  sd. 
Riv.  &  N.  W.  into  the  woods.  Trans, 
of  9  pers:  William  Harris,  Ann  Whit- 
acre,  Chri.  Whiting,  Ann  Westly,  John 
Wood,  James  Abbott,  Tho.  Deason, 
Tho.  Colly,  Robert  Stingsby. 

HENRY  SOUTHELL,  700  acs.  upon 
the  Chesopeian  shore,  within  the  Terri- 


torie  of  Lyn  Haven,  butting  Nly.  upon 
land  of  William  Layton,  Wly.  upon  the 
river,  Ely.  into  the  woods  &  Sly.  upon 
the  river.  25  Nov.  1636,  p.  399.  Trans, 
of  14  pers:  Elias  Light,  Richard  Light, 
Wm.  Layton,  Geo.  Lento,  Wm.  Basnett, 
Jathen.  Right,  Jon.  Eves,  Sarah  Palmer, 
Jon.  Duncome,  Rowd.  Buddy,  Thomas 
Heath,  Ralph  Simpkins,  Hannah  Wad- 
dington,  Alice  (or  Eliz.)  Alcott.  Note: 
Renewed  in  the  name  of  Lt.  Richard 
Popley.    Rich.  Kemp,  Seer. 

FRANCIS  MAULDEN,  400  acs.,  25 
Nov.  1636,  p.  400.  On  N.  side  of 
Nanzamund  Riv.,  S.  E.  upon  Dumplin 
Island  &  N.  W.  into  the  woods.  100 
acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of  himself  &  wife 
Katherine  Maulden  &  300  acs.  for  trans, 
of  6  pers:  Jos.  Titloe,  Robt.  Sutton, 
Barbary  Barnes,  Humph.  Browne,  Fran- 
cis Hutchinson,  Wm.  Parry. 

RICHARD  YOUNG,  350  acs.  War- 
wicksquieck  Co.,  25  Nov.  1636,  p.  400. 
Up  the  Riv.  S.  from  the  great  Indian 
feild,  beg.  at  an  oake  marked  with  2 
notches,  Wwd.  upon  Thomas  Jordan 
his  land.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  Henry 
Sneale  (or  Sueale),  Elizabeth  Sneale  his 
wife,  Elib.  Sneale,  John  Sneale,  Dorothy 
Sneale,  Alice  Sneale,  Mary  Sneale. 
Note:  Renewed  24  Aug.  1643  by  Sir 
William  Berkeley  &  another  pattern  of 
11  May  1638  added  unto  it.  Test: 
SamlT.  Abbot,  Clr.  (Note:  Because  of 
the  similarity  in  the  formation  of  the 
letters  u  and  n  there  is  some  doubt  as 
to  whether  this  name  is  Sneale  or 
Sueale.— N.M.N.) 

SAME.  100  acs.  Same  county  &  date, 
page  401.  Due  for  his  own  per.  adv.  & 
trans,  of  his  wife  Dorothy  Young. 

GEORG  SAPHEIR,  300  acs.  Eliz. 
Citty  Co.,  26  Nov.  1636,  p.  401.  Joyn- 
ing upon  the  old  Poquoson  river,  W. 
from  land  of  John  Laydon,  E.  from  the 
otter  damms,  S.  to  the  Riv.  &  N.  into 
the  woods.  Due  for  his  per.  adv.  & 
trans,  of  5  pers:  Jon.  Hencing,  Mathew 
Gouch,  Jon.  Dennis,  Thomas  Body, 
Henry  Pomery. 

ANTHONY  JONES  (Joanes),  100 
acs.  Warwicksquicke  Co.,  26  Nov.  1636, 


52 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


p.  402.  Butting  on  Pagan  point  baye 
Wwd.,  into  the  woods  E.  on  N.  side  of 
sd.  Cr.  &  on  S.  side  of  the  river.  Trans, 
of  2  pers:  Richard  Loe  ((or  Lee), 
Thomas  Randall. 

HENRY  BRADLY,  100  acs.  War- 
wicksquicke  Co.,  28  Nov.  1636,  p.  402. 
The  river  runing  on  N.  W.  side  of  it, 
beg.  at  a  little  Cr.  upon  the  S.  W.  side 
&  S.  E.  into  the  woods.  Due  for  the 
per.  adv.  of  his  wife  Francis  Bradly  & 
trans,  of  1  servant  called  Walter  Bill. 
Note:    Renewed  &  100  acs.  added. 

STEPHEN  GILL,  100  acs.  Chas.  Riv. 
Co.,  28  Nov.  1636,  p.  402.  W.  upon 
his  former  pattent  land.  Due  for  the 
per.  adv.  of  his  now  wife  Ann  Gill  & 
her  late  husband  Henry  Toppin. 

ALICE  EDLOE,  Widdowe,  50  acs. 
Henrico  Co.,  29  Nov.  1636,  p.  403. 
At  Harroe  Attocks,  bounding  W.  upon 
the  maine  river,  Nly.  to  a  little  Cr.  over 
against  Kings  land,  adj.  Sly.  upon  land 
of  Georg  Boate,  runing  Ely.  into  the 
woods.  It  being  now  in  the  tenure  of 
sd.  Alice  Edloe.  Due  for  trans,  of  Wil- 
liam Barton. 

WILLIAM  COX,  150  acs.  Henrico 
Co.,  29  Nov.  1636,  p.  403.  Aboute  2^4 
mi.  above  Harroe  Attocks,  W.  by  N. 
upon  the  maine  river,  Wly.  upon  the 
great  swamp,  Ely.  into  the  woods  & 
Sly.  towards  Harrow  Attocks.  Due  for 
trans,  of  3  pers:  Thomas  Braxston, 
Richard  Bird,  Richard  Hewes. 

THOMAS  ANDREWS,  50  acs.  Eliz. 
Citty  Co.,  upon  the  Schoole  land, 
formerly  called  Benjamine  Syms  land, 
joyning  N.  upon  land  of  Elizabeth 
Tompson,  N.  E.  upon  the  great  Poquo- 
son river  &  W.  S.  W.  into  the  woods. 
28  Nov.  1636,  p.  403,  21  year  lease. 
Fee  Rent:  2  bbls.  of  sound  &  sweete 
Indian  Come. 

RICHARD  MILTON,  75  acs.  at 
Westover,  Chas.  Citty  Co.,  29  Nov. 
1636,  p.  404.  S.  upon  the  maine  river, 
joyning  E.  upon  John  Clay,  W.  upon 
land  of  William  Tompson  &  N.  upon 
Herring  Cr.,  which  land  is  one  halfe 
part  of  a  plantation  formerly  belonging 


to  John  Davis  &  John  Clay  in  equall 
portions,  with  all  buildings  &  howseing 
thereupon  &  sold  by  sd.  Davis  unto 
Thomas  Stephens,  Merchant.  The  sd. 
75  acs.  &  his  due  share  of  building 
thereunto  belonging  being  due  unto  sd. 
Milton  by  deed  of  sale  from  Thomas 
Stegg,  Merchant,  extant  upon  record. 

WILLIAM  WILKINSON,  Minister, 
700  acs.  in  Lyn  haven  comonly  called 
Chesopeian  Riv.,  upon  a  Cr.  W.  on 
Capt.  Adam  Thorogood  his  land,  N. 
upon  the  Cr.,  Ely.  along  the  Cr.  &  Sly. 
into  the  woods.  20  Nov.  1635,  p.  405. 
200  acs.  by  assignment  from  Robert 
Newberke,  3  Oct.  1635,  to  whom  it 
was  due,  vizt:  50  acs.  for  his  own  per. 
adv.  &  150  acs.  for  trans,  of  3  pers.* 
The  other  500  acs.  due  sd.  Wilkinson, 
viz:  100  acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of  him- 
self &  wife  Naomy  Wilkinson  &  400 
acs.  for  trans,  of  8  pers.* 

JAMES  PLACE,  550  acs.  Henryco 
Co.,  1  June  1636,  p.  405.  Upon  a  small 
cr.  by  a  cleare  feild  called  Pimasioes  (?) 
feild  otherwise  porridges  feild,  bounded 
upon  the  maine  river  S.  W.,  Sly.  & 
N.  W.  towards  the  falls  of  the  great 
river  &  S.  E.  Ely.  towards  land  of 
Robert  Hollum,  N.  E.  into  the  woods. 
Due  in  right  of  his  now  wife  Elizabeth, 
to  whom  it  was  due,  viz:  250  acs.  in 
right  of  her  first  husband  Georg  Boates, 
to  whom  it  was  due  for  trans,  of  sd. 
Elizabeth  &  4  servants;  300  acs.  in  right 
of  her  late  husband  John  Ward,  to 
whom  it  was  due,  viz:  100  acs.  for  his 
per.  adv.  as  being  an  Ancient  Planter 
in  the  time  of  Sir  Thomas  Dale,  &  200 
acs.  for  trans,  of  his  first  wife  Grace 
Ward  &  3  pers:  Cornelius  Dehull,  Vin- 
cent Dehall,  Rich.  Tombs,  Jon.  Morgan, 
Tho.  Robinson,  Richard  Greete. 

CORNELIUS  LOYD,  100  acs.  on  the 
E.  side  of  the  baye  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  Nly. 
upon  Thomas  Lambeths  land,  Sly.  upon 
a  Cr.,  Ely.  into  the  woods  &  Wly.  upon 
the  maine  river.  Trans,  of  2  pers.*  22 
Dec.  1636,  p.  406. 

FRANCIS  STOCKLEY  (Stockeley), 
50  acs.  Accomack  Co.,  22  Dec.  1636,  p. 
406.  S.  E.  by  S.  on  the  old  plantation 
Cr.,  N.  W.  by  N.  into  the  woods,  Wly. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


53 


on  Henry  Williams  &  Ely.  on  the  Cr. 
Trans,  of  1  servant  named  Francis  Jarvis. 

LT.  JOHN  CHEESMAN,  200  acs.  at 
the  new  Poquoson,  S.  W.  upon  land  of 
Christopher  Stokes  &  Thomas  Ramshaw, 
N.  E.  into  the  woods  on  both  sides  the 
runn.  Trans,  of  4  pers.*  22  Dec.  1636, 
p.  406. 

ELLINOR  DEY  &  THOMAS  EM- 
MENSON,  300  acs.  Warwick  Riv.  Co., 
22  Dec.  1636,  p.  407.  Beg.  Wly.  upon 
Claybornes  Neck  pond,  runing  Ely.,  Sly. 
upon  Thomas  Attowells  land,  Nly.  into 
the  woods.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Edward 
Sandall,  Jon.  Foard,  Robert  Bentall, 
Nathan  Gudle,  Georg  Johnson,  William 
Osmotherly  (?). 

RICHARD  PRESTON,  150  acs.,  22 
Dec.  1636,  p.  407.  About  4  mi.  up 
Warwickquick  Riv.,  Sly.  upon  the  N. 
side  of  same,  Nly.  into  the  woods, 
bounded  with  2  creeks  on  each  side  & 
the  land  knowne  by  an  Indian  name  of 
Husquamps.  Due  for  trans,  of  his  now 
wife  &  2  pers.* 

EPAPHRODITUS  LAWSON,  200 
acs.  Warwickquicke  Co.,  23  Dec.  1636, 
p.  407.  Joyning  upon  William  Parkers 
land  on  the  E.,  N.  W.  upon  Nanza- 
mund  river  &  S.  E.  into  the  woods. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  Jon.  Dipple,  Wm. 
Ewin,  Rich.  Williams,  Jon.  Smith. 

ARTHUR  HASLINGTON,  200  acs. 
Warwicksquicke  Co.,  23  Dec.  1636,  p. 
408.  Ely.  upon  land  of  Epaphroditus 
Lawson,  N.  W.  upon  Nansamund  Riv. 


&  S.  E.  into  the  woods.  Due  for  his 
own  per.  adv.  &  trans,  of  3  pers: 
Arthur  Haslington,  Thomas  Morgan, 
John  Banister.  Note:  This  pattent  re- 
newed in  the  name  of  Gresham  Cofeild 
18  July  1640. 

WILLIAM  JOHNSON,  50  acs.  War- 
wicksquicke Co.,  23  Dec.  1636,  p.  408. 
Joyning  upon  land  of  Arthur  Hasling- 
ton Ely.,  N.  W.  upon  Nansamund  Riv. 
&  S.  E.  into  the  woods.  Due  for  his 
owne  per.  adv. 

NICHOLAS  REYNOLDS,  1000  acs. 
at  Lawnes  Cr.,  S.  S.  E.  up  the  same, 
N.  N.  E.  upon  Edward  Rogers  land,  N. 
upon  Capt.  William  Peirce,  down  the 
Cr.  East  &  W.  into  the  woods.  23  Dec. 
1636,  p.  408.  The  sd.  1000  acs.  being 
given  &  graunted  by  Capt.  Francis  West 
late  deceased  to  Roger  Delke  late  alsoe 
deceased  &  now  due  to  sd.  Reynolds  by 
intermarrying  with  Alice  the  relict  & 
widdowe  of  sd.  Roger. 

HENRY  WILSON  (Wilsonn),  50 
acs.  Accomack  Co.,  23  Dec.  1636,  p. 
409.  S.  E.  by  S.  on  the  old  plantation 
Cr.,  N.  W.  by  N.  into  the  woods,  Wly. 
on  land  of  William  Blower  &  Ely.  on 
land  of  Francis  Stockeley.  Due  for  trans, 
of   one   servant   named   Jasper   Molton. 

WILLIAM  MELLING,  100  acs.  Ac- 
comack Co.,  23  Dec.  1636,  p.  409.  21 
yr.  lease.  On  the  S.  side  of  Kings  Cr., 
abutting  Wly.  on  land  of  William 
Bilby,  Ely.  along  the  Cr.  &  Sly.  into 
the  woods.  Fee  Rent:  4  bbls.  Indian 
corne  to  be  paid  yearely. 


BY  SIR  JOHN  HARVEY,  KNIGHT,  GOVERNOR  AND  CAPTAIN 
GENERAL  OF  VIRGINIA 


WILLIAM  TUCKER,  MAURICE 
TOMPSON,  GEORG  TOMPSON, 
WILLIAM  HARRIS,  THOMAS  DEA- 
CON, JAMES  STONE,  CORNELIUS 
LOYD,  of  London,  Merchants  &  JERE- 
MIAH BLACKMAN,  of  London,  Mar- 
mas  Pawlett,  beg.  at  a  small  gutt  that 
riner,  &  their  Associates  &  Co.,  8000 
acs.  Chas.  Citty  Co.,  being  a  tract  of 
land  comonly  knowne  by  the  name   of 


Burckley  hundred,  9  Feb.  1636,  p.  410. 
Bounding  E.  upon  land  of  Capt.  Thomas 
Pawlett,  beg.  at  a  small  gutt  that  runneth 
into  the  woods  at  the  W.  end  of  the 
Clift  of  Westover,  W.  upon  Kimiges  Cr. 
up  to  the  head,  N.  into  the  woods  & 
from  the  gutt  from  the  water  side.  N. 
into  the  woods  &c.  Due  by  deed  of 
sale  from  the  Adventurers  &  Co.  of 
Burckley  hundred  &c. 


54 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


CAPT.  THOMAS  WILLOUGHBY, 
100  acs.  at  Musketo  point,  E.  upon  the 
second  Easterne  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  W. 
upon  Warwicksquike,  S.  upon  the 
Southerne  br.  &  N.  upon  James  Riv. 
13  Feb.  1636,  p.  410.  Trans,  of  2  pers: 
Thomas  Price,  William  Kelridge. 

SAME.  200  acs.  upon  the  maine  of 
Eliz.  Riv.,  N.  upon  James  Riv.,  S.  upon 
the  first  Easterne  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.  & 
E.  N.  E.  into  the  woods.  13  Feb.  1636, 
p.  411.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Jon.  Arroe 
(?),  Phillipp  Stephens,  Jon.  Beadle, 
Ann  Dawson.  Note:  Renewed  by  Sir 
William  Berkeley  1  Apr.  1644  in  the 
name  of  John  Watkins.  Test:  Samll. 
Abbott,  CI. 

ISSABELL  THRESHER,  Widdow, 
450  acs.  upon  the  back  cr.  of  the  new 
Poquoson  river,  Nly.  upon  Thomas 
Brice,  Sly.  towards  the  old  Poquoson, 
Ely.  upon  the  head  of  a  small  Cr.  upon 
Thomas  Symons  &  Wly.  into  the  woods. 
50  acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of  her  late 
husband  Robert  Thresher,  50  acs.  for 
her  own  per.  adv.,  &  350  acs.  for  trans, 
of  7  pers:  Robt.  Thresher,  Jr.,  Jon. 
Billings,  Wm.  Chitwood,  Roger  Lewis, 
Abraham  Pelhire,  John  Baker,  Jon. 
Pigion.    16  Feb.  1636,  p.  411. 

MR.  GEORG  MENIFYE,  Merchant, 
1200  acs.  James  City  Co.,  23  Feb.  1636, 
p.  412.  A  neck  of  land  comonly  called 
the  Rich  Neck  from  a  Neck  bounded  on 
the  W.  with  a  br.  of  Archers  hope  Cr., 
parting  the  same  from  the  barren  Neck, 
on  E.  with  the  main  br.  of  Archers  hope 
Cr.  to  the  head  thereof,  thence  Wwd. 
on  a  direct  line  to  the  head  of  the 
aforesd.  br.  Trans,  of  24  pers:  Edward 
Williams,  Tho.  Andrews,  Anth.  Skinner, 
Rich.  Clarke,  Symon  Lorum,  Jon.  Doe, 
Rich.  Apleton,  Antho.  (an)  Eastindian, 
Wm.  Sutton,  Wm.  Large,  John  Abra- 
ham, Wm.  Stodon,  John  Bagby,  Jon. 
Ellis,  Samll.  Turner,  Nich.  Wherwood, 
John  Baker,  Jon.  Grimes,  Tho.  Poole, 
Tho.  Taylor,  Letitian  Price,  Robert  Tho- 
mas,  Anth.    (a)    Turk,   Jeffery  Hatton. 

ELIZABETH  BALLHASH,  Widdow, 
450  acs.  at  Curies,  Henrico  Co.,  25  Feb. 
1636,  p.  412.  At  4  Mi.  Cr.  lying  N.  & 
by  W.  upon  the  river,  joyning  to  land 


late  in  possession  of  Nicholas  Balling- 
ton  Nwd.  &  running  into  the  woods  E. 
by  N.  Due  by  order  of  Ct.  at  James 
Citty  8  Dec.  1636. 

JOHN  NEALE,  Merchant,  1500  acs. 
Accomack  Co.,  18  June  1636,  p.  413. 
Beg.  at  the  long  point  on  the  seaboard 
side,  abutting  S.  E.  on  Smith's  Island  & 
N.W.  into  the  woods.  Trans,  of  30  pers.* 

RICHARD  COCKE,  3,00  acs.,  March 
6,  1636,  Page  413.  Easterly  upon  land 
granted  to  John  Price  now  in  the  tenure 
of  Robert  Hallum,  Westerly  upon  land 
of  Thomas  Harris  &  Southerly  upon  the 
main  river.  Due  for  the  trans,  of  3 
score  pers:  Morrice  Rose,  Tho.  Pearson, 
Sym.  Morley,  Eliz.  Gargaine,  Valent. 
Fletcher,  Wm.  Rogers,  Tho.  Love,  Jon. 
Morlin,  Dan.  Evans,  Ann  Barfoote, 
Rich.  Hill,  Anth.  Waklin,  Eras.  Harri- 
son, Jon.  Hearne,  Joane  Ely,  Jon.  An- 
drews, Wm.  White,  Jon.  Jones,  Hum- 
phrey Burcher,  Henry  Powndle,  Jon. 
Williams,  Wm.  Harris,  Jon.  Chapman, 
Nich.  Oliver,  Jon.  Cooke,  Tho.  Parcost, 
Margaret  Powell,  Mary  Huffe,  Wm. 
Hastings,  Isaac  Horton,  Georg  Harrison, 
John  Smith,  James  Tompson,  John 
Hewett,  Robert  Cheyny,  John  Shore, 
Kath.  Shore,  James  Shore,  Richard 
Cooke,  Antho.  Wyyon,  Thomas  Turner, 
John  Northerne,  Robert  Lewis,  John 
Johnson,  John  Browne,  John  Browne, 
John  Wattin,  John  Beadell,  Robert 
Brewer,  John  West,  Wm.  Hinton, 
Phillip  Foster,  Margt.  a  Negroe. 

CHRISTOPHER  WOODWARD,  350 
acs.  upon  Appamattock  Riv.,  bounded 
N.  upon  the  river,  S.  into  the  maine 
woods,  E.  upon  Mr.  William  Farrar  & 
W.  upon  the  winding  river,  8  Mar. 
1636,  p.  414.  50  acs.  due  for  his  owne 
per.  adv.,  50  acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of 
his  late  wife  Margarett  Woodward  & 
50  acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of  his  now 
wife  Dorothy  Woodward,  &  200  acs. 
for  trans,  of  4  pers.* 

CAPT.  JOHN  HOBSON,  Esqr.  one 
of  his  Majesties  Councell  of  State  in 
Va.,  a  tract  of  land  bounded  from 
Pagan  point  Cr.,  hereafter  to  bee  called 
Hampstead  point,  downward  unto  War- 
wicksquike river,  hereafter  to  be  called 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


55 


New  Towne  haven,  which  land  is  scit- 
uate  within  the  Countie  of  Isle  of 
Wight,  upon  the  S.  side  of  James  River. 
16  Mar.  1636,  p.  414.  Due  as  a  share 
of  his  Adventure  heretofore  in  the  time 
of  the  Treasurer  &  Co.,  bearing  date  2 
May  1621. 

SYMON  STURGES  (also  written 
Turges),  JOHN  SADLER  &  RICHARD 
QUYNYE,  of  London,  Merchants,  a 
scite  or  tract  of  land  comonly  called  by 
the  name  of  Martin  Brandon,  16  Mar. 
1636,  p.  415.  Beg.  at  the  mouth  of  the 
upper  Chippokes  Cr.  by  the  side  of 
which  Cr.  the  land  lyeth  nearest,  Ely. 
from  the  mouth  of  sd.  Cr.  to  the  point 
of  Tappahanna  marsh  Nly.  &  from  the 
point  of  the  sd.  marsh  by  the  maine 
river  side  up  to  the  mouth  of  Wards 
Cr.  W.  Sly,  the  sd.  Cr.  setting  nearest 
hand  Sly.  into  the  woods.  Due  by  pur- 
chase from  Capt.  Robert  Bargrave. 

PATRICK  KENNEDE  (Kennedye— 
Kennedeye),  600  acs.  in  the  Upper  Co. 
of  New  Norfolk,  13  Apr.  1637,  p.  415. 
On  the  W.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  butting  on 
the  maine  river  runing  S.  S.  W.  &  on 
the  maine  br.  to  the  Swd.  running  W. 
N.  W.  on  Kennedeyes  Cr.  &c.  Trans, 
of  12  pers:  Patrick  Kennedye,  Edmund 
Camell,  Robert  Perry,  Phillipp  Caudell 
(or  Candell),  John  Waters,  Robert 
Greene,  Arthur  Taylor,  Harman  Turner, 
Jerimiah  Ward,  Henry  Baylye,  John 
Garye,  Tho.  (first  written  Charles) 
Hayes.  Note:  Renewed  in  the  name  of 
Jonathan  Langworth,  Chirurgion  &  600 
acs.  added. 

ROBERT  PAGE,  500  acs.  in  the 
Westermost  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  13  Apr. 
1636,  p.  416.  The  S.  E.  side  butting 
upon   sd.    branch,    bounded   within    the 

5  Mi.  Cr.  5  mi.  from  the  mouth  of  sd. 
br.,  bounded  on  N.  E.  side  with  the 
4  Mi.  Cr.  &  distant  4  mi.  from  the 
mouth  of  sd.  br.    Trans,  of   10  pers.* 

EDMUND    SCARBORROUGH,    200 

acs.  Accomack  Co.,  18  May  1637,  p. 
416.  Wly.  on  Magaty  Baye,  beg.  at 
the  Nwd.  of  a  place  called  the  Stages, 
runing  along  the  baye  Nly.  for  breadth 

6  Ely.  for  length  into  the  woods.  50 
acs.  due  in  right  of  his  late  father  Capt. 


Edmund  Scarborough,  50  acs.  for  the 
per.  adv.  of  his  mother  Hannah  Scar- 
borough, 50  acs.  for  his  own  per.  adv. 
&  50  acs.  for  trans,  of  a  servant  called 
Robert  Butter. 

EDWARD  MAJOR,  450  acs.  Up.  Co. 
of  New  Norf.,  18  May  1637,  p.  416. 
At  Nansamund  Riv.,  N.  E.  joyning  land 
of  Daniell  Gookin,  Gent.,  S.  W.  upon 
a  Cr.  runing  into  the  woods,  S.  E.  upon 
sd.  river  &  N.  W.  into  the  woods. 
Trans,  of  9  pers:  Edward  Major,  Tho. 
Terrell,  William  Beates,  William 
Young,  Arthur  Purnell,  John  Ripple, 
Richard  Grigson,  Jone  Grigson,  John 
Griffitt. 

JOHN  REDMAN,  of  London,  Mer- 
chant, &  JOHN  NEALE,  of  Va.,  Mer- 
chant, an  island  called  Smiths  Island, 
with  all  meadows  &  marshes  thereunto 
belonging,  500  acs.  more  or  less,  Acco- 
mack Co.,  18  May  1637,  p.  417.  Abut- 
ting against  land  of  John  Neale  upon 
the  maine,  the  sd.  island  containing  500 
acs.,  more  or  less.  Due  for  trans,  of 
10  pers:  John  Headry,  James  Hutchison, 
Henry  Warner,  Richard  Harris,  Peter 
Warrenford,  Anthony  Stensbye,  Richard 
Graves,  Robert  Stackhowse,  Thomas 
Sadler,  Thomas  Mitchell. 

THOMAS  MEERES,  300  acs.  Up. 
Co.   of  New  Norf.,    17  May   1637,   p. 

417.  3  mi.  up  in  Eliz.  Riv.,  adj.  land 
of  William  Ranshaw,  Sly.  into  the 
woods,  Nly.  on  the  maine  river,  &  Ely. 
up  the  river.    Trans,  of  6  pers.* 

FRANCIS  HOUFGH,   800  acs.  Up. 

Co.   of   New  Norf.,    17   May    1637,    p. 

418.  Beg.  at  the  first  Cr.  of  Nansa- 
mund river  on  the  S.  side,  extending 
towards  the  mouth  of  same,  Nly.  upon 
sd.  river,  Sly.  into  the  woods,  Wly.  up- 
on sd.  Cr.  &  Ely.  towards  the  maine 
river.    Trans,  of  16  pers.* 

SAME.  100  acs.  Same  Co.,  date  & 
page.  On  S.  side  of  Nansamund  Riv. 
between  land  of  Joseph  Sammon  &  John 
Gary,  S.  E.  into  the  woods,  N.  W.  upon 
the  river  &  S.  W.  &  N.  E.  along  the 
banke  of  the  maine  river,  sd.  land  be- 
ing a  Thickett.  Due  by  deed  of  sale 
from  Humphry  Scone. 


56 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


SAME.  200  acs.  Same  Co.,  date  & 
page.  Lying  betweene  land  of  Mr.  Rich- 
ard Bennett  &  his  own  land,  riming  W. 
into  the  woods,  E.  upon  the  river  & 
N.  &  S.  along  the  Cr.  side.  Due  by 
deed  of  sale  from  Humphry  Scone. 

SAME.  400  acs.  Same  Co.  &  date, 
page  419.  Ely.  upon  a  Cr.  about  3  mi. 
from  the  mouth  of  Nanzamund  Riv., 
extending  Wly.  upon  sd.  river  &  Sly. 
into  the  woods.  Due  by  deed  of  sale 
as  above. 

JOSEPH  JOHNSON,  of  London, 
Merchant,  to  FRANCIS  HOUFGH,  of 
Va.,  Gent.,  assignment  of  his  right  & 
title  of  all  land  due  unto  him  by  order 
of  Court  for  his  adventure  from  1618 
until  the  present  yeare,  whereof  is  land 
wanting  for  4  pers.  transported  this 
yeare  in  Capt.  Tobias  Felgates  shipp  the 
Defense  &c.  Consideration:  The  re- 
ceiving of  certaine  good  &  valuable  con- 
sideration of  sd.  Houfgh.  25  Jan.  1634, 
p.  419.  Signed:  Joseph  Johnson,  in 
the  presence  of:    Tho.  Dewe. 

BENJAMINE  HARRISON,  600  acs. 
James  Citty  Co.,  18  May  1637,  p.  420. 
S.  of  the  Riv.  about  V/2  mi.  up  the 
Upper  Chippokes  Cr.  upon  the  Ely. 
side  neare  land  graunted  unto  Jerimiah 
Clements,  bounding  upon  the  Ely.  side 
of  a  Sw.  over  against  Sandy  point.  500 
acs.  due  by  order  of  Ct.  3  June  1635 
&  alsoe  due  with  100  acs.  for  trans,  of 
12  pers:  Robert  Sorrell,  Thomas  Essing- 
ton,  Richard  James,  Richard  Court,  Hen. 
Bagly,  Humphry  Campton,  Mathew 
Hauton,  John  Resburye,  David  Vaughan, 
Mary  ,  Mathew  Rayson,  Christo- 
pher Hargrave. 

JOHN  WILKINS,  1300  acs.  Up.  Co. 
of  New  Norf.,  18  May  1637,  p.  420. 
E.  side  of  Nansamund  Riv.  on  the 
second  Cr.  on  S.  side  of  the  first  branch, 
runing  S.  W.  by  W.  along  the  Cr.,  E. 
S.  E.  into  the  woods,  N.  E.  upon  Mr. 
Whites  land  &  W.  upon  James  Knotts 
land.  50  acs.  for  his  own  per.  adv.  & 
1250  acs.  for  trans,  of  25  pers:  John 
Wilkins,  Bridgett  Craft,  Agnis  Medlam, 
Rosamar  Yetman,  Hen.  Medcalfe,  Georg 
Lee,  Paule  Trendale,  Tho.  Vincent,  Jane 
Hurman,  Richard  Graves,  Mary  Wells, 


David  Kiffin,  William  Woolfe,  Richard 
Leake,  William  Hutchison,  Anth.  Stens- 
bye,  Robert  Stensbye  (or  Steusbye), 
William  Wilborne,  Michael  Bysant, 
Wm.  Cocker,  Rowland  Rayne,  Thomasin 
his  wife,  A  Negro,  Stephen  Barnett, 
William  Crosman. 

THOMAS  ADDISON,  150  acs.  Up. 
of  New  Norf.,  in  Nansamund  Riv.,  20 
May  1637,  p.  421.  Bounded  N.  upon 
land  of  Daniell  Gookin,  Gent.,  S.  upon 
the  river,  &  W.  into  the  woods.  Trans, 
of  3  pers:  Georg  Borer,  Gregory 
Pagrane  (or  Pagrave),  Jon.  Powell. 

WILLIAM  FRYE,  250  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  20  May  1637,  p.  421.  In 
Chichahominy  Riv.  about  4  mi.  above 
Clay  banke,  Ely.  upon  the  river  &  S.  W. 
into  the  woods.  Trans,  of  5  pers:  John 
Burden,  Mathew  Forden,  Leon.  Cham- 
berlain, Francis  Burnett  (altered  to 
Barrett),  Ursula  Smith.  Note:  Re- 
newed 29  Aug.  1643  &  150  acs.  added. 
Test:    Samll.  Abott,  CI. 

THOMAS  HAMPTON,  700  acs.  Up. 
Co.  of  New  Norf.,  19  May  1637,  p. 
422.  In  Nansamund  Riv.,  E.  upon 
same,  W.  into  the  woods,  S.  upon  two 
small  Indian  feilds  near  adj.  unto 
Powells  Cr.  &  Nly.  downward  the  sd. 
river.  Trans,  of  14  pers:  Georg  Sheare, 
William  Read,  Richard  Harris,  Eliza. 
Harris,  Thomas  Thomas,  Eliza.  Thomas, 
Eliza.  White,  Robt.  Nuttall  (first  writ- 
ten Thomas),  John  White,  Edward 
White,  Jarvis  Smith,  William  Ward, 
Randall  Browne,  Ann  Davenport. 

THOMAS  HAMPTON,  Clerke,  300 
acs.  same  Co.,  date  &  page.  Ely.  upon 
Nansamund  Riv.,  W.  into  the  woods, 
S.  upon  land  of  Thomas  Hampton  & 
Nly.  downward  the  sd.  Riv.  Trans,  of 
6  pers:  John  Bagworth,  Edward  Dudly, 
John  Bass,  Thomas  Hampton,  Jon. 
Browne,  Richard  Egleston. 

JOHN  RADISH  &  JOHN  BRAD- 
WELL,  16  acs.  James  Citty  Island,  20 
May  1637,  p.  423.  12  acs.  abutting  E. 
upon  land  formerly  in  possession  of 
Mary  Holland,  W.  upon  the  bounds  & 
limitts  there  determined,  S.  upto  the 
highway    runing    close    to    Goose    hill 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


57 


marsh  &  extending  Nwd.  40  pole,  be- 
ing the  breadth;  the  length  from  E.  to 
W.  48  po;  the  other  4  acs.  adj.  sd. 
land,  Edward  Travis  his  land  abutting 
Nly.  upon  it.  The  whole  16  acs.  due 
sd.  Radish  by  deed  of  sale  from  John 
Baldwin,  late  of  James  Island,  Gent.,  & 
now  the  moitye  due  sd.  Bradwell  by 
contract  &  bargaine  between  sd.  Radish 
&  Bradwell. 

THOMAS  HOLT,  500  acs.  Up.  Co. 
of  New  Norf.,  22  May  1637,  p.  423. 
N.  side  of  the  E.  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv., 
upon  the  maine  river,  Sly.  into  the 
woods,  N.  upon  the  head  of  the  river, 
Ely.  &  downe  the  river  lying  upon  a 
Cr.  joyning  upon  land  of  Thomas  Ran- 
shaw  Wly.  50  acs.  for  his  own  per. 
adv.  &  450  acs.  for  trans,  of  9  pers: 
Thomas  Marsh,  James  Arundell,  Yeo- 
man Gibson,  John  Drake,  Wm.  Smith, 
Toby  Smith,  Samll.  Taylor,  Georg  Tay- 
lor, Nathaniell  Cordey. 

HENRY  WOODHOWSE,  Gent.,  500 
acs.  Low.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  22  May 
1637,  p.  424.  Within  the  mouth  of  the 
second  baye  from  the  Long  Cr.  of  the 
Ewd.  side  of  Chisopeiake  Riv.  N.  &  S. 
along  the  baye,  E.  upon  the  baye  &  W. 
into  the  woods.  100  acs.  for  the  per. 
adv.  of  himselfe  &  wife  Mary  Wood- 
howse,  &  400  acs.  for  trans,  of  his 
daughter  Elizabeth  Woodhowse  &  7 
pers:  Hen.  Brightman,  Laur.  Wilson, 
Jacob  Bradchater  (or  Bradwater),  Jon. 
Symons,  Tho.  Symons,  Kaemo  of 
Camena,  Thomas  of  Potuxon. 

THOMAS  DAVIS,  300  acs.  Up.  Co. 
of  New  Norf.,  22  May  1637,  p.  424. 
Upon  the  S.  side  of  the  E.  br.  of  Eliz. 
Riv.  opposite  land  of  Thomas  Sawyer, 

5  or  6  mi.  up  the  river  Ely.  to  the  head 
upon  a  Cr.,  Nly.  upon  the  maine  river 

6  a  marsh,  Wly.  down  the  river  &  Sly. 
into  the  woods.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
Joane  Jobb,  Ann  Griffin,  Geo.  Tabott 
Susanna  Bony  (Bouy),  Robert  Pearse, 
Wm.  Pett. 

THOMAS  CODD,  300  acs.  in  the 
Up.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  22  May  1637, 
p.  425.  Adj.  Thomas  Holt,  lying  upon 
E.  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.  50  acs.  due  for 
his  per.  adv.  &  250  acs.  for  the  trans. 


of    5    persons.    Georg    Hockins    is    the 
only  other  name  mentioned. 

THOMAS  SAWYER,  300  acs.  in  the 
Up.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  22  May  1637, 
p.  425.  Upon  E.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.  adj. 
Thomas  Codd.  Due  for  the  trans,  of 
his  wife,  Frances  Sawyer  &  5  pers: 
Thos.  Kirke,  John  Sykes,  Richard  Gyl- 
yard,   Christo.   Hamon,   Wm.   Packford. 

THOMAS  BRICE,  200  acs.,  22  May 
1637,  p.  425.  100  acs.  upon  the  back 
creek  of  the  New  Poquoson,  Ely.  to- 
wards the  Bay  &  Nly.  upon  Samuel 
Bennett's  first  devident,  and  the  other 
100  acs.  being  upon  the  New  Poquoson 
River  Sly.  into  the  woods,  called  the 
Black  Walnutt  Neck.  Due  by  order  of 
court  dated  Aug.  28,  1633,  being  part 
of  500  acs.  by  the  said  order  granted 
in  right  and  by  guift  from  Sir  John 
Danvers,  Knight. 

WILLIAM  MORGAN,  alias  Brookes, 
100  acs.  in  Eliz.  City  Co.,  22  May 
1637,  p.  426.  Upon  the  narrow  of  the 
back  river  E.  by  S.  into  the  main  land, 
N.  upon  a  creek  which  parts  same  from 
land  of  John  Bowles  &  S.  upon  land  of 
Robert  Goodman.  Due  for  the  trans, 
of  2  servts:Jon.  Constantine  &  John 
Pugsley. 

WILLIAM  PARRY,  350  acs.  in  the 
Up.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  22  May  1637, 
p.  426.  At  the  entering  into  the  narrow 
of  the  Eastermost  branch  of  Nansamond 
River.  Due  for  the  trans,  of  his  wife 
Ann,  &  6  pers:  Eliza.  Greenwoods, 
Rich.  Ridges,  Hugh  Jones,  James  Mer- 
fee,  Wm.  Joanes,  Joseph  Crosia. 

THOMAS  ALLEN,  550  acs.  Low.  Co. 
of  New  Norf.,  6  May  1637,  p.  427.  To 
begin  Ely.  upon  first  br.  extending  Sly. 
out  of  the  first  baye  from  the  Long 
Creek  upon  the  E.  side  of  Chisopeiack 
Riv.,  into  the  woods  Sly.,  Wly.  towards 
the  great  Indian  feild  &c.  Trans.  11 
pers.* 

WILLIAM  PRIOR,  Gent.,  200  acs. 
Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  23  May  1637,  p.  427. 
N.  by  E.  upon  sd.  river,  S.  by  W.  into 
the  maine  woods,  E.  by  S.  upon  his 
owne  devdt.  &  W.  by  N.  upon  land  of 


58 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Lewis  Cocke.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Wil- 
liam Peirce,  Wm.  Norton,  Ann  Powell, 
Ann  Cooke. 

JOHN  GOOKIN,  Gent.,  350  acs.  Up. 
Co.  of  New  Norf.,  23  May  1637,  p. 
427.  Beg.  at  Mossey  point,  W.  upon 
Nansamund  Riv.,  E.  into  the  woods  & 
S.  adj.  the  Gleab  Land.  Trans,  of  7 
pers:  Thomas  Box,  Junr.,  Peter  Nor- 
man, Mary  Norman,  Jon.  Butler,  John 
Burden,  Robert  Hodges,  Walter  Car- 
penter. 

RICHARD  BELL  &  CHRISTOPHER 
LAWSON,  500  acs.  James  Citty  Co., 
23  May  1637,  p.  428.  Beg.  at  a  little 
Indian  feild  over  against  land  of  John 
Dansey,  N.  E.,  into  the  woods  S.  W. 
200  acs.  purchased  by  sd.  Bell  of 
Alexander  Stonner  &  50  acs.  purchased 
by  him  of  Thomas  Taylor,  to  whom  it 
was  due  for  his  per.  adv.;  250  acs.  due 
sd.  Lawson  for  trans,  of  5  pers:  Thomas 
Taylor,   Willi.   Reynolds,   Willi.   Coyte, 

Roger   Andrewes,    Anthony  ,    Ann 

Drawater. 

THEODORE  MOYSES,  2000  acs. 
James  Citty  Co.,  23  May  1637,  p.  428. 
Upon  Tanks  Pasbye  hayes  Cr.,  runing 
2  mi.  N.  W.  into  the  woods,  butting 
on  Chichahominy  Riv.  &  bounded  E. 
upon  land  of  John  Mendham.  Trans,  of 
40  pers:  Jon.  Notton,  Frances  Latuer 
(or  Lamer),  Wm.  Foster,  Edward 
Tenches,  Alice  Fuller,  Jon.  Eles,  Jon. 
Ferepoint,  Rich.  Gunny,  Tho.  Wake- 
feild,  Arthur  Patient,  Jon.  Winchester, 
Edward  Branton,  Rich.  Thorneton, 
Joanna  Michell,  Richard  Cock,  William 
Drumond,  Francis  Edsonne,  Fr.  Turner, 
Robert  Roles,  Euge.  Boles,  Robt.  Gaunt, 
Wm.  Hawkins,  Hen.  Bradshaw,  Rich. 
Weston,  Lewis  Abshere,  Ann  Belsome, 
Jon.  Cooke,  Robt.  Asten,  Adrey  Garrett, 
Katherine  Hockwell,  Edward  Bruton, 
Thomas  Monday,  Rich.  Edwards,  Wil- 
liam Pinnock,  Jon.  Hucock,  Wm.  Baker, 
Willi.  Griffin,  Wm.  Smith,  Thomas 
Cragg,  Edward  Simpkins. 

THOMAS  SYMMONS  ( Symons ) , 
100  acs.  Chas.  River  Co.,  23  May  1637, 
p.  429.  50  acs.  butting  upon  a  Cr.  neare 
adj.  land  of  Humphry  Loyd  &  50  acs. 
neare  land  of  Thomas  Raye,  bounded  on 


N.  E.  with  a  Sedgie  Cr.  &  on  S.  E.  with 
a  pynie  Sw.  Due  for  trans,  of  his  wife 
Alice  Robins  (first  written  Dobins)  & 
a  servt.  named  Richard  Key. 

JOHN  BURNETT,  of  Edenborough, 
Merchant,  150  acs.  Up.  Co.  of  New 
Norf.,  23  May  1637,  p.  429.  Adj.  to 
Mossey  point  belonging  to  John  Gookin, 
Gent.  Due  by  purchase  from  sd. 
Gookin,  to  whom  it  was  due  for  trans, 
of  3  pers:  Edward  Morgan,  John  Lon- 
don, William  Pensint. 

ROGER  SYMMONS,  50  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.  Co.,  23  May  1637,  p.  429.  Butting 
upon  the  plantation  of  Oxford,  bounded 
on  S.  with  the  old  Poquoson  &  on  N. 
with  a  Cr.  extending  Ely.  Due  for  his 
own  per.  adv. 

GEORG  UNWIN,  250  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.  25  May  1637,  p.  430.  Upon 
Checkros  Cr.,  E.  Sly.,  into  the  maine 
woods,  Wly.  upon  a  great  deep  Sw.  & 
Nly.  upon  the  Sunken  Marshes.  Trans, 
of  his  wife  Katherine,  his  daughters: 
Katherine  &  Elizabeth,  &  2  servts: 
William  Seth  (?),  Dorcas  ? 

THOMAS  PAULE  (Paul),  350  acs. 
James  Citty  Co.,  25  May  1637,  p.  430. 
Upon  a  great  deepe  Sw.  in  Chicha- 
hominy Riv.,  Sly.  into  the  woods,  Wly. 
upon  the  Pagan  Cr.  &  Nly.  upon  the 
sunken  marshes.  100  acs.  for  the  per. 
adv.  of  his  late  father  Francis  Paule  as 
being  an  Ancient  Planter,  50  acs.  for 
the  per.  adv.  of  his  mother  Mathew 
Paule,  50  acs.  for  his  own  per.  adv., 
50  acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of  his  sister 
Frances  Paule  &  100  acs.  for  trans,  of 
2   pers:    Tho.   Grindon,   Andrew  Hoer. 

JOHN  DANSEY,  100  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  25  May  1637,  p.  431.  Upon 
Tanks  Pasbye  hayes  Cr.  S.  W.,  N.  E. 
into  the  woods  beg.  at  a  little  Cr.  butt- 
ing upon  Chichahominy  Riv.  lying  in 
the  neck  of  Clay  banke.  Trans,  of  2  pers.* 

PETER  REY  &  WILLIAM  JACOB. 
350  acs.  Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  25  May 
1637,  p.  431.  At  the  head  of  New 
Towne  haven  next  adj.  land  of  Edward 
Rogers,  S.  E.  into  the  woods,  N.  W. 
upon  the  river.  S.  W.  &  N.  E.  along 
the  banke  of  sd.  river.    100  acs.  for  the 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


59 


per.  adv.  of  sd.  Rey  &  Margarett  his 
wife,  50  acs.  for  trans,  of  his  son  Henry 
Rey  &  100  acs.  by  assignment  from 
James  Pointeau,  to  whom  it  was  due 
for  trans,  of  himself  e  &  Anthony 
Lufurrier;  100  acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of 
sd.  Jacob  &  trans,  of  1  servt.  called 
Samuell  Hicks  (Hickes). 

WILLIAM  WILKINSON,  700  acs. 
in  the  Low.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  25  May 
1637,  p.  431.  Within  Lyn  haven  com- 
monly called  Chesopeian  River,  W.  up- 
on Capt.  Adam  Thorogood.  200  acs. 
due  by  assignment  from  Robert  New- 
berke,  Oct.  3,  1635,  which  land  was 
due  sd.  Newberke  for  his  own  per.  adv. 
&  trans,  of  3  persons.  100  acs.  due  for 
the  per.  adv.  of  himself  &  wife  Naomy 
Wilkinson  &  400  acs.  for  trans,  of  8 
pers:  Edward  Pearse,  Hugh  Jones, 
Martha  Deacon,  Thomas  Craftin,  Daniell 
Baker,  John  Boodes,  John  Johnson, 
Robert  Newberke,  Robert  Laughton, 
John  Goodwin,  Thomas  Preston. 

WILLIAM  DENHAM,  300  acs.  in 
Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  25  May  1637,  p.  432. 
About  3  mi.  up  New  Towne  Haven 
River,  N.  W.  from  land  of  Thomas 
Jordan,  &  opposite  land  of  Thomas 
Butler,  Clerke.  Due  for  the  trans,  of  6 
persons.* 

RICHARD  MILLTON,  75  acs.  in 
Charles  City  Co.,  26  May  1637,  p.  432. 
Being  at  Westover,  S.  upon  the  main 
river,  E.  upon  John  Clay,  West  upon 
William  Thomason  &  N.  upon  Herring 
Cr.,  which  land  is  half  of  a  plantation 
formerly  belonging  to  John  Davis  & 
John  Clay  in  equall  portions  with  all 
buildings  etc  which  sd.  Davis  sold  to 
Thomas  Stegg,  Merchant.  Due  by  deed 
of  sale  from  sd.  Stegg. 

ALICE  EDLOE,  Widdow,  350  acs. 
Henrico  Co.,  1  June  1637,  p.  433.  Be- 
tweene  Harrow  Attocks  &  the  falls  on 
the  same  side  of  the  river  that  Harrow 
Attocks  lyeth  some  2^4  miles,  from 
thence  joyning  to  the  great  Swamp.  50 
acs.  for  her  own  per.  adv.  &  300  acs.  for 
trans,  of  6  pers:  Robert  Castons,  Robert 
Salsbury,  Christopher  Gosse,  Thomas 
Burtlett,  Thomas  Wade,  Sarah  Glover. 


WILLIAM  HATCHER,  850  acs.  at 
Appamattock  Riv.,  10  July  1637,  p.  433. 
450  acs.  upon  the  Swifte  Cr.,  beg.  at  a 
little  Cr.  lying  N.  E.  thereon  &c,  50 
acs.  allowed  for  a  small  island  therein 
with  a  Sw.  &  marshes;  400  acs.  side- 
ing  upon  the  sd.  land.  450  acs.  due  by 
assignment  from  William  Clarke  &  400 
acs.  for  his  own  per.  adv.  &  trans,  of 
7  pers:  Benjamine  Gregory,  Tho. 
Browne,  Charles  Howell,  Eliza.  Willis, 
Richard  Radford,  John  Winchester, 
Alice  Emmerton. 

WILLIAM  COTTON,  Clerke,  350 
acs.  called  the  old  mans  neck,  bet.  two 
maine  branches  of  Hungars  Cr.,  Ely. 
into  the  woods,  Wly.  down  sd.  Cr.  & 
N.  upon  land  of  Capt.  William  Stone, 
parted  from  same  by  one  of  the  sd. 
branches.  100  acs.  for  his  own  &  the 
per.  adv.  of  his  wife  Ann  Graves  & 
250  acs.  for  trans,  of  5  pers:  Elianor 
Hill,  Richard  Hill,  Edward  Esson  &  2 
Negroes:     10  July,  1637,  p.  434. 

JOHN  BAKER,  200  acs.  Henrico 
Co.,  12  July  1637,  p.  434.  Neare  unto 
Varinaes,  Ely.  upon  the  head  of  land  of 
Seath  Ward,  Sly.  upon  land  of  sd.  Baker 
&  William  Dauxe,  &  W.  toward  Capt. 
Davis  his  bottome.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
John  Clarke,  Morgan  Watkins,  John 
Mills,  Elizabeth  Wright. 

HANNAH  BOYES,  daughter  &  heire 
of  Luke  Boyes,  late  of  Henrico,  300  acs., 
13  July  1637,  p.  435.  N.  W.  upon  the 
river  &  joyning  upon  land  of  her 
Mother  Alice  Edloe  on  the  E.  50  acs. 
due  in  right  of  her  father,  to  whom  it 
was  due  for  his  per.  adv.  &  250  acs. 
for  trans,  of  5  servts.  by  her  father: 
Thomas  Lewis,  Robert  Hallum,  Joseph 
Ryall,    Edward    Holland,    Oliver    Allen. 

MATHEW  EDLOE,  (Edlowe),  son 
&  heir  to  Matthew  Edloe,  late  of  Va., 
deed.,  1200  acs.  upon  the  N.  side  of 
James  Riv.  over  against  the  Upper  Chip- 
pokes  Cr.,  S.  W.  upon  the  maine  river 
&  N.  E.  into  the  woods  towards  Dance- 
ing  point.  12  July  1637,  p.  435.  Due 
in  right  of  24  servts.  trans,  at  the  costs 
of  his  father:  Math.  Edloe,  Hugh  Tyd- 
der,  Wm.  Deane,  Edwd.  Tompson,  Wm. 
Cox,   Eliz.  Jax    (Jux   ?).    (Note:    This 


60 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


may  be  intended  for  "ux" — wife), 
Griff.  Roberts,  Fr.  Roberts,  Jon.  Liches- 
ton,  Peter  Homes,  Evans  Kemp,  Jon. 
Buxton,  Tho.  Crosby,  Rand.  Heyward, 
Hen.  Croft,  Tho.  Morris,  Tho.  Rogers, 
Step.  Pettis,  Chri.  Jones,  Wm.  Marsten, 
(or  Marshen),  Jon.  Bethone,  Tho. 
Martin,  Jon.  Seaton,  Geo.  Pricklove. 

THOMAS  SHIPPEY,  300  acs.  Henri- 
co Co.,  11  July  1637,  p.  436.  About  2 
mi.  above  Curies,  S.  upon  a  great  br.  of 
the  4  Mi.  Cr.,  E.  by  S.  upon  the  maine 
land,  W.  by  N.  by  the  side  of  sd.  Cr. 
towards  the  head  of  the  Cr.  into  the 
maine  woods.  50  acs.  for  his  own  per. 
adv.  &  250  acs.  for  trans,  of  5  pers: 
Eliza.  Shippey,  Jeffery  Browne,  Robert 
Cole,    Thomas    Brookes,    John    Cawker. 

THOMAS  MARKHAM,  300  acs. 
Henrico  Co.,  11  July  1637,  p.  436.  N. 
upon  the  4  Mi.  Cr.,  W.  upon  the  river, 
E.  upon  the  maine  &  S.  upon  Curies 
joyning  upon  Baylys  land.  100  acs.  in 
right  of  his  wife  Susan  Markham,  the 
relict  of  Robert  Greenleafe,  to  whom  it 
was  due  as  being  an  Ancient  Planter  & 
50  acs.  for  her  owne  per.  adv.;  50  acs. 
for  the  per.  adv.  of  sd.  Markham  &  100 
acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers:  John  Foker, 
Richard  Wall. 

WILLIAM  FARRAR,  sonne  &  heire 
to  William  Farrar,  late  of  Henrico, 
deed.,  2000  acs.  Henrico  Co.,  11  June 
1637,  p.  436.  Abutting  Ely.  upon  the 
Gleab  land  of  Varina,   extending  Wly. 

to  the  bottome  of Island,  Sly.  upon 

the  maine  river  &  Nly.  into  the  woods. 
Trans,  at  his  owne  costs  of  40  pers: 
Tho.  Williams,  Rich.  Johnson,  Jon. 
Hely,  Jon.  Frame  (or  France),  Eustace 
Downes,  Jon.  Pead,  Edwd.  Fewson, 
Rich.  Greeke,  James  Rigsby,  Jon.  Pratt, 
Eliza.  Foster,  Jon.  Hues,  Hen.  Gyllom, 
Wm.  Thomas,  Jon.  Baker,  Patrick 
Robinson,  Christo.  Penhorne,  Math. 
Waraner,  Jon.  Smith,  Wm.  Towers, 
Wm.  Baker,  Edwd.  Hooke,  Mary 
Heynes,  John  Garner,  Wm.  Richardson, 
Jon.  Howman,  Math.  Brownridge,  Rich. 
Lewd,  Jon.  Gibson,  Jon.  Price,  Fr. 
Posey,  James  Roberts,  Robert  Turner, 
William  Dawson,  Giles  Crump,  Rich. 
Garner,  Howell  Edmonds,  Martin 
Dimock,  Henry  Howell,  Robert  Coleman. 


RICHARD  GREETE,  300  acs.  Henri- 
co  Co.,  11  July  1637,  p.  437.  S.  upon 
land  of  Thomas  Sheppey  upon  the  4 
Mi.  Cr.,  E.  by  S.  upon  the  maine  land 
&  W.  by  N.  by  sd.  Cr.  to  the  head 
thereof.  50  acs.  due  in  right  of  Sarah 
Dalahay,  wife  of  Gringall  Delahay, 
whoe  surrendered  his  claim  for  her 
trans,  to  sd.  Greete,  &  250  acs.  for  the 
trans,  of  3  wives  &  2  servants:  Elianor 
Greet,  Alice  Greete,  Margarett  Thomas, 
his  3  wives,  John  Howell  &  Richard 
servants;  Sarah  Delahay. 

MARY  BOX,  daughter  &  heire  of 
John  Box,  300  acs.  Henrico  Co.,  12 
July  1637,  p.  438.  N.  W.  upon  the 
Swife  Cr.  by  Appamattuck  Riv.  near 
the  land  of  Charles  Magnor,  now  in 
possession  of  William  Hayward  &  Tun- 
ing S.  E.  into  the  woods.  100  acs.  due 
in  right  of  her  father  as  being  an 
Ancient  Planter  &  200  acs.  for  trans,  of 
her  mother  Mary  Box  &  3  servts:  Tho. 
Neale,  Edward  Holland,  William  . 

CAPT.  THOMAS  HARRIS,  700  acs. 
in  Henrico  Co.,  12  July  1637,  p.  438. 
Called  by  the  name  of  the  Long  feild 
with  Sw.  &  marshes,  beg.  at  a  little  Cr. 
over  against  the  land  of  Capt.  Martin, 
bounded  Nwd.  on  the  backside  of  the 
Sw.,  Wwd.  on  the  maine  river,  &  S.  E. 
towards  Bremoes  devident.  Due  as  fol- 
loweth:  400  acs.  graunted  unto  Edward 
Gurganey  by  order  of  Court  1  Oct. 
1617  from  the  late  Treasurer  &  Co.  & 
bequeathed  by  Ann  Gurganey,  Widdowe 
of  sd.  Edward,  to  Thomas  Harris  as  by 
her  last  will  dated  11  Feb.  1619;  300 
acs.  for  trans,  of  8  pers.* 

FRANCIS  POYTHERS,  400  acs. 
Chas.  Citty  Co.,  13  July  1637,  p.  439. 
N.  upon  his  own  land,  S.  into  the  maine 
woods,  E.  upon  land  of  Capt.  Woodliffe 

6  W.  of  Baylyes  Cr.  50  acs.  for  his 
own  per.  adv.  &  350  acs.  for  trans,  of 

7  pers:  Richard  Wells,  Jone  Lucas,  Tho. 
Tompson,  Rich.  Fermer,  Bryan  Reycock, 
Francis  Hewes,  Richard  Whiting. 

FRANCIS  OSBORNE,  1300  acs.  in 
Appomattuck  Riv.,  bounding  N.  upon 
same,  S.  into  the  woods,  W.  upon  land 
of  Mr.  William  Farrar,  butting  Ely.  on 
Charles  Citty  now  in  the  tenure  of  Capt. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


61 


Francis  Epes.  14  July  1637,  p.  439. 
Due  in  right  of  his  late  father  Jenkin 
Osborne,  whoe  trans.  26  pers:  Mary 
Welch,  Wm.  Brock,  Tho.  Asson,  John 
Congly  (or  Cougly),  Thomas  Batman, 
Thomas  Tyler,  Geo.  Purser,  Hannah 
May,  Richard  Gaily,  Samll.  Ramsby, 
Rich.  Aboge  (or  A  boye),  Tho.  Baylye, 
Wm.  Waller,  John  Yeo,  Joane  Walters, 
John  Tinwell,  Wm.  Wright,  Symon 
Trencher,  Wm.  Lighthollier,  Hen. 
Ward,  Thomas  Lewis,  Wm.  Austin,  2 
Negroes,  1  Negroe  more,  Jon.  Chamell. 

THOMAS  CAUSSEY,  500  acs.  Chas. 
Citty  Co.,  14  July  1637,  p.  440.  300 
acs.  beg.  at  the  mouth  of  Appamattuck 
Riv.  at  the  S.  side,  bounded  W.  upon  a 
great  Cr.,  S.  into  the  maine  woods,  E. 
upon  Causey  feild  Cr.  200  acs.  more 
beg.  at  sd.  Cr.  &  adj.  upon  land  of 
Capt.  Francis  Eppes.  Trans,  of  10  pers: 
Willi.  Maurice  (or  Maunce),  Jon. 
Chambers,  Daniell  Feild,  Robert  Boddi- 
cutt,  Jon.  Craft,  Robert  King,  Jon. 
Barker,  Jon.  Bridges,  Jon.  Hodges, 
Lawrance  Farburne. 

RICHARD  WARD,  100  acs.  in 
Varina,  Henrico  Co.,  14  July  1637,  p. 
440.  S.  W.  toward  the  2  Mi.  Cr.,  N. 
W.  into  the  maine  woods,  Sly.  upon 
land  of  John  Baker  &  E.  N.  E.  to  the 
sd.  Cr.  50  acs.  due  for  his  owne  per. 
adv.,  &  50  acs.  by  purchase  from  Barth- 
lomew  Farthing,  to  whom  it  was  due 
for  trans,  of  1  servant  called  Sarah  Breman. 

ALICE  EDLOE,  100  acs.  Henrico 
Co.,  14  July  1637,  p.  441.  Lying  2% 
mi.  above  Harroe  Attocks  towards  the 
falls  on  the  same  side  of  the  River  in  a 
Sw.  betwixt  land  belonging  to  William 
Coxe  &  350  acs.  graunted  to  sd.  Alice, 
bounded  W.  by  S.  upon  the  maine  river, 
E.  by  N.  into  the  maine  woods  through 
sd.  Sw.,  beg.  12  ft.  on  that  side  of  a 
Cr.  towards  land  of  sd.  Coxe,  running 
up  the  river  &  abutting  her  own  land. 
Trans,  of  2  pers:  John  Williams,  Wil- 
liam Attaway. 

CAPT.  HENRY  BROWNE,  Esq.,  one 
of  the  Councell  of  State,  2250  acs. 
James  Cittie  Co.,  14  July  1637,  p.  441. 
On  the  S.  side  of  James  Riv.,  beg.  at 
the  halfe  way  tree,  runing  S.  by  W.  into 


the  woods,  butting  upon  the  maine 
river,  N.  by  E.,  in  breadth  1100  po., 
bounded  on  Westermost  side  with  a 
small  Sw.  close  to  the  river  side,  pass- 
ing through  some  part  of  the  same  a 
compleate  mile  into  the  woods  with 
trees  marked  all  the  way.  2000  acs. 
graunted  by  order  of  court  12  Dec. 
1634  upon  such  terms  &  conditions  as 
is  in  the  sd.  order  expressed  &  250  acs. 
by  purchase  from  Capt.  William  Perrye 
&  Capt.  Thomas  Osborne,  Overseers  of 
the  will  of  John  Smith,  whoe  by  sd. 
will  did  ordeyne  the  sd.  overseers  to 
make  sale  of  sd.  land.  The  following 
names  appear  under  this  record:  Capt. 
Henry  Browne,  Laur.  Bristoe,  Wm. 
Packett,  Tho.  Hutt,  Samll.  Flood,  Rich. 
Edwards,  Robt.  Jones,  Samll.  Burfoote, 
John  Ratsham,  Mingo  a  Negroe,  Samll. 
Swam,  (or  Swane),  Wm.  Billbrough, 
Rich.  Penill,  Stephen  Browne,  Ralph 
Wood,  Alice  Mills,  David  Warner, 
Franc,  a  Negroe,  Fr.  a  Negroe,  Anth.  a 
Negro,  Alexander  a  Negro,  Jon.  a 
Negro,  twoe  women  Negroes.  These 
being  transported  at  the  charg  of  Capt. 
Browne.  Mr.  Tho.  Hinton,  Mrs.  Ann 
Browne,  Mr.  Andrew  Noyce,  John  More- 
cock,  Georg  Jordan,  Amey  Humphrey, 
William  Berry,  Hontford  Stubbs,  these 
being  in  right  of  his  wife;  Edward 
Lownes,  Rich.  Christmas,  Wm.  Bow, 
Rich.  Makester,  Henry  Hart,  Wm. 
Westwood. 

LT.  RICHARD  POPELEY,  700  acs. 
Low.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  14  July  1637, 
p.  442.  Upon  the  Chesopeian  shore 
within  the  Territory  of  Lyn  haven,  Nly. 
upon  land  of  William  Layton,  Wly.  up- 
on the  river,  Ely.  into  the  woods  &  Sly. 
up  the  river.  Due  in  right  of  marriage 
with  Elizabeth  Southell  (or  Stethell — 
name  altered),  the  relict  of  Henry 
Southell  (?),  to  whom  it  was  due  for 
trans,  of  14  pers:  Elias  Light,  Rich. 
Light,  William  Layton,  Geo.  Lentall, 
Willi.  Bassnett,  Jason  Right,  John  Eves, 
Sarah  Palmer,  John  Duncombe,  Row- 
land Buckly,  Tho.  Heath,  Ralph  Simp- 
kins,  Hanna  Waddington,  Eliza.  Alcutt. 

WILLIAM  MILLS,  350  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  19  July  1637,  p.  443.  On  S. 
side  of  James  Riv.,  bounding  N.  upon 
Smiths  fort,  W.  by  N.  upon  the  maine 


62 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Cr.,  E.  by  S.  into  the  woods  &  up  the 
maine  Cr.  S.  by  W.  Trans,  of  7  pers: 
Wm.  Burges,  Wm.  Godfry,  Wm. 
Holliday,  John  Garrett,  Robert  Bateman, 
John  Grange,  Nicholas  Abdey. 

JOHN  GRAVES,  600  acs.  Eliz.  Citty 
Co.,  9  Aug.  1637,  p.  443.  Neare  unto 
the  upper  end  of  the  back  river,  bounded 
upon  Eastermost  side  of  the  land  of 
Capt.  Adam  Thorogood,  beg.  to  measure 
the  breadth  of  300  po.  about  a  pole  to 
the  Ewd.  of  the  now  dwelling  howse  of 
Oliver  Vanheck,  runing  W.  S.  W.  up 
the  river  &c.  Due  in  right  of  descent 
from  his  father  Thomas  Graves,  whoe 
trans,  at  his  own  costs:  himself e,  Kath- 
erine  Graves  his  wife,  John  Graves  the 
pattentee  &  Thomas  Graves,  Junr.  & 
8  pers:  Henry  Singleton,  Tho.  Edge, 
Robt.  Phillipps,  Tho.  Griggs,  Tho. 
Phillipps,  Franc.  White,  Wm.  Symbee, 
Jone  Packett. 

HENRY  POOLE,  Gent.,  150  acs. 
Low.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  9  Aug.  1637, 
p.  444.  Within  the  Territorie  of  Lyn 
haven,  Nly.  upon  land  late  belonging 
to  Henry  Southerne,  now  in  possession 
of  Lt.  Richard  Popeley,  Wly.  upon  the 
river,  Ely.  into  the  maine  woods  &  Sly. 
upon  the  river.  50  acs.  for  his  owne 
per.  adv.  &  100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2 
pers:  Joseph  Smith,  James  Cooke. 

LEONARD  YEO,  850  acs.  Eliz.  Citty 
Co.,  9  Aug.  1637,  p.  444.  Upon  the 
head  of  a  br.  of  the  old  Poquoson  Cr., 
S.  E.  upon  land  of  Georg  Hull  &  John 
Layden,  Nly.  upon  the  New  Poquoson 
&  Wly.  upon  the  ridge  of  land.  50  acs. 
for  his  owne  per.  adv.  &  800  acs.  for 
trans,  of  16  pers:  Richard  Gedley,  John 
Moyes,  Thomas  Chapman,  John  Cole, 
Nathaniell  Martin,  Owen  Haes  (or 
Hues),  2  Negroes,  Walter  Bayne,  Row- 
land Garrett,  Nicholas  Crouch,  Thomas 
Lovell,  John  Spurway,  Richard  Stephens, 
John  Oldis,  John  Cooper. 

WILLIAM  PRIOR,  Gent.,  600  acs. 
Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  9  Aug.  1637,  p.  445. 
Being  a  long  sandy  point  to  the  Nwd. 
of  Queens  Cr.,  aboute  4  mi.  from  sd. 
Cr.,  N.  upon  a  Cr.,  E.  upon  the  maine 
river,  &  W.  into  the  woods.  Trans,  of 
12  pers:   Robert  Fossett,  Stephen  Benn, 


Grace  Amison,  Abraham  Keene,  Walter 
Downes,  Jon.  Burch,  Barnaby  Barnes, 
Anthony  Grimston,  Tho.  Wilkinson, 
William  Peirce,  Cornelius  Swillivan, 
Thomas  Attera.  Note:  This  pattern  sur- 
rendered &  renewed  in  the  name  of 
Joseph  Croshaw  by  Sir  John  Harvey. 
Test:    Tho.  Cooke,  CI. 

JOHN  CHEW,  Gent.,  700  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.  Co.,  9  Aug.  1637,  p.  445.  Bounded 
W.  by  N.  upon  500  acs.  graunted  to 
him  6  Aug.  1637,  upon  the  maine  river 
N.  by  E.,  upon  a  small  baye  S.  by  W. 
&  upon  the  great  baye  E.  by  S.  Trans, 
of  14  pers:  William  Winifrett,  Geo. 
Goodwin,  Thomas  Tompkins,  John 
Vaughan,  Robt.  Parr,  Chri.  Evans,  Ann 
Waterman,  Arnall  Freeze,  Walter  Hazle- 
ward,  Jon.  Weston,  Tho.  Winard,  1 
Negro  woman,  Jon.  Chew  1622,  Jon. 
Chew  1633. 

CAPT.    FRANCIS    HOOKE,    Esqr., 

100  acs.  Eliz.  Citty  Co.,  upon  the 
Strawberry  bancks,  9  Aug.  1637,  p.  445. 
Upon  a  Cr.  next  the  fort  feild,  S.  upon 
the  maine  river,  E.  upon  Thomas  Oldis 
land  &  N.  E.  upon  land  of  John  Neale. 
The  sd.  land  being  in  the  tenure  &  oc- 
cupation of  Robert  Partin  &  Gresham 
Covell.  Due  by  assignment  from  Capt. 
Thomas  Purifye,  Esq.,  to  whom  it  was 
graunted  by  pattent. 

Memord.  It  is  agreed  betweene  Capt. 
Thomas  Purifye,  Esqr.  on  the  one 
p(ar)te  and  Capt.  Francis  Hooke,  Esqr. 
on  the  other  pte  that  the  said  Capt. 
Thomas  Purifye  shall  at  all  times  here- 
after upon  demaund  assigne  sell  &  sett 
over  to  Capt.  Francis  Hooke  his  heires 
or  assignes  all  his  estate  right  title  in- 
terest and  Claime  which  hee  hath  in  or 
unto  one  hundred  acres  of  Land  lying 
upon  the  Strawberry  banckes  now  in  the 
occupation  of  Robert  Partin  and 
Gressam  Covell  togeather  wth  his  pat- 
tent  of  the  same  free  from  all  incum- 
brances and  alsoe  to  deliver  to  Capt. 
Francis  Hooke  the  possession  thereof. 
In  consideration  whereof  the  said  Capt. 
Francis  Hooke  is  to  give  Capt.  Purifye 
a  bond  for  the  paymt.  of  fower  Thow- 
sand  pounds  of  Tobacco  in  January  next 
or  threescore  and  tenn  pownds  sterl.  in 
March  next  at  the  Choice  of  the  said 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


63 


Capt.  Purifye  for  p  ( er )  f ormance  where- 
of the  said  (par) ties  doe  bind  them- 
selves each  to  other  their  heires  Execu- 
tors and  Adminrs.  in  the  sum  of  one 
hundred  pownds  sterl.  In  Witness 
whereof  the  said  pties  have  hereunto  put 
their  hands  this  16th  of  May  1637. 
(Signed)  Tho.  Purifye.  Signed  &  de- 
livered in  the  presence  of:  Robert 
Evelin  &  John  Redman.    Page  446. 

CAPT.  FRANCIS  HOOKE,  Esqr.  one 
of  the  Councell  of  State,  50  acs.  Eliz. 
Citty  Co.,  10  Aug.  1637,  p.  446. 
Comonly  called  Pascalls  Neck,  lying  S. 
upon  point  Comfort  Cr.,  E.  upon  Fox 
hill,  W.  upon  the  Indian  Stone,  N.  into 
the  woods.  Due  by  assignmt.  from  Mary 
Beanstead,  widdow  of  Thomas  Beanstead. 

JOHN  CHEW,  Gent.,  500  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.  Co.,  6  Aug.  1637,  p.  447.  Upon 
the  maine  Riv.  N.  by  E.,  upon  English 
his  Cr.  W.  by  N.,  upon  Clarkson  his 
Cr.  S.  by  W.  &  upon  a  neck  of  land  E. 
by  S.  Due  according  to  aforesd.  order 
for  the  adv.  of  himself e  &  9  pers.*  to 
the  sd.  Chas.  River. 

WILLIAM  PRIOR,  Gent.,  300  acs. 
Chas.  River  Co.,  11  Aug.  1637,  p.  447. 
N.  &  E.  upon  the  sd.  Riv.,  S.  by  W. 
into  the  woods,  E.  by  S.  upon  the  devdt. 
of  Capt.  Richard  Townesend  &  W.  by 
N.  upon  his  own  devdt.  Due  according 
to  the  aforesd.  order  for  the  Adv.  of 
himselfe  &  5  pers.  the  first  year  to  the 
sd.  Chas.  River:  William  Prior,  Mrs. 
Margarett  Prior,  uxor,  Tho.  Dilloe,  Jef- 
fery  Merchant,  Georg  Leigh,  Rice  Davis. 

BRIDGES  FREEMAN,  900  acs. 
James  Citty  Co.,  11  Aug.  1637,  p.  447. 
On  Wly.  side  of  Chichahominy  Riv., 
opposite  land  graunted  to  him  & 
Francis  Fowler,  pointing  S.  E.  upon  the 
maine  river  &  N.  W.  along  the  Cr.  up 
into  the  woods  next  adj.  place  comonly 
called  Juring  Point.  Trans,  of  18  pers: 
David  Minton,  Wm.  Wilshere,  Jon. 
Bridge,  David  Jones,  William  Nutt,  Fr. 
Aldrige,  Mathew  Williamson,  Katherine 
Leonard,  Jerimy  Stone,  Eliza.  Hart  (first 
written  Hunt),  Richard  Sanders,  Tho. 
Smith,  James  Redgison,  Eliza.  Hodges, 
Mercy  Seawell,  Jon.  Burden,  Robt. 
Flood,  Wm.  Elkton. 


SAME.  100  acs.  James  Citty  Co.,  12 
Aug.  1637,  p.  448.  Upon  the  Ely.  side 
&  within  the  mouth  of  Chichahominy 
Riv.,  next  adj.  land  in  possession  of  sd. 
Freeman  &  Francis  Fowler  a  Cr.  parting 
the  same.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Henry  Scott 
&  one  Richard  "testified  to  be  his  servt. 
by  Capt.  Uty." 

MARGARETT  ROGERS,  Widdowe, 
500  acs.  in  the  upper  Co.  of  New  Norf., 
14  Aug.  1637,  p.  448.  300  acs.  Nly. 
upon  Crosse  Cr.,  butting  upon  land 
lately  belonging  to  Thomas  Jorden,  a 
small  Cr.  runing  between,  Sly.  into  the 
woods  neare  unto  a  path  crossing  the 
head  of  the  Cr.  200  acs.  adj.  sd.  land 
towards  the  reedy  Sw,  &  runing  Sly. 
into  the  woods.  Due  for  trans,  of  10 
pers.  at  the  costs  of  her  late  dec'd.  hus- 
band Edward  Rogers.  Provided  never- 
thelesse  that  whereas  the  sd.  Margarett 
Rogers  is  now  with  child  by  the  sd. 
Edward  Rogers  that  if  the  child  bee 
borne  with  life  that  then  the  inheritance 
of  the  sd.  land  to  belong  to  sd.  child. 
The  following  names  appear:  Joane 
Davis,  Christ  Thorpe,  Nicholas  White, 
John  Bordman,  Jon.  Home,  Tho.  Bul- 
mur,  Randall  Jackson,  Peter  Eaton, 
Eliza.  Joanes,  Francis  Champins. 

SAME.  200  acs.  same  county  &  date, 
p.  449.  Lying  in  the  Crosse  Cr.  100 
acs.  adj.  land  lately  belonging  to  Tho- 
mas Jorden,  on  the  N.  side  of  the  Cr. 
&  runing  N.  W.  into  the  woods.  The 
other  100  acs.  on  the  S.  side  the  Cr., 
joyning  upon  her  own  land.  Due  by 
assignment  from  Richard  Freeland  to 
her  late  husband.  Provided  &c.  as  above. 

RICHARD  FREELAND  to  ED- 
WARD ROGERS  assignment  of  the 
above  tract,  9  June  1636,  p.  449- 
Signed  Richard  (his  marke)  Freeland. 
Witness:  Tho.  Cooke,  John  Home. 

HENRY  HART,  250  acs.  James  Cit- 
tie  Co.,  15  Aug.  1637,  p.  450.  At  the 
head  &  bounding  upon  the  great  Creek 
N.  W.,  into  the  woods  S.  by  E.,  upon 
a  great  Sw.  N.  W.  Due  for  trans,  of 
his  wife  Elizabeth  Hart  &  4  pers: 
Martin  Ward,  Phillipp  Cleaver,  Jone 
Walker,  William  Patrick. 


64 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


JOHN  HUCKS,  200  acs.  James  Citty 
Co.,  15  Aug.  1637,  p.  450.  S.  side  of 
James  Riv.,  N.  on  the  Crosse  Cr.,  on 
the  W.  side  of  land  of  Thomas  Rey- 
nolds &  upon  the  maine  Cr.  S.  W.  50 
acs.  for  his  owne  per.  adv.  &  150  acs. 
for  trans,  of  3  pers:  Jon.  Rawlings,  Jon. 
Hodson,  Jane  Moore. 

JOHN  ORCHARD,  350  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  15  Aug.  1637,  p.  450.  Right 
against  the  further  Gulfe  on  the  E.  side 
of  Chichahominy  Riv.  a  mile  from  the 
hether  side  of  Warrany  Landing  place, 
W.  N.  W.  upon  the  river,  S.  &  W. 
down  the  river  side  for  the  breadth  & 
E.  S.  E.  into  the  maine  woods.  Trans, 
of  his  first  wife  Ann,  deed.,  his  now 
wife  Mary,  his  owne  per.  adv.  &  4 
pers.  transported:  William  Oxford, 
John  Ward,  Margary  Price,  Francis 
MufFett. 

WILLIAM  CARTER,  200  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  15  Aug.  1637,  p.  451.  Sly. 
upon  land  formerly  graunted  to  him, 
Ely.  towards  Chippoecks  Cr.,  Wly.  upon 
sunken  Marsh  &  Nly.  into  the  bay  tree. 
Trans,  of  4  pers.* 

ROBERT  CRADDOCKE  &  JOHN 
DAVIS,  600  acs.  Henrico  Co.,  15  Aug. 
1637,  p.  451.  300  acs.  Nly.  upon  a 
great  Sw.,  Sly.  towards  land  of  Alice 
Edloe,  Widdowe,  Wly.  over  the  river 
&  Ely.  into  the  woods  called  the  Long- 
feild;  &  300  acs.  joyning  upon  the  sd. 
Longfeild  Nly.  the  land  included  in  this 
pattent  beg.  next  to  land  of  sd.  Alice 
Edloe.  300  acs.  due  by  assignment  from 
William  Cooke  &  Richard  Carpenter  & 
300  acs.  for  trans,  of  6  pers.* 

Memord:  That  I  John  Baugh  of 
Varina,  planter,  hath  assigned  unto 
William  Cooke  &  Richard  Carpenter  all 
my  right  and  title  that  I  have  unto  the 
land  taken  up  by  mee  in  this  pattent 
being  the  13th  of  June  1636.  Signed: 
John  Baugh.    Witness:    Benj.  Carrill. 

Memord:  That  wee  William  Cooke 
&  Richard  Carpenter,  planters,  doth  as- 
signe  &  sell  unto  John  Davis  &  Robert 
Craddock,  of  Harihatoxs,  planters,  all 
the  right  and  title  that  wee  the  above 


named  hath  according  unto  this  pattent. 
In  witness  whereof  wee  have  sett  our 
hands  the  29th  July  1637.  Signed: 
William  Cooke,  Richard  Carpenter. 
Witness:    John  Baugh.    Page  452. 

JOSEPH  ROYALL,  300  acs.  Henrico 
Co.,  15  Aug.  1637,  p.  452.  At  S.  E. 
side  of  Turkey  Island  Cr.,  runing  into 
the  woods  N.  E.  &  to  the  mouth  of  the 
Cr.  S.  W.  50  acs.  for  his  owne  per. 
adv.,  50  acs.  for  trans,  of  his  first  wife 
Thomasin,  50  acs.  for  his  now  wife 
Ann,  50  acs.  for  his  brother  Henry  & 
100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Robert 
Warwell,  Jon.  Wells. 

WILLIAM  REYNOLDS,  200  acs. 
Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  15  Aug.  1637,  p.  452. 
Beg.  at  Willsons  point,  runing  into  the 
woods  S.  W.,  abutting  to  Hatefeilds  Cr. 
&  N.  E.  upon  Queens  Cr.  Trans,  of  4 
pers:  Morris  Jones,  Richard  Pew,  John 
Butterum,  Ann  Banks. 

SAMUELL  JONES,  50  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.  Co.,  15  Aug.  1637,  p.  453.  Ely.  on 
land  of  William  Reynolds,  N.  E.  upon 
Queens  Cr.  &  S.  W.  into  the  woods. 
Trans,  of  1  servt.  called  Thomas  Hatt- 
feild. 

CAPT.  JOHN  SIBSEY,  1500  acs. 
Low.  New  Norf.  Co.,  17  Aug.  1637, 
p.  453.  Upon  the  W.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv. 
on  the  N.  side  thereof,  E.  upon  a  Cedar 
tree,  N.  W.  upon  the  maine  river  & 
S.  W.  upon  a  br.  of  sd.  river.  Trans, 
of  30  pers.* 

SAME.  1500  acs.  Same  date  &  page. 
Next  adj.  land  of  Mr.  Francis  Towers, 
N.  upon  the  maine  river,  E.  as  farr  as 
the  Westermost  parting  of  Crany  point 
Island  &  N.  along  the  maine  river  as 
farr  as  the  sd.  1500  acs.  may  conteyne. 
Due  for  trans,  of  30  pers.* 

JUSTINIAN  COOPER,  1050  acs. 
Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  16  Aug.  1637,  p. 
454.  N.  W.  upon  the  head  of  Lawnes 
Cr.,  S.  E.  upon  the  back  Cr.,  N.  E. 
upon  his  dwelling  howse  &  S.  W.  into 
the  woods.  50  acs.  for  his  own  per. 
adv.  &  1000  acs.  for  trans,  of  20  pers: 
Richard  Cosey,  Nich.  Mann,  Tohn  Cur- 
tis,    John     Coker,     Henry     Ronncifull, 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  I. 


65 


Clement  Evans,  Henry  Boney  (or 
Bouey),  James  Smith,  Geo.  Stacy,  Wil- 
liam Redman,  Georg  Archer,  William 
Bannister,  William  Cooke,  Samuell 
Eldrege,  William  Nesse,  Mary  Clinton, 
John  Davis,  Robt.  Rabye,  Richard  Smith, 
Wm.  Underwood  (first  written  Robert.) 

ELIZABETH  PACKER,  Widdowe, 
950  acs.  Henrico  Co.,  17  Aug.  1637,  p. 
454.  E.  upon  4  Mi.  Cr.,  W.  upon  land 
of  Seth  Ward,  S.  upon  the  river  &  N. 
into  the  woods.  Due  in  right  of  her 
late  husband  Serjant  William  Sharpe  & 
Thomas  Packer,  whoe  at  their  own  costs 
&  charges  trans.  19  pers:  Rich.  Vase, 
John  Thomas,  Lewis  Jones,  Leonard 
Houghton,  William  Cooke,  Peter  Hud- 
sey,  Edward  Jones,  Jon.  Ward,  William 
Wooley,  2  Negroe  servts.  to  Serjt  Wm. 
Sharp,  Thomas  Blancks,  Jacob  Dewitt, 
John  Haman,  Andrew  Pratt,  Christ. 
Stevenson,  Christ.  Beare,  Jon.  Shaddock, 
Francis  Stone,  servants  to  Tho.  Packer. 
Note:  Henrico  County  Index  to  Patents 
carried  this  name  as  Parker. 

EDWARD  TUNSTALL,  Gent.,  400 
acs.  Henrico  Co.,  16  Aug.  1637,  p.  455. 
In  Appamattuck  Riv.,  bounding  N.  up- 
on Henry  Miller,  W.  upon  the  Riv.,  & 
E.  upon  the  maine  woods.  150  acs.  due 
for  his  owne  per.  adv.  &  trans,  of  2 
servts.,  &  300  acs.  due  in  right  of  his 
wife  Martha,  due  to  her  from  her 
former  husband  Nicholas  Greenhill, 
whoe  trans,  the  sd.  Martha  &  5  pers. 
Edward  Tunstall,  Martha  his  wife,  Jon. 
Gill,  Richard  Clayton,  Robert  Rowden 
(or  Rowder),  James  Barker,  Thomas 
Thorneton,  James  Morris,  Joane  Higge- 
son. 

CHRISTOPHER  STOKES  (Stoakes), 
300  acs.  Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  16  Aug.  1637, 
p.  455.  At  the  New  Poquoson,  Sly.  up- 
on the  river,  Nly.  into  the  woods,  Ely. 
upon  a  small  brooke  between  sd.  land 
&  land  of  John  Watson  &  Wly.  towards 
the  Poquoson  damms.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
William  Freeman,  Samuell  Waltham, 
Richard  Shotbold,  Henry  Hickman, 
William  Watty,  Henry  Powell. 

JOHN  JACKSON,  250  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.  Co.,  17  Aug.  1637,  p.  455.  In  the 
New  Poquoson,  on  S.  side  of  Capt.  John 


Cheesemans  Cr.,  N.  E.  upon  same,  S. 
into  the  woods  with  a  br.  on  the  W., 
S.  W.  into  the  woods  with  a  Sw.  butt- 
ing to  Capt.  Cheesemans  land  S.  Trans, 
of  5  pers:  Robert  Tassell,  Peter  Buck, 
Peter  Stephens,  William  Woorke,  John 
Hill. 

PERCIVALL  CAMPION  (Champ- 
ion), 500  acs.  Up.  Co.  of  New  Norf., 
18  Aug.  1637,  p.  456.  W  N.  W.  upon 
Nansamund  Riv.,  E.  S.  E.  into  the 
woods,  S.  by  E.  upon  a  Cr.  &  N.  by  W. 
joyning  land  of  Mathew  Atkinson.  50 
acs.  for  his  own  per.  adv.,  50  acs.  for 
per.  adv.  of  his  wife  Mary  &  400  acs. 
due  for  trans,  of  8  pers:  John  Pemy 
(?),  Robert  Caully,  Nich.  Gower,  John 
Saye,  John  Laurwell,  Jon.  Price,  Arche- 
lass  Stephens,  James  Midleton. 

MATHEW  ATKINSON,  200  acs. 
Up.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  18  Aug.  1637, 
p.  456.  W.  N.  W.  upon  Nansamund 
Riv.,  E.  S.  E.  into  the  woods,  S.  by  E. 
upon  land  of  Percivall  Campion  &  N. 
by  W.  joyning  to  land  of  John  Gookin, 
Gent.  Due  for  his  per.  adv.  &  trans, 
of  2  sonns  &  1  servt:  Mathew  Atkinson, 
Junr.,  Thomas  Atkinson,  Tho.  Towning. 

THOMAS  TODD,  250  acs.  New 
Norf.  Co.,  18  Aug.  1637,  p.  457.  Upon 
S.  side  of  the  E.  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv., 
beg.  at  a  Cr.,  the  land  being  a  neck, 
bounded  up  the  river  E.  Nly.,  down  the 
river  W.  Sly.,  into  the  woods  S.  Ely. 
being  distant  from  the  mouth  or  en- 
trance of  sd.  branch  about  6  mi.  50  acs. 
for  his  own  per.  adv.  &  200  acs.  for 
trans,  of  4  pers:  Elizabeth  Todd,  his 
wife,  Mary  Whitmore,  William  Whiter- 
edge    (or    Witheredge),    James    Blesse. 

JAMES  KNOTT,  1550  acs.  Up.  Co. 
of  New  Norf.,  18  Aug.  1637,  p.  457. 
N.  E.  faceing  upon  Nansamund  Riv.,  S. 
into  the  woods,  E.  upon  the  second  Cr. 
&  W.  &  S.  upon  the  third  Cr.  50  acs. 
for  the  per.  adv.  of  his  wife  Elianor 
Knott  &  100  acs.  by  purchase  from 
Maudlin  Jones,  due  for  her  per.  adv.  & 
trans,  of  1  servt.  called  Robert  Bryan  & 
1400  acs.  for  trans,  of  28  pers:  Robert 

,     Henry    Yates,     Ellin    Williams, 

Ann  Craford,  Lewis  Vaughan,  Thomas 
Taylor,    Thomas    Broad,    John    Home, 


66 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Francis  Bisley,  John  Piper,  John  Popel- 
well,  Thomas  Brough,  Richard  Russell, 
Thomas  Sparrow,  Tho.  Ferreby,  Robert 
Maxe,  Robert  Selby,  Robert  Wells, 
Richard  Wheeler,  &  2  Negroes,  Rich- 
ard Nowell,  Walter  Blake,  Richard 
Reynolds. 

ROBERT  BENNETT,  700  acs.  Up. 
Co.  of  New  Norf.,  18  Aug.  1637,  p. 
458.  Aboute  a  mile  &  a  halfe  up  a  Cr. 
neare  the  mouth  of  Nansamund  Riv., 
beg.  at  a  pine  marked  with  the  letters 
of  his  name — RB — bordering  up  a  par- 
cell  of  land  marked  by  Robert  Newman 
upon  the  E.  side  of  sd.  Cr.,  the  Cr. 
runing  up  S.  or  neare  thereabouts  from 
the  river.  Trans,  of  14  pers:  James 
Leonard,  Peter  Rice,  Elizabeth  Gilbert, 
Georg  Rowles,  Robert  Raby,  Richard 
Haies,  Phillipp  Pharin,  (or  Phazin), 
Geo.  Rotherum,  John  Ford,  Jon.  Lee, 
Ann  Bussey,  Richard  Smith,  Edward 
May,  Elizabeth  Russey. 

GEORG  WHITE,  Clerke,  150  acs. 
Up.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  19  Aug.  1637, 
p.  458.  S.  upon  his  own  land,  N.  into 
the  woods,  E.  upon  land  of  John  Wil- 
kins  &  W.  upon  land  of  Francis  Hough. 
Trans,  of  his  wife  Blanch  White  &  2 
pers:  Peter  White,  Zachariah  Taylor. 
Note:  This  pattern  surrendered  &  re- 
newed with  other  bounds  with  an  addi- 
tion of  150  acs.  more.    Rich.  Kemp,  Sec. 

SAME.  200  acs.  Same  Co.  &  date, 
p.  459.  W.  upon  a  Cr.  deviding  this 
from  land  of  James  Knott  &  E.  upon 
the  first  Cr.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Georg 
White,  William  Moore,  John  Joice, 
Thomas  Cutchman. 

RICHARD  BENNETT,  Gent.,  2000 
acs.  Up.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  19  Aug. 
1637,  p.  459.  Being  a  neck  of  land  in 
Nansamund  Riv.  about  2  mi.  from  the 
point  or  beg.,  adj.  land  of  John  Parrott, 
beg.  upon  sd.  Riv.  at  Parraketo  point  & 
upon  the  Cr.  side  at  a  greate  Oyster 
bancke,  runing  from  the  Riv.  to  the  Cr. 
N.  W.  &  S.  E.  &  up  the  same  S.  W. 
Trans,  of  40  pers:  Jon.  Francis,  Ann 
Atwood,  Alex.  Garner,  Jon.  Hane  (or 
Have),  Eliza.  Husley,  Geo.  Lock,  Rich. 


Bird,  Jon.  Peters,  Jon.  Dee,  Tho.  Wil- 
liams, Gilbert  Lee,  Tho.  Jones,  Ambrose 
Bennett,  Rich.  Cullumbine,  Th(x_Luter, 
Robt.  Moore,  Henry  Rutkin,  Ricm 
Morris,  Austin  a  Negroe,  Ralph  Hewes, 
Thomas  "killed  wth  a  tree,"  Rich.  Glas- 
cock, Rich.  Glascocke,  Edward  Yorke, 
Willi.  Quillmead,  Peter  Bayly,  Robert 
Rawson,  Peter  White,  Willi.  Fowler, 
Wm.  Limpson,  William  Durand,  Robert 
Campeere,  Arthur  Wood,  Henry  John- 
son, Grace  his  wife,  James  Smith,  Mary 
Harding,  Arthur  Martin,  Georg  Bussey, 
Richard    Bennett. 

SAME.  350  acs.  Same  Co.  &  date, 
p.  460.  Being  a  neck  of  land  neare  a 
mile  within  Sandy  Cr.,  being  the  first 
Cr.  to  the  Wwd.  of  Crany  point,  sd. 
neck  lying  S.  W.  into  the  woods  &c, 
sd.  Cr.  going  in  &  out  betweene  Nansa- 
mund &  Eliz.  Rivers.  Trans,  of  7  pers: 
Thomas  Jefferies,  William  Ford,  John 
Jolly,  Robert  Farthing,  James  Willett, 
Tho.  Bennett,  John  Robinson. 

ROBERT  ROCKWELL,  250  acs.  Up. 
Co.  of  New  Norf.,  19  Aug.  1637,  p. 
460.  In  Nansamund  Riv.,  butting  upon 
land  of  Edward  Major,  bounded  by 
same  Cr.  binding  his  land,  50  acs.  due 
for  his  owne  per.  adv.  &  200  acs.  for 
trans,  of  his  wife  Sarah  Rockwell,  2 
children:  Mary  Rockwell,  Thomas  Rock- 
well &  1  servt:  Mary  Hayes. 

THOMAS  SMITH,  350  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  21  Aug.  1637,  p.  460.  Adj. 
unto  Weaver  his  plantation,  Sly.  to- 
wards a  br.  of  Kethes  Cr.,  a  mile  Ely. 
into  the  woods  &  on  N.  side  of  Edward 
Hall  &  William  Shute  (name  altered — 
first  written  White),  bounded  on  S. 
with  the  Beaver  damms.  50  acs.  for  his 
owne  per  adv.  &  100  acs.  by  purchase 
from  Silvester  Totnam  &  200  acs.  for 
trans,  of  4  pers.* 

SILVESTER  TOTNAM  unto  THO- 
MAS SMITH,  100  acs.  (above),  to- 
gether with  all  right  and  title  &c.  For 
good  &  valuable  consideration.  Dated 
1635.  Signed:  Silvester  Totnam,  in  the 
presence    of   John   Dennett.    Page   461. 


Patent  Book  No.  l 


PART  II. 


By  Sir  John  Harvey 


WILLIAM  CLARKE,  100  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.  Co.,  21  Aug.  1637,  p.  461.  E. 
upon  the  New  Poquoson  Riv.,  W.  into 
the  woods,  N.  in  breadth  upon  Oyster 
Cr.  &  S.  upon  the  reach  of  sd.  River. 
Due  for  trans,  of  2  pers.* 

PETER  HAYES,  350  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  21  Aug.  1637,  p.  461. 
Bounded  on  W.  with  land  of  Thomas 
Davis,  N.  &  N.  E.  with  Pagan  Cr.  & 
on  S.  &  S.  W.  with  the  maine  woods. 
Due  by  purchase  from  Georg  Hardye, 
who  purchased  from  Roger  Bagnall,  to 
whom  it  was  granted  by  pattent. 

Assignment  of  same  from  Roger  Bag- 
nall to  Georg  Hardye,  Shippright,  4 
Dec.  1636,  p.  462.  Witnesses:  Ann 
Jones,  Richard  Hart. 

Assignment  from  Georg  Hardye  to 
Peter  Hayes,  Planter,  11  Feb.  1636,  p. 
462.    Witness:    Tobias  Hurst. 

ROBERT  LUCAS,  150  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.  Co.,  21  Aug.  1637,  p.  462.  N.  up- 
on the  New  Poquoson  river,  S.  into  the 
woods,  E.  upon  the  damms  joyning  up- 
on land  of  John  Powell,  &  W.  into  the 
woods.    Trans,  of  3   pers.* 

THOMAS  WEEKES,  100  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  21  Aug.  1637,  p.  462.  Upon 
Chippokes  Cr.,  S.  into  the  woods,  Wil- 
liam Rookins  devdt.  on  the  W.  &  on  the 
E.  the  westermost  br.  of  a  little  cr. 
Trans,  of  his  wife  Elizabeth  Beardsty 
&  a  servt.  called  William  Jones. 

HUMPHRY  ENGLAND,  150  acs. 
James  Citty  Co.,  21  Aug.  1637,  p.  463. 
Up  Chichahominy  Riv.  being  a  neck  of 
land  called  the  redbanke  pointing  to  an 
island  belonging  to  William  Morgan, 
butting   towards   the   E.   upon   the   Riv. 


with  a  marsh  before  it  &  running  Wwd. 
into  the  woods  &  upon  S.  side  of  sd. 
Neck.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  John  England, 
Humphry  England,  Junr.,  James  Barnes. 

PETER  MOUNTEGUE,  150  acs.  Up. 
Co.  of  New  Norf.,  22  Aug.  1637,  p. 
463.  S.  into  the  woods,  N.  upon  Eliz. 
Riv.,  E.  upon  the  S.  br.  &  W.  upon  a 
Cr.  called  the  Oystershell  Necke.  Trans, 
of  3  pers:  Wm.  Jones,  Tho.  Redbye, 
Margt.  Harford.  Note:  Assigned  to 
Thomas  Marsh  alias  Rivers  &  confirmed 
by  Sir  Francis  Wyatt.  Rich.  Kemp,  Seer. 

THOMAS  BERNARD  (Barnard), 
Gent.,  500  acs.  Warwick  River  Co.,  22 
Aug.  1637,  p.  464.  N.  towards  the  Mills, 
S.  upon  the  back  Cr.  towards  land  lately 
belonging  to  Capt.  Richard  Stevens,  E. 
into  the  woods  towards  land  of  Zachar- 
iah  Cripps  &  W.  upon  Warwick  Riv. 
opposite  land  of  Capt.  Thomas  Flint. 
Trans,  of  10  pers:  William  Merrett, 
Jon.  English,  Grace  Lee,  Alex.  Lownd, 
Thomas  Taylor,  John  Flye,  Ann  Robin- 
son, Robert  Prichard,  Rich.  Gilbert, 
Robert  Browne. 

GEORG  BURCHER,  200  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  22  Aug.  1637,  p.  464.  Near 
the  head  of  a  little  Cr.,  Ely.  towards 
the  mouth  of  Lawnes  Cr.,  Nly.  towards 
mouth  of  Hog  Island  Cr.  Sly.  towards 
Chippokes  Creekes,  Sly.  into  the  woods 
&  Wly.  towards  James  Riv.  100  acs. 
for  per.  adv.  of  himself  &  wife  Ann 
Burcher  &  100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers: 
John  Jefferson,  Joane  Burcher. 

SAME.  300  acs.  Same  Co.  &  date, 
p.  465.  At  the  upper  Chippokes,  Ely. 
upon  land  of  John  Hacker,  Nly.  upon 
Martins  Brandon,  Sly.  upon  the  head  of 
the  little  Cr.  between  land  of  William 


68 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Pilkinton  &  John  Hacker,  &  Wly.  into 
the  maine  woods.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
Giles  Harwood,  Miles  Sumers,v  Tho. 
Jones,  Jon.  Love,  Dorothy  Andrews, 
Elianor  Bound. 

JAMES  BERRY,  350  acs.  Accomacke 
Co.,  22  Aug.  1637,  p.  465.  At  Magaty 
baye,  butting  upon  land  of  John  Ascum, 
Swd.  along  the  baye  &  E.  into  the 
woods.  100  acs.  for  per.  adv.  of  him- 
self &  wife  Elizabeth  Berry  &  250  acs. 
for  trans,  of  5  pers:  Henry  Lee,  Mary 
Nelson,  Joseph  Hally,  Mary  Nable, 
Robert  Man. 

JOHN  NEALE,  Merchant,  200  acs. 
Accomack  Co.,  22  Aug.  1637,  p.  465. 
At  the  head  of  Kings  Cr.,  abutting  on 
S.  side  of  John  Wilkins,  running  Sly. 
in  breadth  &  Ely.  in  length  into  the 
woods.  Sd.  land  purchased  by  Edward 
Bastwicke  of  William  Melling  by  whom 
it  was  assigned  to  sd.  Neale;  being  alsoe 
due  for  trans,  of  4  pers:  Francis 
Seamer,  Rich.  Hill,  Edward  Eason,  Tho- 
mas Moore. 

WILLIAM  MELLING,  of  Accomack, 
Gent.,  doe  binde  myselfe,  my  heirs, 
Exors.  &  assignes  to  procure  a  pattern 
for  Edward  Bestwicke,  his  heirs  &c.  for 
the  above  land;  which  sd.  pattern  to  be 
procured  upon  all  demaunds,  in  the 
meantime  giving  sd.  Bestwicke  full 
possession  of  the  sd.  plantation  & 
howses,  alwayes  provided  that  hee  medle 
not  with  the  howses  nor  anything  in  the 
cleare  ground  untill  such  time  as  the 
Cropp  is  Cured  strucke  and  carried 
away.  21  Oct.  1635,  p.  466.  Witnesses: 
Pascoe  Crocker,  Peter  Varloe.  Signed: 
William  Melling. 

Assignment  of  the  bill  of  Mr.  Melling 
unto  Mr.  John  Neale,  3  Dec.  1636,  p. 
466.    Signed:    Edward  Bestwicke. 

ALEXANDER  STOMAR  (Stomer), 
Brickmaker,  1  acr.  in  James  Island,  near 
the  brick  kill,  being  24  pearches  in 
length  &  ll/2  per.  in  breadth,  bounded 
on  W.  with  James  Riv.,  N.  with  a  little 
Sw.,  On  East  end  with  the  back  river 
&  on  S.  with  2  persimon  trees.  23  Aug. 
1637,  p.  466.  Fee  Rent:  1  Capon, 
provided  that  if  sd.  Stomer,  his  heirs 


&c.  shall  not  build  upon  the  sd.  acre 
within  6  months  then  it  shall  bee  law- 
ful for  any  other  to  make  choice  of  & 
build  upon  the  same,  etc. 

JOHN  WOODLIFE,  550  acs.  Chas. 
City  Co.,  24  Aug.  1637,  p.  467.  530 
acs.  in  the  Territorie  of  great  Weya- 
noake  neare  the  head  land  called  Beg- 
gars bush  bordering  W.  upon  land 
formerly  belonging  to  William  Parrott, 
E.  upon  Samuell  Jordans  land,  S.  upon 
the  maine  land  &  N.  upon  James  River; 
&  20  acs.  in  Charles  hundred  bordering 
E.  upon  James  Riv.,  W.  upon  the  place 
where  the  pale  rann,  S.  upon  sd.  Jor- 
dans land  &  N.  upon  land  of  William 
Julian.  Due  in  right  of  decent  from 
his  father  Capt.  John  Woodlife,  Esqr., 
of  Charles  Citty,  to  whom  it  was 
granted  by  Sir  Georg  Yeardly  in  the 
yeare  of  our  Lord  God  1620. 

GEORG  HOLMES,  350  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  24  Aug.  1637,  p.  468.  At 
the  head  of  Kethes  Cr.,  bounded  bet.  2 
swamps  meeting  both  in  one  head,  bear- 
ing N.  W.  into  the  woods,  upon  which 
land  he  is  now  seated  &  graunted  unto 
him  12  Sept.  1636.  100  acs.  for  the 
per.  adv.  or  himself  &  wife  Rebecca  & 
250  acs.  for  trans,  of  5  pers:  Thomas 
Browne,  Robert  Sharpe,  James  Wambly, 
Jeffery  Frye  &  Ann  . 

CHENEY  BOYES  (Boys-Boyse), 
1550  acs.  Chas.  Citty  Co.,  24  Aug. 
1637,  p.  468.  N.  upon  lime  hill  Sw., 
W.  upon  Merchants  hope  Cr.,  E.  into 
the  woods  &  S.  up  towards  the  head  of 
sd.  Cr.  100  acs.  due  for  his  per.  adv. 
as  being  an  Ancient  planter  before  the 
time  of  Sir  Thomas  Dale  his  Govmt., 
according  to  a  charter  of  orders  from 
the  Late  Treasurer  &  Co.  dated  18  Nov. 
1618,  &  1450  acs.  for  trans,  of  29  pers: 
Cheney  Boyse,  Rich.  Williams,  Lawr. 
Walker,  Tho.  Harris,  Thomas  Wheeler, 
Christ.  Rippin,  Jon.  Tomlinson,  Joane 
Tomlinson,  Jon.  Mason,  Jon.  Walker, 
Christ.  Easill,  Jon.  Siscock,  Oliver  Bis- 
hoppe,  Israeli  Johnson,  Humphry  Jones, 
Gilbert  Dowson,  Nich.  Shaw,  Wm. 
Backster,  Daniell  Coblier  (or  Collier), 
Wm.  Wale,  Wm.  Thorncombe,  Jon. 
Cole,     Eliz.     Greene,     Eliz.     Phillipps, 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


69 


Kath.  Yorke,  Jon.  Swift,  Margt.  Parr, 
Daniell  Murr,  Morgan  Rosier,  Wm. 
Holland. 

CHRISTOPHER  WOODWARD,  600 
acs.  Chas.  Citty  Co.,  24  Aug.  1637,  p. 
469.  Bounded  N.  upon  Apamattuck 
Riv.,  S.  into  the  woods,  E.  upon  land 
lately  belonging  to  William  Farrar, 
Gent.  &  W.  upon  the  winding  river. 
150  acs.  for  per.  adv.  of  himself,  his 
late  wife  Margarett,  his  now  wife 
Dorothy  Woodward  &  450  acs.  for 
trans,  of  9  pers:  Georg  Bassett,  John 
Francklin,  Phillipp  Thomas,  Henry 
Stevens,  Ann  Myner.  (Other  names  not 
given.) 

JOHN  BRODWELL,  300  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  24  Aug.  1637,  p.  469-  Part 
being  an  Island  lying  W.  upon  Chicha- 
hominy  Riv.  against  the  place  called  the 
Gulfe,  compassed  with  the  River  upon 
the  N.  &  soe  round  with  a  Cr.  from  the 
river  with  a  neck  of  land  butting  upon 
sd.  Island  lying  S.  W.  upon  the  river 
&  S.  W.  into  the  woods.  Trans,  of  6 
pers:  William  Downes,  Ambrose  Eadly, 
David  Williamson,  Edward  Browne, 
Jarvis  Rewed  (?)  Henry  Lawdeare. 

THOMAS  ELLIS,  50  acs.  James  Citty 
Co,  24  Aug.  1637,  p.  469-  Butting 
N.  E.  upon  Clay  banck  lying  at  the  Cr. 
mouth  runing  up  to  old  Pasbye  Hayes 
called  by  the  name  of  Trucking  point. 
Due  by  assignment  from  Alexander 
Stomer  for  trans,  of  1  servt.* 

JOHN  SEAWARD,  600  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co,  8  Mar.  1636,  p.  470.  Joyn- 
ing  upon  Goose  hill  Cr.  upon  the  N. 
side  of  the  maine  Cr,  along  upon  the 
Cr.  S.  W.  &  running  N.  W.  into  the 
woods.  Trans,  of  12  pers:  John  Wal- 
ker, Tho.  Belcher,  Edwd.  Bond,  Charles 
Jones,  Wm.  Griffin,  Kath.  Person,  Geo. 
Scales,  Robt.  Clarke,  Guy  Taylor,  & 
"three  others." 

JOHN  GARYE,  300  acs.  Up.  Co.  of 
New  Norf,  25  Aug.  1637,  p.  470.  On 
S.  side  of  Nansamund  Riv.  neare  adj. 
land  of  Joseph  Sammon,  S.  E.  into  the 
woods,  N.  W.  upon  the  river,  N.  E. 
&  S.  W.  along  the  banck  of  the  maine 


river  150  po.  in  length  up  the  river 
towards  land  of  Mr.  Daniell  Gookins. 
Trans,  of  6  pers.* 

LEIFT.  JOHN  UPTON,  1650  acs. 
Isle  of  Wight  Co,  25  Aug.  1637,  p. 
471.  About  3  mi.  up  Pagan  point  Cr, 
almost  W.  from  the  Cr.  into  the  woods, 
a  little  Cr.  runing  in  by  sd.  land  out  of 
Pagan  point  Cr.  Trans,  of  33  pers: 
Richard  Young,  Anthony  &  Mary, 
Negroes,  Florence  Richards,  Roger  Bag- 
nail,  Ralph  Harwood,  Thomas  Reeve, 
Richard  Spademan,  Edward  Burr,  Savage 
Merrie,  Wm.  Scot,  Rich.  Jones,  Fr. 
Savage,  Owen  Howell,  Nich.  Bushell, 
James  Parsons,  Jon.  Parker,  Lewis  Phil- 
lipps,  Morgan  Roberts,  Wm.  Davis,  Jon. 
Fitchett,  Morgan  Evans,  Christ.  Lewis, 
Phill  Kennersly,  Eliz.  King,  Martha 
Snow,  Mary  Johnson,  Jonas  Sadlington, 
Anth.  Tyler,  Peter  Hayes,  Richard 
Jackson,  William  Pincher,  Eliz.  Larkin. 

CAPT.  JOHN  CHEESMAN,  600  acs. 
Chas.  Riv.  Co,  8  Mar.  1636,  p.  471. 
S.  E.  upon  the  New  Poquoson  riv,  N. 
W.  into  the  woods  by  Cheesemans  Cr, 
towards  a  ridge  of  land  adj.  S.  W.  on 
land  of  Thomas  Hawkins.  Trans,  of  12 
pers:  Christo.  Averitt,  Phillip  Averit, 
Mary  a  Negro,  Edward  Catterell,  Joane 
Bolton,  Robert  Cockett,  Richard  During 
(or  Dining),  Richard  Ward,  Georg 
Costen,  Richard  Banks,  John  Harwell, 
Mathias  a  Negroe. 

SAME.  Same  county  &  date,  p.  472. 
At  the  new  Poquoson,  S.  W.  upon  land 
in  possession  of  Christopher  Stokes  & 
N.  Ely.  on  both  sides  the  river  (or 
run.)  300  acs.  due  by  deed  of  sale 
from  Edward  Cheesman  &  200  acs.  for 
trans,  of  4  pers.* 

JOSEPH  JOLLY,  350  acs.  Chas. 
Riv,  25  Aug.  1637,  p.  472.  S.  upon 
the  New  Poquoson  river,  N.  into  the 
woods,  E.  upon  land  of  William  Clarke 
&  W.  upon  land  of  John  Watson.  50 
acs.  due  for  his  per.  adv.  &  300  acs. 
for  trans,  of  his  wife  Margery  &  5  pers: 
Andrew  Howell,  Nathaniell  Clarke,  Jon. 
Bourne,    Nicholas   Porter,    Sarah   Jones. 

JOHN  DAVIS,  250  acs.  James  Citty 
Co,  26  Aug.  1637,  p.  472.    In  Chicha- 


70 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


hominy  Riv.,  N.  E.  into  the  woods,  S. 
W.  on  a  Cr.  &  on  E.  side  adj.  land  of 
Samuell  Kirby.  50  acs.  for  his  own 
per.  adv.  &  200  acs.  for  trans,  of  4 
pers:  Samll.  Fenn,  Walter  Willis,  Tho- 
mas Lodge,  Richard  Price. 

NICHOLAS  REYNOLDS,  1000  acs. 
at  Lawnes  Cr.,  S.  S.  E.  upon  same, 
N.  N.  E.  upon  land  of  Edward  Rogers, 
upon  land  of  Capt.  William  Peirce,  N. 
down  the  Cr.  &  E.  into  the  woods. 
Graunted  by  Capt.  Francis  West,  deed, 
to  Roger  Delke,  late  alsoe  dee'd.,  & 
now  due  sd.  Reynolds  by  intermarrying 
with  Alice  the  relict  of  sd.  Roger. 

CAPT.  FRANCIS  HOOKE,  Esq;., 
one  of  the  Councell  of  State,  &  to  him 
&  his  successors  whoe  shall  bee  Capt. 
of  the  fort  after  him  for  ever,  a  parcel 
of  land  comonly  called  by  the  name  of 
the  fort  feild  scituate  upon  the  Straw- 
berry bancks  in  Eliz.  Citty  Co.,  beg.  by 
the  plackett  well  which  is  upon  the  Cr. 
side  which  runneth  up  by  the  Gate 
howse  W.  &  soe  to  a  place  where  a 
howse  stood  where  one  Powell  lived, 
from  thence  directly  to  a  Spring  in  the 
banck  of  the  Cr.  right  against  the  howse 
of  Thomas  Oldis  E.  28  Aug.  1637,  p. 
473. 

WILLIAM  SPENCER,  Gent.,  550 
acs.  28  Aug.  1637,  p.  474.  E.  by  N. 
between  the  mouth  of  hog  Island  Cr. 
&  Lawnes  Cr.,  towards  the  river,  butt- 
ing S.  by  W.  upon  a  small  Cr.  by  the 
mouth  of  Lawnes  Cr.,  into  the  woods 
Wly.,  being  a  neck  of  land  bounded 
with  hog  Is.  Cr.  Trans,  of  11  pers: 
Anthony  Stoton,  David  Red,  Anthony, 
Hill,  Humphry  Woollierine,  Mary 
James,  John  Yepe,  Roger  Shelly,  Robert 
Cornish,  Richard  Brett. 

ROBERT  NEWMAN,  50  acs.  in  the 
Up.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  28  Aug.  1637, 
p.  474.  At  Nansamund  Riv.  bet.  his 
now  dwelling  house  &  land  of  Francis 
Hough.  Trans,  of  1  servt.,  Jobe  Jefferies. 

SAMUELL  SNEAD,  200  acs.  James 
Cittie  Co.,  28  Aug.  1637,  p.  474.  Beg. 
at  the  head  of  Kethes  Cr.,  runing  N.  W. 
adj.  land  of  Georg  Holmes,  S.  W.  to 
a  Sw.  neare  adj.  where  a  marked  tree 


stands,  S.  W.  one  degree  Wly.  to  place 
comonly  called  the  meadowes,  thence 
towards  land  of  Thomas  Smith  to  a 
marked  tree  neare  the  Cow  pen  thence 
N.  E.  to  beg.  Trans,  of  4  pers.*  Re- 
newed 19  Mar.  1643  in  the  name  of 
Alice  Snead.    Test:    Samll.   Abbott,   CI. 

WILLIAM  BARKER,  Marriner,  600 
acs.  Chas.  Citty  Co.,  29  Aug.  1637,  p. 
475.  Being  a  point  of  land  called 
Bikers  which  was  formerly  bounded  in 
Capt.  Nathaniell  Powells  devdt.  lying 
S.  Ely.  in  the  woods  &  Wly.  upon 
Chapmans   devdt.    Trans,    of    12   pers.* 

CAPT.  ROBERT  FELGATE,  250  acs. 
Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  29  Aug.  1637,  p.  475. 
E.  upon  land  of  Capt.  John  West,  N. 
upon  the  Gleabland,  N.  by  W.  upon 
land  of  John  Waine,  W.  by  S.  into  the 
woods  &  S.  upon  land  of  William 
Barber.  Due  for  adv.  of  himself  &  4 
pers.  the  first  year  to  the  said  planta- 
tion of  Chas.  River:  Erasmus  Felgate, 
Robert  Syler,  Mary  Mooreland,  Henry 
Thorne. 

JOHN  GUNDRY,  of  Eliz.  Citty, 
Labourer,  an  old  planter  who  hath  re- 
mayned  9  yeares  compleate  in  this  coun- 
try &  performed  to  the  Co.  upon  the 
comon  land  the  full  time  of  his  service 
agreed  on  &c.  for  his  first  generall 
devdt.,  to  be  augmented  &c,  150  acs. 
in  the  Territorie  of  Eliz.  Citty,  6  Dec. 
1620,  p.  476.  (By  Sir  George  Yeard- 
lye.)  (Note:  The  ground  belonging  to 
this  pattent  was  measured  by  mee  Wil- 
liam Clayborne,  Surveyor  &  bounded 
from  the  within  named  great  Cr.  along 
the  banck  of  the  river  75  po.  &  soe 
endeth  at  a  great  white  peeled  tree  & 
running  into  the  woods  with  a  right 
angle.  William  Clayborne.)  Sd.  land 
bordering  E.  upon  Southampton  Riv., 
W.  upon  the  maine  land,  S.  upon  land 
in  the  occupation  of  William  Capp  & 
N.  upon  or  towards  the  great  Cr.  of  the 
same  river.  100  acs.  for  his  per.  adv. 
&  50  acs.  for  the  per  adv.  of  Mary  his 
wife,  a  new  planter.  Fee  Rent:  1 
shiling  for  every  50  acs.,  etc. 

JOHN  GUNDRY  (Gunnery-Gunery) 
of  Kiquotan,  Planter,  to  CAPT.  ADAM 
THOROGOOD,    Gent.,     of    Kiquotan, 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


71 


bill  of  sale  of  the  abovementioned  tract 
of  land,  30  Dec.  1626,  p.  477.  Part  of 
which  land  sd.  Gundry  hath  lett  & 
farmed  out  as  followeth:  To  Thomas 
Thornborough  220  po.  for  5  years  yett 
to  come,  yeilding  for  rent  every  yeare  a 
hen  or  a  Capon,  leaveing  the  sd.  howse- 
ing  tenntable.  at  the  expiration  of  sd. 
terme;  to  Thomas  Flint  22  po.  for  4 
yrs.,  2  Capons  for  rent  yearely,  leaving 
&c,  to  Lancelott  Barnes  25  po.  for  5 
yrs.,  2  Capons  &c,  as  above,  which 
poles  are  by  the  river  side.  Sd.  Thoro- 
good  with  2  other  sufficient  sureties 
entered  into  bond  to  pay  sd.  Gundy  100 
lbs.  of  lawful  mony  of  England.  Pro- 
vided that  the  tenants  above  named  shall 
quietly  enjoy,  hold  &  keepe  either  the 
severall  shares  of  land  &  their  howses 
builded  thereon  the  full  terme  as  above 
expressed,  etc.  Signed:  John  Gundry. 
Witnesses:  Tho.  Crampe,  Edward  Cage, 
Esmer  Phillipps. 

WILLIAM  LANSDEN,  of  Kiquotan 
in  the  Corp.  of  Eliz.  Cittie,  Yeoman,  an 
old  planter,  100  acs.  3  June  1624,  p. 
479.  For  his  first  personall  devdt.,  to 
be  augmented  &c.  On  W.  side  of 
Southampton  Riv.  within  sd.  Corp.,  E. 
upon  sd.  Riv.,  W.  upon  the  maine  land, 
N.  upon  a  Cr.  deviding  this  from  land 
of  William  Cleyborne,  Gent.,  Ewd.  ex- 
tending 50  po.  at  16^  ft.  the  pole  unto 
other  land  of  sd.  Clayborne.  (By  Sir 
Francis  Wyatt.) 

CAPT.       ADAM       THOROGOOD, 

Esqr.,  &  one  of  the  Councell  of  State, 
5350  acs.  Low.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  19 
Sept.  1637,  p.  480.  Nly.  upon  Chiso- 
peian  Bay,  to  begin  at  the  first  Cr.  of 
that  Riv.,  running  to  a  broade  Cr.  that 
shooteth  behind  a  long  point  of  land, 
W.  into  the  maine  land,  Sly.  up  the 
Riv.  to  a  little  Island  shooting  into  the 
Riv.  of  Chisopeian.  Due  at  the  speciall 
recomendation  of  him  from  their  Lord- 
shipps  &  others  of  his  Majesties  most 
Honoble.  Privie  Councell  to  the  Govr. 
&  Councell  of  Va.,  &  alsoe,  viz:  50 
acs.  for  his  own  per.  adv.,  50  acs.  for 
per.  adv.  of  his  wife  Sarah  Thorogood 
&  5250  acs.  for  trans,  of  105  pers. 
Note:  In  addition  to  himself  &  wife, 
only  the  following  names  apear:    Tho. 


Thorogood,  Fr.  Newton,  James  Lending, 
Stephen  Barnard. 

SAME.  200  acs.  Eliz.  Citty  Co.,  20 
Sept.  1637,  p.  481.  Sly.  upon  land 
lately  belonging  to  John  Gundrye  & 
now  in  possession  of  sd.  Thorogood,  W. 
into  the  maine  land,  N.  upon  land  of 
Thomas  Bolding  &  E.  upon  Hampton 
Riv.  Due  by  purchase  from  Capt. 
William  Clayborne,  late  one  of  the  sd. 
Councell  &  Secretarie  of  State  for  Va. 

SAME.  200  acs.,  same  Co.,  date  & 
page.  S.  upon  the  back  river,  E.  upon 
land  of  Thomas  Thorneborough  &  W. 
upon  the  little  Otterdam.  Trans,  of  4 
pers:  Edward  Coleman,  Robert  Jackson, 
Tho.  Love,  William  Stevens. 

RICHARD  WELLS,  50  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.  Co.,  12  Sept.  1637,  p.  481.  Lying 
from  the  river  up  into  the  woods  N.  & 
by  W.  betweene  2  Crks.,  one  called 
Salvage  Cr.  &  the  other  a  small  Cr.  bet. 
the  devident  of  Mr.  William  Prior  & 
land  of  John  Broch.  Due  for  his  per. 
adv. 

ROBERT  NEWMAN,  150  acs.  Up. 
Co.  of  New  Norf.,  21  Sept.  1637,  p. 
482.  On  S.  side  of  Nansamund  Riv. 
adj.  land  of  John  Parrott,  beg.  at  Par- 
raketo  point.  Due  by  assignmt.  from 
Lt.  John  Upton. 

THOMAS  HAMPTON,  Clarke,  100 
acs.  Up.  Co.  New  Norf.,  21  Sept.  1637, 
p.  482.  Bounded  N.  Ely.  with  the  part- 
ing of  the  S.  &  W.  branches  of  Nansa- 
mund Riv.,  Sly.  with  a  small  Cr.  or 
Sw.  parting  the  sd.  ground  (being  an 
old  Indian  feild)  from  the  woodland 
ground  &  Wly.  into  the  woods,  most 
of  sd.  ground  being  an  old  Indian  feild. 
Trans,  of  2  pers:  James  Scott,  Randall 
Browne. 

LEIFT.  JOHN  UPTON,  850  acs.  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  23  Sept.  1637,  p.  482. 
Upon  the  head  of  a  br.  proceeding  out 
of  Warwicksquicke  Riv.  now  knowne 
by  the  name  of  New  Towne  haven,  ly- 
ing N.  W.  upon  sd.  br.,  S.  W.  into  the 
woods,  N.  E.  upon  sd.  br.  which  doth 
neare  butt  upon  the  head  of  Pagan  point 


72 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Cr.  Trans,  of  17  pers:  (Note:  The 
names  under  this  record  are  the  same  as 
the  first  seventeen  names  appearing  un- 
der Upton  patent  in  P.  B.  1,  p.  471.) 

SAME.  800  acs.  Same  location,  & 
date,  p.  483.  Due  for  trans,  of  16  pers. 
Note:  These  names  are  carried  in  his 
patent  for  1650  acs.  &  include  the  last 
16  names  referred  to  in  item  just  above, 
in  P.  B.  1,  p.  471.) 

FRANCIS  MORGAN,  50  acs.  Chas. 
Citty  (or  Chas.  River. — altered)  Co., 
23  Sept.  1637,  p.  483.  E.  adj.  Coxes 
Thickett.  Trans,  of  1  servt.  named  John 
Co  veil. 

MRS.  ELIZABETH  STEVENS 
(Stephens),  500  acs.  Warwick  Riv.  Co., 
23  Sept.  1637,  p.  484.  Towards  the 
head  of  Blunt  Point  Riv.,  abutting  Sly. 
upon  land  of  John  Bayneham,  extending 
Nly.  toward  the  head  of  sd.  Riv.  Due 
for  trans,  of  10  pers.*  by  her  father 
Abraham  Peircie,  late  of  Va.,  Esqr., 
which  was  taken  up  by  her  late  husband 
Capt.  Richard  Stevens  in  Waters  his 
Creeke  &  was  exchanged  with  Richard 
James,  Clerke  Atty.  for  Capt.  William 
Clayborne,  etc. 

FRANCIS  MORGAN,  100  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.  Co.,  26  Sept.  1637,  p.  484.  Lying 
N.  &  by  E.  upon  the  river,  S.  by  W. 
into  the  woods,  W.  by  S.  upon  devdt. 
of  Capt.  John  West,  E.  by  N.  upon 
Cox  Thickett.  Due  for  the  adv.  of  him- 
self &  Edward  Cheeseman  the  first 
yeare  to  sd.  Charles  River. 

CAPT.  FRANCIS  HOOKE,  2000 
acs.,  more  or  less,  on  Flowerdew  hun- 
dred side  by  a  Cr.  &  on  Martins  Bran- 
don side  by  Asheleys  bay  or  Capt.. 
Wards  Cr.,  the  land  being  called 
Speilmans  &  lying  over  against  Weya- 
noke.  26  Oct.  1637,  p.  485.  Granted 
by  order  of  Ct.,  6  Dec.  1634  which  hee 
is  alsoe  to  make  apepare  due  after  a 
survey  of  the  sd.  land  taken  by  soe 
many  persons  transported  according  to 
the  proportion  of  50  acs.  per  pole,  (or 
per  person.) 

JOHN  YATES,  250  acs.  Low.  Co.  of 
New  Norf.,  6  June  1637,  p.  485.    Upon 


the  E.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.  on  the  S.  side, 
beg.  at  a  cr.  on  the  W.  end  of  sd.  Neck, 
bounded  up  the  Riv.  E.  Nly.,  down  the 
Riv.  W.  Sly.,  into  the  woods  S.  Ely., 
distant  about  7  mi.  from  the  mouth  of 
the  Cr.  Trans,  of  5  pers.  The  only 
name  appearing  under  this  record  is 
Vincent  Coronell.  Note:  Renewed  in 
the  name  of  John  Godfry  &  50  acs. 
added,  22  July  1645.  Test:  Samll. 
Abbott,  CI. 

FRANCIS  FOWLER,  1200  acs.  James 
Cittie  Co.,  25  Oct.  1637,  p.  485.  1000 
acs.  on  W.  side  of  Juring  point  Cr., 
beg.  at  Crosse  Cr.  a  mile  above  sd. 
point,  sd.  Cr.  runing  W.  by  N.,  the 
maine  Cr.  runing  N.,  the  land  bearing 
into  the  woods  W.  on  the  maine  Cr. 
side  &  N.  towards  the  head  of  the  Cr. 
200  acs.  beg.  at  the  head  of  the  same 
Cr.,  bearing  into  the  woods  E.  &  to- 
wards the  mouth  of  the  great  Cr.  S. 
Trans,  of  20  pers:  William  Frye,  John 
Motly,  John  Smith,  Anthony  Taylor, 
Jon.  Jenkins,  Susan  Ward,  Richard 
Jones,  Charles  Rogers,  Henry  Smith, 
Robert  Nash,  John  Tomkeson,  Robert 
Lovell,  Roger  Grace,  John  Jenings, 
Robert  Purkeys,  Richard  West,  John 
Wallford,  Stephen  Standish,  Richard 
Coles,  Edward  Smith,  Wm.  Pate,  Tho- 
mas Flexneye,  Andrew  Adams,  Ann 
Goodrige. 

ZACHARIAH  CRIPPS,  Gent.,  200 
acs.  Warwick  Riv.  Co.,  25  Oct.  1637, 
p.  486.  In  the  woods  to  the  S.  E.  & 
by  S.  on  land  of  Mr.  Thomas  Barnard, 
S.  W.  by  S.  on  the  woods  joyning  to 
the  cleare  ground  of  sd.  Cripps,  on  N. 
W.  by  N.  with  an  old  fence  perteyning 
to  sd.  cleare  ground  &c.  Due  by  order 
of  Ct.,  21  Aug.  1633  &  alsoe  due  for 
trans,  of  4  pers:  John  Smith,  Robert 
Read,  Daniell  Stubbs,  Thomas  Morgin. 

CAPT.  JOHN  HOWE,  1000  acs. 
Accomack  Co.,  24  Oct.  1637,  p.  487. 
Upon  Cherrystones  Cr.  to  the  Ewd.  & 
at  the  head  of  same  where  it  devides 
into  2  branches,  bounding  sd.  land  on 
the  N.  E.  till  it  comes  to  the  tenn 
pownds  br.  &c.  crossing  the  head  of  the 
hog  pen  Cr.  etc.  Trans,  of  20  pers: 
John  How,  Luke  Aden,  Nich.  Searell, 
Tho.     Yeoman,     Rich.     Moores,     Jon. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


73 


Bancks,  Ralph  Person,  Tho.  Nute, 
Winifred  Nute,  Wm.  Croshen,  3 
Negroes,  Austin  Revell  (or  Renell),  1 
Negro,  Rich.  Hewitt,  Rebecca  Sharpe, 
Eliz.  Kerfoote,  Samuell  Powell,  Rich. 
Louder. 

OLIVER  SPRYE,  300  acs.  Up.  Co. 
of  New  Norf.,  24  Oct.  1637,  p.  487. 
Being  called  by  the  name  of  the 
thicken,  beg.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Daniell 
Gookins,  S.  W.  along  the  maine  river, 
N.  W.  into  the  woods  &  S.  E.  upon  the 
river.  Due  by  order  of  Ct.,  6  June  1635 
&  alsoe  due  for  trans,  of  6  pers:  James 
Hicks,  John  Longworthy,  Tho.  Bush, 
John  Dawson,  Georg  Wilcock,  John 
Cherry. 

SAME.  300  acs.  same  Co.,  24  Oct. 
1637,  p.  488.  On  Ewd.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv. 
near  the  head,  neare  adj.  land  taken  up 
in  the  right  of  Thomas  Davis,  upon  S. 
side  of  sd.  E.  branch,  E.  up  the  river, 
S.  into  the  woods  &  N.  upon  the  river. 
50  acs.  for  his  owne  per.  adv.,  &  250 
acs.  for  trans,  of  5  pers:  Richard  Hues, 
Jasper  Laflyn,  Richard  Vaus  (or  Vans), 
Wm.  Wright,  Jane  Wright.  Renewed 
in  the  name  of  Richard  Parsons.  Test: 
Tho.  Cooke,  CI. 

JOHN  CLARKSON,  100  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.,  23  Oct.  1637,  p.  488.  On  S.  side 
of  Willoughbys  Neck,  N.  upon  the  Cr., 
E.  upon  the  Baye,  S.  into  the  woods  & 
W.  upon  land  of  John  Thomas.  Due 
for  adv.  of  4  pers.*  the  2nd  yeare  of 
the  plantation  of  sd.  Chas.  River. 

SAME.  150  acs.,  same  Co.,  date  & 
page.  Butting  upon  his  own  land. 
Trans,  of  3  pers:  Peter  Death,  Jon. 
Bassnett,  James  Vocseen  (first  written 
Watson.) 

HENRY  CATELYN  (Catylin),  300 
acs.  Up.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  23  Oct. 
1637,  p.  489-  In  W.  most  br.  of  Eliz. 
Riv.  in  a  Cr.  runing  N.,  the  land  on  the 
W.  side  thereof,  being  bounded  within 
2  small  branches  &  another  small  br.  in 
the  Middest.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  John 
Musgrove,  Jon.  Tiffiney,  Jon.  Wyne, 
Leonard  Richardson,  Edward  Lilly,  Jon. 
Bond. 

ROBERT   NEWMAN,    50    acs.    Up. 


Co.   of  New  Norf.,    23    Oct.    1637,    p. 

489.  S.  side  of  Nansamund  Riv.,  adj. 
land  of  John  Parrott,  beg.  neare  Parra- 
keto  point  &  adj.  his  land  purchased 
from  Lt.  John  Upton.  Due  for  his. 
owne  per.  adv. 

THOMAS  EDGHILL,  100  acs.  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  23  Oct.  1637,  p.  489. 
Upon  a  Cr.  runing  S.  W.  out  of  the 
maine  Cr.  of  the  Pagan  Baye,  adj.  next 
to  John  Walkers  devdt.,  Wwd.  towards 
the  head  of  Vasters  (or  Vaslers)  Neck. 
50  acs.  due  for  his  per.  adv.  &  50  acs. 
for  the  per.  adv.  of  1  servt.  called 
Nicholas  Byram. 

JAMES  MILLER,  100  acs.  Chas.  Riv. 
Co.,  23  Oct.  1637,  p.  490.  Upon  the 
great  Otterdamms  at  the  head  of  the 
New  Poquoson  N.,  bounded  on  E.  with 
land  of  Robert  Lucas  &  Sly.  into  the 
woods.  Due  for  per.  adv.  of  himself 
&  wife  Mary. 

SAMUELL  EDMONDS,  350  acs. 
James  Citty  Co.,  23  Oct.  1637,  p.  490. 
E.  upon  land  of  Jerimiah  Clements,  N. 
upon  the  mouth  of  Up.  Chippokes  neck, 
W.  upon  land  of  William  Rookins  & 
S.  into  the  woods.    Trans,  of  7  pers.* 

HENRY  WILSONN  (Willson),  50 
acs.    Accomack   Co.,    29    Oct.    1637,   p. 

490.  S.  E.  by  S.  on  the  old  plantation 
Cr.,  N.  W.  by  N.  into  the  woods,  Wly. 
on  land  .of  William  Blower  &  Ely.  on 
land  of  Francis  Stockely.  Due  for  trans, 
of  1  servt:   Jasper  Molton. 

ROBERT  HOLLOM,  1000  acs. 
Henrico  Co.,  1  Nov.  1637,  p.  491. 
Butting  Sly.  upon  land  of  Hannah 
Boyce,  Wly.  upon  the  maine  river,  Nly. 
up  towards  the  falls  &  Ely.  up  into  the 
maine  woods,  being  right  opposite 
against  fallen  Cr.    Trans,  of  20  pers.* 

WILLIAM  EYRES,  250  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  1  Nov.  1637,  p.  491.  Beg. 
at  a  Red  point  that  is  joyning  upon  a 
small  Cr.,  running  up  from  the  maine 
Cr.  which  runneth  from  the  great  river 
called  Warwicksquicke  Cr.  W.  &  by  S. 
&  backwards  into  the  woods,  S.  &  by 
E.  upon  Nansamund  Riv.  Trans,  of  5 
pers.* 


74 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


SAME.  150  acs.,  aame  Co.,  date  and 
page.  Upon  the  maine  river  beg.  at  a 
Cr.  &  being  an  island  called  the  Long 
pond,  runing  by  the  river  S.  &  by  E. 
downward  &  N.  &  by  W.  upwards.  50 
acs.  due  by  order  of  Ct.,  6  Dec.  1634 
being  due  for  his  per.  adv.  &  100  acs. 
for  trans,  of  2  servts.* 

WILLIAM  COX,  150  acs.  Henrico 
Co.,  29  Oct.  1637,  p.  492.  About  2 J/2 
mi.  above  Harrow  Attocks,  W.  by  N. 
upon  the  maine  river,  Wly.  upon  the 
great  Sw.,  Ely.  into  the  woods  &  Sly. 
towards  Harrow  Attocks.  Trans,  of  3 
pers.* 

EPAPHRODITUS  LAWSON,  200 
acs.  Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  1  Nov.  1637, 
p.  492.  Adj.  land  of  William  Parker 
on  E.,  N.  W.  upon  Nansamund  Riv.  & 
S.  E.  into  the  woods.    Trans,  of  4  pers.* 

CAPT.  JOHN  CHEESEMAN,  500 
acs.  Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  1  Nov.  1637,  p. 
492.  At  the  New  Poquoson,  S.  Wly. 
upon  land  of  Thomas  Ramsey  &  N.  Ely. 
on  both  side  of  the  River  (or  Run) 
300  acs.  by  deed  of  sale  from  Edward 
Cheeseman  &  200  acs.  for  trans,  of  4 
pers.* 

GEORG  TRAVELLOR,  500  acs.  Ac- 
comack Co.,  1  Nov.  1637,  p.  493.  S.  E. 
by  S.  on  the  old  plantation  Cr.,  N.  W. 
by  N.  into  the  woods,  Wwd.  on  land  of 
John  Jenkins.  100  acs.  for  the  per.  adv. 
of  himself  &  wife  Alice  Travellor  & 
400  acs.  for  trans,  of  8  pers.* 

WILLIAM  JOHNSON,  50  acs.  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  29  Oct.  1637,  p.  493. 
Adj.  land  of  Arthur  Haslington  Ely., 
N.  W.  upon  Nansamund  Riv.  &  S.  E.  in- 
to the  woods.  Due  for  his  own  per.  adv. 

SAMUELL  CURBYE,  200  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  29  Oct.  1637,  p.  493.  S.  W. 
upon  Tanks  (or  Tauks)  Pasbye  Hayes 
Cr.,  S.  E.  upon  the  end  of  John  Dan- 
seys  land,  N.  E.  upon  Chichahominy 
Riv.  &  N.  W.  into  the  woods  halfe  a 
mile.  100  acs.  by  deed  of  sale  from 
Alexander  Stomer,  9  July  1636  &  100 
acs.  due  for  trans,  of  2  pers.* 

FRANCIS  MAULDEN,  400  acs.  in 
Nansamund  Riv.   on  the  N.  side,   beg. 


at  a  reedy  br.,  extending  up  the  Riv., 
S.  E.  upon  Dumpling  Island  &  N.  W. 
into  the  woods.  1  Nov.  1637,  p.  494. 
100  acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of  himself  & 
wife  Katherine  Maulden  &  300  acs.  for 
trans,  of  6  pers.* 

JAMES  WARRADINE,  350  acs. 
Chas.  Citty  Co.,  3  Nov.  1637,  p.  494. 
Butting  Wly.  upon  Baylyes  Cr.  next 
above  land  of  Mr.  John  Georg;  beg.  at 
the  third  island,  along  by  the  Cr.  Ely. 
into  the  woods.  Trans,  of  7  pers: 
Elizabeth  Collett,  Elizabeth  Carr,  Row- 
land Cotton,  Jacob  Blight,  John  Hall, 
Jon.  Grodson,  Richard  Langley. 

THOMAS  WHEELER,  200  acs.  Chas. 
Cittie  Co.,  29  Sept.  1637,  p.  495.  Be- 
ing a  neck  of  land  between  two  creeks, 
E.  upon  the  Cr.  that  parteth  Weyanoke 
land  &  W.  upon  Oldmans  (or  Old 
mans)  Cr.,  N.  upon  the  maine  woods 
&  S.  upon  land  of  Mrs.  Perry.  Due  for 
trans,  of  4  pers:  Jone  Colchester,  Rich- 
ard Phillipps,  William  Matherell,  Wil- 
liam Baker. 

HUGH  WYNN,  200  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  3  Nov.  1637,  p.  495.  About 
2  mi.  up  the  maine  Cr.  of  the  baye  of 
New  Towne  haven,  which  land  run- 
neth into  the  woods  N.  W.  &  up  the 
Cr.  S.  W.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  James 
Robinson,  Douglas  Clarke,  Eliz.  Revells, 
Charles  Callahan. 

EDWARD  STOCKDELL,  400  acs. 
Accomacke  Co.,  4  Nov.  1637,  p.  495. 
Upon  the  second  neck  beyond  William 
Andrews  plantation,  Sly.  upon  Hungars 
Cr.  &  Nly.  into  the  woods.  Trans,  of 
8  pers:  Edwd.  Phinly,  his  wife  &  1 
child,  Jon.  King,  Robt.  Dye,  Hen.  Stone, 
Thomas  Moulton,  Winifred  Lovell. 

PHILLIPP  TAYLOR,  500  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  4  Nov.  1637,  p.  496.  Butt- 
ing upon  a  Cr.  parting  the  land  of  Ed- 
ward Drew  &  Thomas  Powell.  100  acs. 
for  the  per.  adv.  of  himself  &  wife  & 
400  acs.  for  trans,  of  8  pers:  Tho. 
Willis,  Jon.  Charles,  Fr.  Bristoe,  Symon 
Wright,  Rebecca  Bayly,  Thomas  Ed- 
wards, Eliza.  Thomas,  Francisco  a 
Negroe. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


75 


RICHARD  KEMP,  Esqr.,  Secretary 
of  State,  &  to  his  Successors  for  ever 
600  acs.  in  James  Cittie  Co.,  14  Nov. 
1637,  p.  496.  Bounded  on  the  S.  with 
Johnsons  land,  upon  E.  end  with 
Archers  hope  Cr.,  upon  the  N.  side  at 
the  end  neare  sd.  Cr.  with  a  point  of 
land  &  a  little  Sw.  &  W.  into  the  woods 
&  part  with  a  great  deepe  Sw.  Whereas 
it  was  ordered  by  Act  of  Court,  5  Oct. 
1631,  that  in  respect  of  the  necessary 
attendance  of  the  Secretarie  at  James 
Citty  in  the  execution  of  his  place  & 
office  600  acs.  scituate  as  neare  James 
Citty  as  might  conveniently  be  found 
should  bee  laid  out  &  taken  upp  to  be- 
long to  the  place  of  Secretarie,  etc  Fee 
Rent:    4  pence  yearly. 

EPAPHRODITUS  LAWSON,  50  acs. 
Isle  of  Wight  Co.,    20  Nov.    1637,   p. 

497.  At  the  mouth  of  Warwicksquike 
river  alias  New  Towne  haven,  running 
N.  W.  into  the  woods  &c.  Due  by  as- 
signment from  Ellis  Dunridge,  to  whom 
it  was  due  for  his  own  per.  adv. 

JOHN  BAKER,  650  acs.  Chas  Citty 
Co.,  20  Nov.  1637,  p.  497.  150  acs. 
E.  upon  Causons  feild  Cr.,  N.  upon 
Appamattock  Riv.,  towards  the  Citty 
Cr.  W.  &  S.  into  the  maine  woods; 
500  acs.  E.  upon  sd.  River,  N.  upon  a 
reach  of  same,  W.  into  the  woods  &  S. 
up  along  the  Citty  Cr.  50  due*in  right 
of  his  first  wife  Priscilla  Palmer,  50 
acs.  by  deed  of  guift  from  his  Mother 
in  Law  Jone  Palmer  2  Jan.  1633  &  550 
acs.  due  for  his  own  per  adv.,  the  per 
adv.  of  his  late  wife  Alice,  of  his  wife 
Dorothy  &  for  trans,  of  8  pers:  Kath. 
Henborne,  Michaell  Tibbs,  Robt.  Squire, 
Jon.  Clason,  Anthony  Lee,  Jervis  Dick, 
Hugh  Baker,  Alice  Drewrye. 

NATHANIELL  FLOYD,  850  acs. 
Isle  of  Wight   Co.,    20  Nov.    1637,   p. 

498.  600  acs.  being  a  neck  about  4  mi. 
up  the  maine  Cr.  running  up  the  baye 
of  Warwicksquike,  the  sd.  neck  lying 
bet.  2  creeks  &c.  250  acs.  up  towards 
the  head  of  the  maine  Cr.  over  small 
crks.  or  brookes.  Trans,  of  17  pers: 
Christ.  Denn,  Robert  Leaderd,  Wm. 
Moyses,  Ambrose  Procter,  Tho.  Weare, 
Robt.  Barton,  Rober  Joyce,  Mathew 
Tomlin,  Jon.  Cox,  Rich.  Redock,  David 


Hopkins,  Flug  Floyd,  Wm.  Cox, 
Katherin  Folder,  Rich.  Carter,  Jon. 
Gillett,  Christ.  Thomas. 

THOMAS  HARWOOD,  100  acs. 
Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  20  Nov.  1637,  p.  498. 
E.  upon  the  New  Poquoson  river,  W. 
into  the  woods,  N.  upon  Francis 
Laugher,  &  S.  upon  the  river.  50  acs. 
by  assignmt.  from  Richard  Vauston  & 
50  acs.  in  right  of  John  Taylor,  due 
him  for  his  per.  adv. 

JOHN  JUDSON,  225  acs.  Chas.  Riv. 
Co.,  21  Nov.  1637,  p.  499.  Being  a 
neck  of  land  N.  into  the  woods,  S.  to 
Queens  Cr.  bet.  2  branches  of  same. 
50  acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of  William 
Geatley  (also  spelt  Gatlett)  the  first 
yeare  to  Chiskeiake;  50  acs.  for  the 
per.  adv.  of  Richard  Bartlett  the  first 
yeare  to  Chiskeiake  &  25  acs.  for  the 
per.  adv.  of  sd.  Judson  the  second  yeare 
to  Chiskeiake  &  100  acs.  for  trans,  into 
the  Colony  of  2  pers:  Walter  Goffe, 
Mary  Reynolds. 

WILLIAM     CROUTCH      (Crouch), 

50  acs.  Up.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  21 
Nov.  1637,  p.  499.  In  the  great  Cr.  on 
the  left  hand  goeing  into  the  mouth  of 
Eliz.  Riv.  about  2  mi.  on  the  N.  side 
from  Daniell  Tanner  butting  on  the  face 
of  the  Cr.  &c.  Trans,  of  1  servt:  John 
Freeman. 

JOHN  SALVAGE,  sonn  &  heire  to 
Ensigne  Thomas  Salvage,  late  of  Acco- 
mack, dec'd.,  a  tract  of  land  bounded 
with  the  Cr.  of  Accomack  on  the  S.,  the 
great  bay  on  the  W.,  Wiscaponson  on 
the  N.  &  the  maine  Ocean  on  the  E. 
Due  in  right  of  descent  from  his  sd. 
father  &  graunted  by  the  King  of  the 
Easterne  shore  to  sd.  Thomas  as  by 
deed  upon  record  under  his  hand  call- 
ing himself e  Lin  (or  Lui)  Stuchans  (?) 
21  Nov.  1637,  p.  499. 

CHRISTOPHER  STOKES  (Stoakes), 
400  acs.  Chas.  Riv.,  14  Aug.  1637,  p. 
500.  Adj.  land  of  Capt.  John  Chees- 
man,  Sly.  upon  his  own  land,  N.  W. 
upon  land  of  Thomas  Ranshaw  &  into 
the  woods  on  both  sides  of  the  Cr. 
Due  by  order  of  Ct.  12  March  1633, 
also  due  for  his  own  per.  adv.,  the  adv. 


76 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


of  his  wife  Elizabeth  Stokes  &  4  chil- 
dren: Christopher  Stokes,  William 
Stokes,  Henry  Stokes,  &  Eliza.  Stokes  & 
trans,  of  2  servts:  Wm.  Dickes,  Hen. 
Waltham. 

JOHN  TAYLOR,  50  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  22  Nov.  1637,  p.  500.  Be- 
ing an  Island  riming  up  the  Pagan  shore 
bet.  2  Crks.,  one  runing  S.  E.  &  the 
other  round  the  Island  bearing  to  the 
S.  W.,  opposite  against  land  of  Arthur 
Smith.    Due  for  his  per.  adv. 

THOMAS  POWELL,  100  acs.  Up. 
Co.  of  New  Norf.,  10  June  1637,  p. 
501.  S.  side  of  Nansamund  Riv.,  E.  S. 
E.  into  the  woods,  Nly.  into  the  marsh. 
50  acs.  for  his  own  &  50  acs.  for  per. 
adv.  of  a  servt.  named  Robert  Floyd 
(changed  to  Lloyd.) 

SAME.  200  acs.  Same  Co.,  date  & 
page.  1  mile  from  the  plantation  of  sd. 
Powell,  the  river  Wly.  winding  about 
a  point  of  marsh,  Sly.  into  the  woods. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  Geo.  Castle,  Robert 
Lowe,  Francis  Goodman,  William 
Bracele. 

GEORG  SAUGHIER  (also  written 
Slaughier),  200  acs.  Eliz.  Citty  Co.,  23 
Nov.  1637,  p.  501.  Ely.  upon  land  of 
Robert  Gould,  S.  upon  the  Otterdamms, 
N.  into  the  woods  &  Wly.  towards  the 
head  of  the  damms.  Trans,  of  his  wife 
Elizabeth  Saughier,  his  daughter  Eliza- 
beth Saughier,  his  brother  Robert 
Saugher  &  1  servt.  Margery  Hacker. 

HENRY  SNAILE  (Snayle)  (or 
Suaile-Suayle),  50  acs.  Isle  of  Wight 
Co.,  23  Nov.  1637,  p.  502.  Nly.  upon 
Pagan  Cr.,  S.  into  the  woods,  W.  upon 
land  of  Peter  Hayes  &  E.  upon  Moones 
Cr.  Due  by  assignmt.  of  the  right  of 
1  servt.  called  William  Taylor  from  Lt. 
John  Upton. 

THOMAS  DAVIS,  100  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  23  Nov.  1637,  p.  502. 
Called  the  Oyster  bancke  Neck,  joyning 
to  land  which  Thomas  Jorden  lately 
lived  upon  in  Warwicksquike  river  & 
now  called  New  Towne  haven,  N.  W. 
upon  the  Cr.  &  S.  W.  into  the  woods. 
Trans,  of  2  pers.* 


RICHARD  PRESTON,  100  acs.  upon 
the  uppermost  end  of  Thomas  Jordans 
great  Indianfeild  Neck,  butting  S.  E. 
upon  sd.  Neck,  beg.  at  the  E.  side  of  a 
small  runing  brooke  knowne  by  the 
name  of  the  Indian  Snares,  extending 
Ely.  for  breadth  &  N.  N.  W.  up  the 
sd.  brooke  into  the  woods.  Trans,  of  2 
servts.  called  Michaell  Vinkles  &  Wal- 
ter Brute. 

ROBERT  PARTIN,  40  acs.  Eliz.  Citty 
Co.,  24  Nov.  1637,  p.  503.  Bet.  the 
great  howse  &  the  Widdowe  Tompson 
land,  bounded  E.  by  same,  S.  on  the 
fort  feild,  W.  on  land  of  Robert 
Brasheare  &  N.  to  the  Church.  21  yr. 
lease.  Fee  Rent  yearely:  1  bbl.  sound 
&  sweete  Indian  Corne,  provided  dur- 
ing sd.  term  he  shall  sufficiently  people 
&  plant  sd.  land. 

JOHN  BROCHE,  400  acs.  Chas.  Riv. 
Co.,  24  Nov.  1637,  p.  503.  Butting 
upon  a  point  of  Queens  Cr.,  N.  E.  up- 
on the  maine  river  &  S.  W.  upon  sd. 
Cr.  100  acs.  for  his  own  &  per.  adv. 
of  his  wife  Barbery  Broche  &  trans,  of 
6  pers:  Adam — (fiist  written  Adam 
Oliver — altered),  Chr.  Cutler,  Tho. 
Owen,  Hen.  Guy,  Robert  Ward,  Eliz. 
Bennett.  Note:  Renewed  in  the  name 
of  Nicholas  Parnew.    Rich.  Kemp,  Seer. 

SAME.  300  acs.,  same  Co.  &  date, 
p.  504.  Bounded  by  a  Sw.  by  the  In- 
dian Cabin  lying  upon  Queens  Cr.,  run- 
ning N.  E.  into  the  forrest  abutting 
upon  a  piny  point.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
Nicholas  Bates,  Thomas  Sewell,  Wil- 
liam Savary,  Jon.  Walton,  Mary  Os- 
borne, Francis  Perris. 


DAVID  MANSELL,  500  acs.  in 
Martins  hundred,  within  James  Citty 
Co.,  adj.  his  own  plantation  or  neck  of 
land,  24  Nov.  1637,  p.  504.  Running 
backward  into  the  forrest  N.  E.  &  to- 
wards the  maine  river  S.  W.  adj.  land 
of  Mr.  Warren.  Trans,  of  10  pers: 
Richard  Kincott,  Jonas  Evans,  John 
Smallwood,  Phillipp  Powell  (or 
Pewell),  Wm.  Crouch,  Willi.  Hely, 
Geo.  Bullock,  Francis  Segar,  Eliza. 
Lewis,  John  Bennett. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


77 


THOMAS  SYMMONS,  450  acs. 
Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  25  Nov.  1637,  p.  505. 
Butting  upon  footeball  quarter  Cr.  S., 
running  parallel  to  a  br.  of  same,  neare 
N.  W.  untill  it  meete  with  the  planta- 
tion of  sd.  Symmons,  the  S.  W.  side 
bounded  with  land  of  William  Freeman 
&  W.  side  with  land  of  Andrew  Hunt- 
ington &  what  that  parcel  should  want 
of  400  acs.  is  to  bee  supplyed  bet. 
plantation  of  Gilbert  Symmons  &  the 
sd.  Thomas.  Trans,  of  9  pers:  John 
Cortes,  Geo.  Habetill,  Robt.  Robins, 
Dorothy  Glover,  Rich.  Tompson,  James 
Lester,  Rich.  Winter,  Emerie  Ealerye, 
Wm.  Madwell. 

HUMPHRY  TABB,  50  acs.  Eliz. 
Cittie  Co.,  25  Nov.  1637,  p.  505.  N. 
upon  Harris  his  Cr.,  bounded  by  land 
of  John  Duckett  on  W.  most  side  & 
running  parallel  to  his  own  plantation. 
Trans,  of  1  servt.  called  Richard  Jen- 
kinson. 

JOHN  WICKLIFE,  100  acs.  Up.  Co. 
of  New  Norf.,  25  Nov.  1637,  p.  505. 
Bounded  on  the  N.  E.  with  Chuck  a 
Tuck  river,  S.  W.  upon  the  same  & 
S.  E.  into  the  woods  next  adj.  land  of 
William  Eyres.    Trans,  of  2  pers.* 

NICHOLAS  HILL,  100  acs.  Eliz. 
Citty  Co.,  25  Nov.  1637,  p.  506.  E. 
upon  the  broad  Cr.,  S.  upon  a  br.  of 
same  runing  bet.  land  of  sd.  Hill  & 
Thomas  Watts,  W.  into  the  woods,  & 
N.  towards  the  head  of  sd.  Cr.  upon 
land  of  Capt.  Purifye.  Due  for  his  own 
per.  adv.  &  trans,  of  a  servt.  called 
John  Coffin   (or  Scofnn.) 

JOSEPH  COBB  (Cobbs),  400  acs. 
Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  4  Aug.  1637,  p. 
506.  In  a  br.  of  Warwicksquike  Riv., 
now  called  New  Towne  haven,  Nly.  on 
the  back  Cr.  parting  it  from  land  of 
John  Vaslers,  Sly.  &  Wly.  into  the 
woods  &  Ely.  upon  sd.  Cr.  Due  for 
per.  adv.  of  himself,  wife  Elizabeth 
Cobb,  2  sons:  Joseph  &  Benjamin  Cobb 
&  trans,  of  4  servts:  Martin  Douflin, 
Jon.  Norton,  Jon.  Manly,  Jane  Cooke 
(or  Corke.)    Renewed  1  Sept.  1643. 

DAVID  WINLEY,  100  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  27  Nov.  1637,  p.  507    Butt- 


ing upon  Cherry  Stones,  bounded  on  E. 
with  a  Cr.  deviding  this  &  land  of  Capt. 
John  Howe,  on  W.  with  land  of  Mr. 
Drew  &  extending  E.  by  S.  into  the 
woods.  Due  in  right  of  his  now  wife 
Jone  &  her  former  husband  Richard 
Young.  Note:  Renewed  in  the  name 
of  Pharoah  Young,  heire  unto  same,  30 
Aug.  1643. 

SAME.  250  acs.,  Same  Co.,  date  & 
page.  Bounded  into  the  baye  N.  N.  W., 
into  the  woods  S.  E.  into  Capt.  William 
Stone  his  Cr.  N.  E.  by  N.,  upon  the 
Cr.  which  is  betweene  the  Indians  &  it 
S.  E.  by  S.  lying  in  an  old  Indian  Towne 
called  the  Mattoones  by  Hungars.  Due 
for  his  own  per.  adv.  &  trans,  of  4 
pers.* 

ROBERT  THROCKMORTON,  300 
acs.  Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  24  Aug.   1637,  p. 

508.  S.  upon  land  of  William  Clarke, 
N.  into  the  woods  the  white  marsh  be- 
ing in  the  midle  of  same.  Due  for  his 
own  per.  adv.  &  trans,  of  5  pers:  John 
Bristoe,  Robert  Turner,  Henry  Warren, 
Thomas  Clarke,  Richard  Bilcliffe. 

ELIANOR  DAY  &  THOMAS  EM- 
MENSON,  300  acs.  Warwick  Riv.  Co., 
27  Nov.  1637,  p.  508.  Beg.  Wly.  upon 
Claybornes  neck  pond,  runing  Ely.  in 
breadth,  Sly.  upon  Thomas  Attowell  his 
land  &  Nly.  in  length  into  the  woods. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Edward  Sandall,  John 
Ford,  Robert  Beatall,  Nathan  Gadle, 
Georg  Johnson,  William  Osmotherly. 

JOHN  MOONE,  Gent.,  550  acs. 
Isle  of  Wight  Co.,    10   Oct.    1637,   p. 

509.  Ely.  upon  Pagan  point  Cr.,  Wly. 
&  Nly.  upon  land  formerly  graunted  to 
him,  &  Sly.  into  the  woods.  Trans,  of 
11  pers:  Thomas  Hynes,  Wm.  Harris, 
Wm.  Vinson,  Peter  Gleare,  Robert  Vir- 
gin, Rich.  Bufort,  Walter  Norden, 
Hugh  Press,  Math.  Bassett,  Margarett 
Small,  John  Vanham. 

CAPT.  ANDREW  HASTLER,  Esqr., 
&  RICHARD  WILSONN,  Marriner, 
one  whole  intire  neck  of  land  in  Chicha- 
hominy  river  comonly  known  by  the 
name  of  Pease  hill,  the  one  side  of 
which  neck  butteth  downe  the  maine 
river  Ewd.  &  the  head  of  the  neck  up- 


78 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


on  the  Ewd.  side  adj.  to  the  land  of 
William  Beard,  Marriner,  &  runneth 
from  thence  to  the  pt.  of  the  neck  of 
land  &  up  to  the  first  Cr.  Sly,  the  which 
sd.  Cr.  maketh  the  aforesd.  pt.  of  land 
a  neck.  Said  Hastier  &  Wilsonn  are  to 
make  appeare  due  to  them  by  trans- 
porting soe  many  servants  as  there 
shalbee  found  upon  survey  to  bee  fiftie 
acs.,  vizt:  for  every  50  acs.  one  servant. 
18  Dec.  1637,  p.  509. 

JONATHAN  LANGWORTH,  Chy- 
rurgeon,  1200  acs.  Up.  Co.  of  New 
Norf.,  18  Dec.  1637,  p.  510.  On  the 
W.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.  butting  on  the 
maine  river  runing  S.  S.  W.  &  on  the 
maine  br.  to  the  Swd.  which  runneth 
W.  N.  W.  on  Kennedey  Cr.  to  the 
Nwd.  &c.  600  acs.  by  assignment  & 
warranty  from  Patrick  Kennedey,  Mar- 
riner, &  600  acs.  for  trans,  of  12  pers: 
Thomas  Ward,  Jon.  Kitchin,  Greg. 
Oakes,  Jon.  Sanders,  Daniell  Audick, 
Evans  Garraway,  Richard  Kenny,  Rich- 
ard Osborne,  Mary  Hatred,  Edward 
Griffin,  Jon.  Marsey,  Edward  Tomlinson. 

HENRY  PERRY  (Pery),  sonn  & 
heire  to  Capt.  William  Pery,  late  of 
Va.  dec'd.,  2000  acs.  knowne  by  the 
name  of  Buckland,  Chas.  Cittie  Co.,  18 
Dec.  1637,  p.  510.  Extending  from  the 
head  of  herring  Cr.  unto  the  Oldmans 
Cr.  &  soe  high  as  it  ebbs  &  flowes  up 
these  creeks.  Bequeathed  by  will  of  his 
father  5  Aug.  1637;  being  alsoe 
graunted  by  order  of  Ct.  19  Sept.  1633. 
Note:  The  following  names  appear  un- 
der this  record:  Joseph  Jolly,  Edward 
Percy,  Wm.  Lee,  Walter  Daukes,  Eliz. 
Moore,  Geo.  Baker,  Jon.  Bearne,  Edw. 
Clarke,  Jon.  Mace,  Jon.  Carpenter,  Hugh 
Fox,  Elias  Wigmore,  Jon.  Radish,  Robt. 
Mercer,  Tho.  Bembrige,  Hen.  Dix,  Jone 
Freeman,  Charles  Mason,  Dan.  Scott, 
Rich.  Smith,  Ann  Frisby,  Symon  Sym- 
mons,  Jon.  Harris,  Jeffery  Steele,  Eliza. 
Bradly,  Gilbert  Mauckes,  Tho.  Reynolds, 
Phillipp  Walker,  Phillip  Walter,  Jon. 
Gill,  Wm.  Courtier,  Jon.  Reston,  Ann 
Stanford,  Eliz.  Dauter,  Daniell  Lewellin, 
Charles  Grene,  Gabriel  Adea,  Wm. 
Geat,  Jon.  Sykamore,  John  Kingston. 

DANIELL  GOOKINS,  Esqr.,  2500 
acs.  in  Up.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  29  Dec. 


1637,  p.  511.  Upon  N.  W.  side  of 
Nansamund  Riv.,  beg.  at  S.  E.  side  of 
a  Cr.  lying  midway  bet.  the  mouth  of 
Nansamund  &  the  mouth  of  Chuckatuck 
alias  New  Towne  haven  river.  Granted 
by  order  of  Ct.  25  Feb.  1634  &  alsoe 
due  for  trans,  of  50  pers:  Tho.  Curtis, 
Jon.  Curtis,  Wm.  Smith,  Wm.  Mad- 
worth,  Gilbert,  Whitfield,  Hugh  Jones, 
Jon.  Thomas,  Henry  Price,  Wm.  Rich- 
ards, Jon.  Garner,  Phill.  Chapman,  Wm. 
Hookes,  Wm.  Granger,  Jon.  Roe,  Elias 
Keely,  Griffin  Murfin,  Elias  Griffin, 
Wm.  Ellis,  Jon.  Hellier,  Hugh  Jones, 
Henry  Casley,  Jon.  Scott,  Jon.  Burden, 
Jon.  Buckland,  Jon.  Cox,  Jos.  Moseley, 
Edw.  Burden,  Edw.  Morgan,  Wal. 
Manet,  Benj.  Box,  Tho.  Browne,  Aus- 
tice  Norman,  Hen.  Norman,  Peter  Nor- 
man, Anth.  Elsworth,  Ann  Elsworth, 
Geo.  White,  Tho.  Addison,  Roger 
Walker,  Roger  Blanch,  Wm.  Long, 
Tho.  Feild,  Robt.  Smith,  Wm.  Pensint, 
Morgan  Phillips,  Robt.  Jewell,  Wm. 
Clarke,  Daniel  Hopkinson,  Wm.  Cor- 
ney,  Esay  Delaware. 

THOMAS  OSBORNE,  JUNR.,  500 
acs.,  Henrico  Co.,  16  June  1637,  p.  512. 
Sly.  upon  fearing  &  Nly.  into  the 
woods,  the  whole  tract  of  land  to  bee 
called  by  the  name  of  Batchelers  bancke. 
Due  for  his  per.  adv.  &  trans,  of  9  pers: 
Henry  Kilbye,  John  Finch,  Wm.  Bur- 
ford,  Samll.  Thorneford,  Edward  Wil- 
liams, Jerimiah  Hoveller,  Agnes  Sherly, 
Jon.  Weyan,  Richard  Perrin. 

ARTHUR  BAYLY,  200  acs.  Henrico 
Co.,  16  Jan.  1637,  p.  512.  Over  against 
the  upper  end  of  Lord  Island,  Wly.  on 
the  river,  Nly.  towards  the  falls,  Ely. 
into  the  woods  &  Sly.  upon  the  upper- 
most Cr.  next  the  falls.  Trans,  of  4 
pers:  Hen.  Robins,  Jon.  Drinkwater, 
James  Evans,  Jonas  Bowers. 

ARTHUR  BAYLY  &  THOMAS 
CROSBY,  800  acs.  Henrico  Co.,  16 
Jan.  1637,  p.  512.  Sly.  upon  land  of 
Samuell  Allmond,  Wly.  upon  the  river, 
Nly.  towards  the  falls  &  Ely.  into  the 
woods.  Trans,  of  16  pers:  (Arthur 
Bayly  his  servts:)  Jonas  Bowers,  Wm. 
Calfe,  Jon.  Duch,  Wm.  Greene,  Mary 
Doubty,    Jerimiah    Burr,    Tho.    Busby, 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


79 


Jon.  Harris.  (Thos.  Crosby  his  servts:) 
Willi.  Rider,  Wm.  Ridly,  Rich.  Childs, 
Robt.  Phelps,  Edward  Evans,  Jon.  Ben- 
nett, Wm.  Barker,  Charles  White. 
Note:  Crosbye  assigned  400  acs.  of  this 
pattent  to  Samuell  Almond. 

ARTHUR  BAYLY,  300  acs.  Henrico 
Co.,  15  Jan.  1637,  p.  513.  Bet.  land 
of  Samuell  Almond  &  James  Place, 
bounded  S.  upon  James  Place  land, 
Wly.  upon  the  Riv.,  Nly.  upon  sd.  Al- 
mond &  Ely.  into  the  woods.  Due  for 
his  own  per.  adv.  &  trans,  of  5  pers: 
Arthur   Bayly,    Robert   Spinke.* 

JOHN  DENNETT,  400  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.  Co.,  15  Jan.  1637,  p.  513.  N.  E. 
adj.  land  of  John  Burland,  N.  W.  upon 
the  head  of  Uteys  Cr.  a  path  goeing 
from  little  Towne  to  Chiskiake  through 
the  midle  of  the  ground  &  upon  the 
Swd.  side  the  second  Swamp  from  the 
path  &  S.  E.  upon  a  barren  levell  which 
goeth  from  Martins  hundred  to  Chis- 
kiacke.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  John  Reeve, 
Robert  Williamson,  Edmund  Andrewes, 
Eliza,  his  wife,  Oliver  Walker,  Henry 
Mishew. 

STEPHEN  CHARLTON,  200  acs. 
Accomack  Co.,  15  Jan.  1637,  p.  514. 
Butting  upon  land  of  John  Wilkinson, 
bounded  on  S.  by  land  of  my  Lady  Dale 
with  a  small  br.  of  a  Cr.  deviding  this 
&  his  own  land.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  John 
Wilton  &  John  Ivell.  (Other  names 
not  given.) 

CAPT.  THOMAS  PAULETT,  2000 
acs.  Chas.  Citty  Co.,  15  Jan.  1637,  p. 
514.  Bounding  to  the  River  S.,  N.  W. 
to  the  maine,  Ewd.  to  land  of  Capt. 
Perry,  W.  upon  Berkeley  hundred  land 
&  extending  by  the  river  side  from 
herring  Cr.  to  gutt  of  land  deviding 
this  from  sd.  Berkley  hundred.  Due  for 
the  per.  adv.  of  himself  &  brother  Chid- 
dock  Paulett  &  trans,  of  38  per:  Jon 
Trussell,  And.  Hore,  (or  Hooe)  Edw. 
Shippey,  Tho.  Cox,  Wm.  Havert,  Evan 
Morgan,  Jon.  Lewellin,  Walter  Nichols, 
Jon.  King,  Phi.  Major,  Jon.  Towell, 
Jon.  Long,  Rich.  Carpenter,  Jon.  Cun- 
inghorm,  Jon.  Beldam,  Eliz.  Clarke, 
Elias  Tally,  Tho.  Gregory,  Wm.  Cooper, 


Susan  Hate,  Wm.  Rose,  David  Flood, 
Peter  Low,  Robt.  Chaplyn. 

ROBERT  HAYES,  100  acs.  Low.  Co. 
of  New  Norf.,  10  Feb.  1637,  p.  515. 
N.  W.  upon  the  river  of  Lyn  haven, 
S.  E.  into  the  woods,  S.  W.  &  N.  E. 
with  a  br.  of  the  Riv.  Due  for  trans, 
of  himself  &  wife. 

GEORG  HULL,  540  acs.  Chas.  Riv. 
Co.,  10  Feb.  1637,  p.  515.  200  acs. 
neare  the  head  of  the  old  Poquoson 
Riv.,  E.  upon  same,  W.  into  the  woods, 
N.  upon  a  plantation  of  Thomas  Sewell 
&  S.  upon  the  Widdowe  Tompsons 
plantation;  340  acs.  more  &  150  po. 
conteyned  in  a  neck  upon  the  old 
Poquoson,  runing  S.  into  the  woods,  on 
E.  side  joyning  to  Moanack  N.  W.  a 
mile  bounded  on  the  S.  W.  side  with  a 
Cr.  deviding  this  &  land  of  John  Lay- 
don,  up  the  Cr.  to  the  head,  etc.,  W. 
&  by  N.  &  half  a  mile  further  into  the 
woods  all  along  the  Master  br.  Trans. 
of  11  pers:  Owen  Macker,  Garrett 
Farrell.    (No  other  names  appear.) 

CAPT.  ADAM  THOROGOOD,  200 
acs.,  Low  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  8  Feb. 
1637,  p.  515.  Being  a  neck  of  land  up 
Samuell  Bennetts  Cr.,  runing  out  of 
Lynn  haven  river,  Ely.  down  the  same 
&c.  150  acs.  due  for  trans,  of  3 
Negroes;  50  acs.  for  part  of  the  second 
devdt.  due  to  John  Gundrye  &c. 

SAME.  200  acs.  Eliz.  Citty  Co.,  10 
Feb.  1637,  p.  516.  Lying  upon  Hamp- 
ton Riv.,  comonly  called  Capps  his 
point,  E.  upon  sd.  Riv.,  Sly.  upon  a 
Cr.  parting  this  &  land  now  in  the 
hands  of  William  Parry,  N.  upon  land 
of  Capt.  Willcox,  now  in  the  occupa- 
tion of  Mr.  John  Woodall.  100  acs. 
for  a  second  devdt.  due  John  Gundrye 
&  100  acs.  for  a  2nd  devdt.  due  to 
William  Lansdall.,  which  were  con- 
signed to  sd.  Thorogood. 

"  ROBERT  TAYLOR,  100  acs.  Up. 
Co.  of  New  Norf.,  8  Feb.  1637,  p.  516. 
Being  2  necks  of  land  in  the  W.  br.  of 
Eliz.  Riv.,  bounded  on  the  W.  with 
Mathew  Howard,  runing  Nly.  into  the 
woods  &  Sly.  upon  the  River.  Trans,  of 
2  pers:  Thomas  Smith,  Peter  Hill. 


80 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


THOMAS  WESTON,  Marriner,  650 
acs.  Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  9  Feb.  1637,  p 
517.  Upon  Capt.  John  West  his  Cr. 
Wly.  into  the  woods  &  Nly.  upon  Ser 
jeant  Wayne.  Trans,  of  13  pers:  Wil 
liam  Rawlings,  Tho.  Willis,  Rich.  Lacy 
Jon.  Darbye,  Rich.  Powell,  Tho 
Wetherbye,  Grace  Smith,  Thomas  Wat 
kins,  John  Joyce,  Richard  Perrin 
Dennis  Bretherston,  Henry  Harris,  Wm 
Golding. 

CAPT.  ADAM  THOROGOOD, 
Esqr.,  600  acs.  Low.  Co.  of  New  Norf., 
12  Feb.  1637,  p.  517.  Nly.  upon  the 
1st  or  2nd  little  Cr.  upon  the  E.  side 
of  Lyn  haven  alias  Chesopeian  Riv., 
Ely.  into  the  maine  land,  Wly.  &  Sly. 
upon  the  maine  Riv.  of  Lynnhaven. 
Trans,  of  12  pers:  Robert  Whetle, 
Choyse  Johnson,  Eliza  Lawcon,  Tho. 
Mitchell,  Jon.  Phillipps,  Jon.  Crabb, 
Robert  Bennett,  Edward  Black,  Jon. 
James,  Edward  Williams,  Edwd.  Strong, 
Jon.  Burges. 

CHARLES  BARCROFT,  350  acs. 
Isle   of  Wight   Co.,    10   Feb.    1637,   p. 

517.  Lying  behind  the  Pagan  shore  & 
bordering  upon  land  of  Christopher 
Reynolds,  runing  Sly.  into  the  woods  & 
soe  up  along  the  Cr.  towards  the  Cy- 
press Sw.  Due  by  assignment  from 
Richard  Death,  to  whom  it  was  due  for 
trans,  of  7  pers:  William  Banton,  Hen. 
Butler,  James  Cousens,  Edwd.  Gradin, 
Rich.  Lucas,  Rich.  Mathews,  Robert 
Steers. 

JOHN  NEALE,  500  acs.  Accomack 
Co.,  18  May  1637,  p.  518.  Beg.  from 
land  of  Edmund  Scarbrough  on  one  side 
&  going  in  breadth  on  the  baye  side  N. 
W.  to  land  of  Thomas  Hunt  &  into  the 
woods  upon  land  formerly  granted  to 
him.  Due  in  consideration  of  the  sur- 
render of  a  pattern  of  Smithes  Island, 
formerly  graunted  to  him. 

CAPT.  ADAM  THOROGOOD,  200 
acs.  Eliz.  Citty  Co.,   12  Mar.  1634,  p. 

518.  W.  upon  the  back  river,  N.  upon 
land  of  John  Robinson,  E.  upon  land 
of  Thomas  Bolding  &  his  own  land  & 
S.  upon  William  Capps.  Due  by  pur- 
chase from  Capt.  Richard  Stephens, 
Esqr.,  late  of  Va. 


CAPT.  THOMAS  OSBORNE,  1000 
acs.  Henrico  Co.,  6  Feb.  1637,  p.  519. 
N.  upon  Procters  Cr.,  E.  upon  the 
maine  river,  W.  into  the  woods  &  S. 
upon  Henrico  Island  called  by  the  name 
of  Fearing.  Granted  by  order  of  Ct.,  8 
Oct.  1634  &  due  for  trans,  of  20  pers: 
Isaac  Hutchins,  Tho.  Draywood,  Jon. 
White,  James  Guterson  (or  Gaterson), 
Godfrey  Lewis,  Tho.  Hunt,  Jon.  Beard, 
Rich.  Arguse,  Roger  Humble,  Robert 
James,  Nath.  Spackman,  Richard  Green- 
wood, Wm.  Jones,  Wm.  Wicklesworth, 
Tho.  Bartin,  Charles  Russell,  James 
Wanton,  Hen.  Seale,  Robert  Cradock, 
Richard  Hitchcox. 

This  pattent  graunted  to  Capt.  Tho- 
mas Osborne  of  Fearing  in  the  Countie 
of  Henrico  for  1000  acs.,  upon  survey 
made  by  William  Wigg,  Apr.  26,  1638, 
but  800  acs.  was  found  within  the 
bounds  of  his  sd.  pattent,  measured  & 
bounded,  vizt:  N.  upon  Procters  Cr., 
W.  into  the  woods  by  the  side  of  sd. 
Cr.  &  the  Spring  &  extending  Sly.  upon 
the  river  towards  Henrico  Island  by 
Mount  my  Lady. 

HUMPHRY  HIGGENSON,  Gent., 
700  acs.  called  by  the  name  of  Tutteys 
neck,   adj.  to  Harrop,   6  Feb.   1637,  p. 

519.  E.  S.  E.  upon  a  gr.  swamp  parting 
it  from  Harrop  land,  W.  S.  W.  upon  a 
br.  of  Archers  hope  Cr.  parting  it  from 
Kingsmells  neck,  W.  N.  W.  upon  an- 
other br.  of  sd.  Cr.  parting  it  from 
land  of  Richard  Brewsters  called  by  the 
name  of  the  great  neck  alias  the  barren 
neck  &  N.  N.  W.  into  the  maine  woods. 
Sd.  land  graunted  unto  Elizabeth  his 
now  wife  by  order  of  Ct.,  4  Oct.  1637, 
whose  right  is  transferred  to  sd.  Hig- 
genson  &  alsoe  due  for  the  adv.  of  14 
pers:  Eliza.  Higginson,  Edward  Har- 
top,  Anth.  Lemon,  Nowell  Floyd,  Tho. 
Rogers,  Mary  Robinson,  Thomas  Adams, 
John  Turner,  Henry  Bower,  John 
Hampton,  Hen.  Moone,  Edward  Gibson, 
Dorothy  Pirn,  Tho.  Bullard. 

RICHARD  BREWSTER,  Gent.,  500 
acs.  James  Citty  Co.,  6  Feb.   1637,  p. 

520.  Beg.  at  the  great  Neck  alias  the 
barren  neck,  adj.  to  Tutteys  Neck  a  br. 
of  Archers  hope  Cr.  parting  the  same, 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


81 


S.  upon  a  br.  of  sd.  Cr.  parting  it  from 
Kingsmells  Neck,  W.  upon  sd.  maine 
Cr.  parting  it  from  Jockeys  Neck  &  E. 
upon  a  br.  of  Archers  hope  Cr.  parting 
it  from  Tutteys  Neck,  N.  into  the  woods 
&  ending  at  a  deep  Sw.  Graunted  by 
order  of  Ct.  4  Oct.  1637  &  alsoe  due, 
vizt:  100  for  his  per.  adv.  being  an 
ancient  planter  in  the  time  of  Sir  Tho- 
mas Dale,  &  400  acs.  for  trans,  of  his 
wife,  2  children,  his  brother  Henry,  3 
men  servts.  &  a  maid  servt.* 

ARGOLL  YEARDLEY,  500  acs.  in 
the  Up.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  6  Feb.  1637, 
p.  521.  Upon  Dumpling  Is.  Cr.  in 
Nansamund  Riv.  on  the  S.  side,  adj. 
land  of  William  Parker  &  E.  N.  upon 
sd.  Cr.  50  acs.  due  for  his  own  per. 
adv.,  50  acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of  his 
wife  Frances  &  400  acs.  for  trans,  of 
8  pers:  Susan  Beale,  Thomas  Adderly, 
Rice  Jones,  Edward  Kinsey,  Christo. 
Graunt,  Jon.  Woodcocke,  Andolo  & 
Maria  2  Negroes. 

JOHN  CORKER,  6  acs.  in  James  Is- 
land neare  unto  Goose  hill,  called  the 
midle  ridge,  bounded  W.  on  James 
Riv.,  E.  into  the  Island,  N.  with  a 
marsh  next  to  land  of  Richard  Tree  & 
S.  with  a  marsh  next  to  land  of  Wil- 
liam   Spencer.    10    Feb.    1637,    p.    521. 

WILLIAM  SPENCER,  1350  acs.  in 
Lawnes  Cr.,  runing  down  same  Sly., 
Wly.  neare  the  mouth,  bounded  with  a 
small  Cr.  to  the  Nwd.,  250  acs.  runing 
into  the  woods  W.  by  N.  &  joyning 
altogether.  10  Feb.  1637,  p.  521. 
Trans,  of  27  pers:  Robert  Stokes,  Ed- 
ward Wilmott,  Robt.  Arnold,  Annias 
Copleston,  Georg  Prosser,  Nicholas  At- 
well,  Evan  Williams,  Francis  Pearle, 
Wm.  Mitchell,  Jon.  Lewis,  Katherine 
Pearce,  Ellen  Alice,  Anth.  Streate,  Hec- 
tor Godbeare,  Nich.  Spencer,  John  Dod- 
man,  Jon.  Holden,  Tho.  Powell,  Tho. 
Smith,  Tho.  Clayton,  Jon.  Mathews, 
Eliz.  Nicholson,  James  Tooke,  Hugh 
Wynn,  Robert  Latchett,  James  Robin- 
son, Joseph  Deare. 

CAPT.  THOMAS  FLINT,  850  acs. 
Warwick  River  Co.,  1  Mar.  1637,  p.  522. 
Beg.  from  marked  trees  over  against 
Major  Thomas  Barnards  land,  S.  &  N. 


upon  the  river,  also  upon  sd.  river 
which  runs  E.  &  W.  towards  Stanly 
hundred  &c,  E.  toward  the  mills  &c. 
to  the  head  of  a  spring  adj.  land  of 
Capt.  William  Perrie.  Trans,  of  17 
pers:  Jon.  Stephens,  Rich.  Butress,  Tho. 
Blancher  (?),  Edwd.  Hudson,  Wm. 
Strulton  (or  Strutton),  Hen.  Brother- 
ton,  Jon.  Farth,  Jon.  Roberts,  Nich. 
Moore,  Wm.  Norcott,  Daniell  Peirce, 
Jon.  Harratt,  Fr.  Miller,  Jon.  Mathw 
(Mathew  ?),  Jon.  Hentlands,  Robert 
Idam,  Hen.  Copeland. 

HUMPHRY  LOYD,  250  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.  Co.,  6  Nov.  1637,  p.  523.  Being 
2  ridges  of  land  the  one  Nly.  upon  the 
Cr.  parting  Thomas  Rayes  land  from  the 
black  Wallnutt  Neck,  the  other  upon 
the  head  of  sd.  Neck,  extending  Sly. 
into  the  woods;  50  acs.  being  in 
severall  parcels  of  Hamocks  of  land  be- 
tween sd.  Neck,  the  baye  &  hogshead 
quarter.  Due  for  trans,  of  5  pers:  Ed- 
ward Roberts,  David  Peirce,  Michaell 
Garner,  William  Maurice,  Geo.  Calledge. 

JONATHAN  LANGWORTH,  Chi- 
rurgion,  400  acs.  Low.  Co.  of  New 
Norf.,  7  Mar.  1637,  p.  523.  On  the 
W.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.    Trans,  of  8  pers.* 

JOHN  SLATER,  700  acs.  Up.  Co.  of 
New  Norf.,  10  Mar.  1637,  p.  523.  E. 
S.  E.  upon  Nansamund  Riv.,  N.  N.  W. 
into  the  woods,  S.  upon  land  of  Francis 
Maulden  &  N.  upon  a  Cr.  adj.  land  of 
Edward  Major.    Trans,  of  14  pers.* 

CHRISTOPHER  STOKES  (Stoakes), 
250  acs.  Warwick  Riv.  Co.,  called 
Stokes  Neck,  10  Mar.  1637,  p.  524. 
Lying  at  the  head  of  Blunt  point  Cr., 
beg.  at  a  Cr.  on  the  N.  side  of  Har- 
woods  Neck  &  runing  all  along  Blunt 
pt.  Cr.  Nly.  Trans,  of  5  pers:  Hen. 
Powell,  Samuell  Walton,  Eliza.  Dickes, 
Richard  Symons,  Lancellott  Stokes. 

CHARLES  MAGNER  (Magnor), 
Planter,  of  Flowerde  hundred  unto 
WILLIAM  HAYWARD,  Gent,  of  Caw- 
seys  Cleere,  by  deed  of  sale,  650  acs. 
more  or  less,  lying  &  being  upon  Appa- 
mattock  Riv.,  bordering  E.  upon  the 
same,  W.  the  maine  land,  S.  upon  Ap- 
pamattock  Towne  &  N.  upon  Swift  Cr. 


82 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


8  Feb.  1634,  p.  525.  Signed:  Charles 
Magnor.  Witnesses:  Wm.  Reynes  & 
Daniell   Lewellin. 

JOHN  DAVIS,  Planter,  of  Kise- 
keiake,  to  THOMAS  CURTIS,  200  acs. 
of  land  upon  the  New  Poquoson  river, 
N.  upon  the  same,  S.  into  the  woods 
next  adj.  land  of  John  Powell  of  Bat- 
chelors  hope.  Consideration:  400  Lbs. 
of  good  &  Merchantable  Tobacco  in 
leafe  to  bee  paid  the  20th  day  of  Octo- 
ber next.  Signed:  John  Davis.  Wit- 
nesses: Joseph  Ham  &  Epaphroditus 
Lawson.    20  July  1633,  p.  525. 

MICHAELL  RATCLIFFE,  Gent.,  of 
Chisekiake,  to  JOHN  BURLAND, 
Planter,  of  Chiskiake,  25  acs.  of  land, 
adj.  land  of  Benjamin  Cheyney,  abutting 
upon  Uties  Cr.  in  sd.  Chisekiake  &  is 
the  same  land  due  unto  sd.  Ratcliffe  for 
his  per.  adv.  unto  Chisekiake,  "for  con- 
firmation whereof  I  have  sett  my  hand 
and  seale  the  25th  of  May  Anno  Dom. 
1634  and  will  bee  ready  at  all  times 
upon  the  request  of  the  said  John  Bur- 
land  to  give  as  full  assurance  thereof 
as  in  mee  lyeth."  Signed:  Michaell 
Ratcliffe.  Witnesses:  Thomas  Ward  & 
Benjamine  Cheyney.    Page  525. 

HUMPHRY  SCONE,  of  Nansamund, 
to  FRANCIS  HOUGH,  assignment  of 
two  pattents  conteyning  300  acs.  dated 
16  Sept.  1636.  Signed:  Humphry 
Scone.  Witnesses:  Tho.  Addison  & 
Jon.  Skinner.    26  Dec.  1636,  p.  526. 

CHRISTOPHER  BRANCH  to  JAMES 
PLACE,  assignment  of  3  score  acs., 
part  of  his  plantation  at  Kingsland,  ly- 
ing N.  upon  his  own  land  &  S.  upon 
Turloe  (?)  Kills  Land;  with  the  appur- 
tenances &  priviledges  thereunto  be- 
longing, howsing  now  standing  or  to 
bee  hereafter  erected  &  built  &c.  Con- 
sideration: 100  acs.  surrendered  in  Ct. 
by  sd.  Place.  Provided  sd.  Place  shall 
pay  &  discharge  all  such  rents  &  taxa- 
tions &c.  Signed:  Christopher  Branch. 
Witnesses:  Francis  Roberts,  &  William 
Woolley.    14  June  1636,  p.  527. 

JAMES  PLACE  to  THOMAS  BAR- 
TON the  above  mentioned  land,  April 
10, —     Page     527.    Consideration:    600 


Lbs.  tobacco  &  3  bbls.  corn.  Witnesses: 
William  Little  &  Robert  Craddock. 
(Barton's  name  is  also  given  as  John). 

BENNETT  FREEMAN,  450  acs. 
James  Citty  Co.,  20  May  1638,  p.  527. 
A  neck  of  land  on  the  Ely.  side  of 
Chichahominy  Riv.,  opposite  land  of 
William  Beard,  S.  upon  the  Riv.  &  N. 
into  the  woods.  Trans,  of  9  pers:  John 
Abrall,  Tho.  Jenkins,  Tho.  Savell  (or 
Sauell),  Margarett  Foster,  William 
Abbeys,  William  Cole,  Robert  Barber, 
James  Plunckett,  Jervis  Seawell. 

HENRY  HAWKINS,  300  acs.  in 
Lower  Co.  New  Norfolk,  May  24,  1638, 
Page  528.  6  mi.  up  the  eastern  branch 
of  Elizabeth  Riv.,  E.  upon  Rainshawes 
Cr.,  W.  upon  Hawkings  Cr.  Due  by 
purchase  from  William  Rainshawe. 

STEPHEN  CHARLTON,  1,000  acs. 
Accomack  Co.,  May  10,  1638,  Page  528. 
N.  E.  upon  main  cr.  of  Nuswattocks, 
adj.  William  Andrewes  and  the  main 
bay.  Trans,  of  20  pers:  Alex  Willin- 
son,  Jon.  England,  Edwd.  Ednall,  Jon. 
Woodford,  Tho.  Symons,  Jon.  Collins, 
Wm.  Davis,  Edwd.  Daniell,  Tho.  Bell, 
Wm.  Moult,  Wm.  Williams,  Jon. 
Robinson,  James  Blithe,  Robt.  Rhoades, 
Brice  Marks,  Chri.  Moyses,  Nich. 
White,  Nich.  Gower,  Archelaus  Ste- 
phens, Alex.  Chapman. 

AMBROSE  BENNETT,  May  8,  1638, 
300  acs.  Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  Page  529- 
Between  Reynolds  Cr.  &  a  br.  of  same. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Morris  Bennett,  Wil- 
liam Morris,  Richard  Jones,  Anthony 
Cole,  Henry  Eaton,  Humphry  West. 

ARTHUR  SMITH,  1,450  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  Sept.  10,  1637,  Page  529. 
Being  a  neck  runing  S.  E.  behind  Pagan 
shore.  Trans,  of  29  pers:  Richard 
Hughes,  Moyses  Stone,  Wm.  Jones,  Jon. 
Auger,  Wm.  Chapman  Tho.  Gravis, 
Sampson  Gross,  Greg.  Soper,  Ann 
Tompson,  Rich.  Biggs,  Jon.  Roe,  Jon. 
Newer,  Alice  Smith,  Jon.  Barcroft,  Jane 
his  wife,  Thomas  Wilkinson,  Peter 
Lather,  Roger  Waters,  James  Roche, 
Thomas  Coxson,  Jonathan  Fayden,  Tho. 
Carter,  Jon.  Tomlinson,  Lawrence 
Robins,   Wm.  Allumbly,   Tho.  Godbye, 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


83 


Cicely  Cotton,  Mary  Champion,  &  1 
negro.  Renewed  in  the  name  of  Arthur 
Smith,  21  Mar.  1643  &  100  acs.  added. 

PETER  KNIGHT,  Merchant,  14  acs., 
being  an  island  in  Nansamund  Riv., 
Up.  Co.  of  New  Norfolk,  10  April  1638, 
p.  529.  S.  side  the  Riv.  opposite  land  of 
Oliver  Sprye  &  adj.  land  of  Robert 
Newman  &  Randolph  Crew.  Sd.  14  acs. 
&  36  acs.  not  yett  taken  up,  due  for  his 
own  per.  adv. 

TRISTRUM  NOSWORTHY,  100 
acs.  upon  a  place  called  by  the  name  of 
the  long  pond,  W.  upon  William  Eyres 
land,  E.  upon  John  Seaward.  10  May 
1638,  p.  530.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Tho- 
mas Vaughan,  John  Hodges. 

SAME.  50  acs.  Up.  Co.  New  Norf., 
same  date  &  page.  Knowne  by  the 
name  of  Kennedyes  Island,  butting  E. 
upon  the  maine  Riv.,  S.  towards  the 
Ritch  Island,  N.  towards  the  maine 
river,  S.  towards  Chucka  Tuck  Riv. 
Trans,  of  a  servt.  called  Robert  Davis. 

SAME.  100  acs.  Up.  Co.  of  New 
Norf.,  10  May  1638,  p.  531.  E.  upon 
land  of  John  Smith,  W.  upon  John  Sea- 
ward, N.  upon  the  maine  river  &  S. 
into  the  woods.  Trans,  of  2  pers: 
Robert  Cooke,  John  Harwood. 

EDWARD  TRAVIS,  900  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  Jan.  25,  1637,  Page  531.  Up- 
on the  head  of  Upper  Chippoaks  Cr., 
adj.  Jeremiah  Dickenson.  "200  acs. 
thereof  due  in  right  of  John  Johnson, 
his  wife  &  2  children  the  daughter  & 
heire  sd.  Johnson,  hee  the  sd.  Travis 
marrying,"  250  acs.  for  5  servts.  trans, 
by  sd.  Johnson  &  450  acs.  for  the  trans, 
of  9  pers.  by  sd.  Travis.  Walter  Travis, 
Nich.  Cosones,  Walter  Johnson,  Doro- 
thy Barnett,  Katherine  Dowse,  Thos. 
Bath,  Tho.  Huson,  Robert  Simpson, 
Peter  John  Turvey,  Francis  Chambers, 
Jon.  Jenings,  Richard  New.  Patent  re- 
newed in  the  name  of  John  Johnson  & 
Edward  Travis. 

SAME.  300  acs.  in  same  county,  same 
date,  Page  532.  At  the  upper  Chippokes, 
adj.  upon  N.  E.  side  of  land  of  Jere- 
miah  Dickinson.    50    acs.    for   his    per. 


adv.  and  250  acs.  for  trans,  of  5  pers: 
Ambrose  Joyner,  Rich.  Sutton,  Katherine 
Wilkins,  Robert  Pittway.  This  patent 
surrendered  by  Travis. 

PELEG  BUCK,  500  acs.  in  James 
City  Co.,  May  29,  1638,  Page  532. 
Near  the  Gleab  land  &  land  lately  in 
the  tenure  of  Thomas  Phillipps,  adj.  S. 
upon  land  belonging  to  the  orphans  & 
heirs  of  Mr.  Richard  Buck.  Sd.  land 
bequeathed  unto  him  by  his  brother 
Gersham  (or  Gorsham)  Buck,  who  pur- 
chased same  of  Sergt.  Thomas  Crumpe, 
(or  Crompe)  Sept.  1,  1636. 

THOMAS  CROMPE,  of  Neck  of 
land  in  the  Colony  of  Va.,  to  GER- 
SHON  BUCK,  of  James  Towne  Island, 
500  acs.  of  land  within  the  precincts  of 
neck  of  land,  together  with  all  howses 
&c,    gardens,    orchards,    tenements    &c. 

1  Sept.  1636,  p.  533.  Signed:  Thomas 
Crompe.    Witness:    Thomas   Cooke. 

CAPT.  WILLIAM  BROCAS,  Esqr., 
&  one  of  the  Councell  of  State,  1621 
acs.,  12  Apr.  1638,  p.  533.  At  a 
meadow,  adj.  land  belonging  to  the 
Mills  on  the  E.  side,  runing  to  the  head 
of  the  Otterdams  &  bounded  on  W.  side 

2  mi.  in  length,  conteyning  1514  acs. 
Another  parcel  conteyning  107  acs.  be- 
longing to  the  Mills,  bounded  on  E. 
side  with  a  Sw.  at  the  howse  of  Thomas 
Henshawe,  etc.  Sd.  land,  &  29  acs.  not 
yett  taken  up,  due  for  trans,  of  33  pers.* 

JOSEPH  HARMON,  800  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  21  May  1638,  p.  534.  On 
Wly.  side  of  Chichahominy  Riv.,  being 
the  next  land  on  this  side  to  Pease  hill 
marsh,  Ely.  upon  the  Riv.  opposite  to 
Warrany  Cr.  Trans,  of  16  pers:  Wil- 
liam Beard,  Joane  Beard,  Tho.  Stout, 
Hen.  Meares,  Fr.  Withers,  Tho.  Lock, 
Nich.  Midleton,  Anth.  Rockwood,  Mar- 
garett  Walton,  Tho.  Burther,  (or 
Burcher)  Jon.  Kitchin,  Ellin  Rogers, 
Rich.  Smith,  Hen.  Lee,  Eliza.  Blacker, 
Edward  Griffin. 

THOMAS  HARWOOD,  Gent.,  1850 
acs.  James  Citty  Co.,  7  Nov.  1637,  p. 
534.  850  acs.  Sly.  upon  land  in  possess- 
ion of  William  Rabnett,  N.  along 
Kethes   Cr.,    E.   into   the   maine   woods 


84 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


adj.  land  of  Richard  Atkins;  1000  acs. 
S.  by  E.  upon  land  of  sd.  Atkins,  N.  by 
W.  towards  Chisekeiake  &  W.  by  S. 
upon  Martins  hundred.  Trans,  of  37 
pers.* 

EDMOND  MORECROFT,  500  acs. 
James  Citty  Co.,  in  Chichahominy  Riv., 
about  2  mi.  up  Pynie  point  Cr.,  W. 
upon  the  Cr.  against  2  islands,  &c. 
Trans,  of  10  pers.*  29  May  1638,  p. 
535. 

EPAPHRODITUS  LAWSON,  250 
acs.,  in  a  Cr.  on  the  S.  E.  side  of 
Nansamund  Riv.,  about  3  mi.  up  the 
Cr.,  runing  Sly.  &  adj.  land  of  John 
Armye.  29  May  1638,  p.  535.  Due  by 
purchase  from  Martha  Tomlin. 

WILLIAM  DURFORD,  150  acs. 
Low.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  29  May  1638, 
p.  536.  Lying  half  a  mile  up  a  Cr. 
against  a  place  called  Batrewhole  some 
6  mi.  up  the  S.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.  Trans, 
of  3  pers.* 

THOMAS  LAMBETH,  200  acs.  Low. 
Co.  of  New  Norf.,   29  May   1638,  p. 

536.  Being  a  ridge  of  land  lying  up  a 
Cr.  called  Dum  out  of  the  mire  come- 
ing  between  land  of  Capt.  Thomas 
Willoughby  &  John  Gater.  Trans,  of 
4  pers:  Mathew  Holmes,  James  Moun- 
cer  (or  Monncer),  Degery  Bond,  Wm. 
Prosser    (or  Presser.) 

HENRY  BRADLY,  200  acs.  Up.  Co. 
of  New  Norf.,  22  Nov.  1637,  p.  537. 
Upon  Warwicksquike  Riv.  now  called 
New  Towne  haven.  Due  for  trans,  of 
his  wife  Frances  Bradly,  &  3  pers: 
Walter  Bill,  Jon.  Felton,  Wm.  Noble. 

ROBERT  CRADOCK  (Craddock), 
300  acs.  Henrico  Co.,  29  May  1638,  p. 

537.  Nly.  on  a  little  Cr.  towards  Lilley 
Valley  upon  land  of  William  Cox,  & 
Isaac  Hutchins  &  S.  upon  land  of  John 
Davis.    Trans,  of  6  pers.* 

CAPT.  FRANCIS  EPES,  1700  acs. 
Chas.  Citty  Co.,  29  May  1638,  p.  537. 
E.  upon  Bayly  his  Cr.,  S.  into  the  maine 
land,  W.  upon  Cason  his  Cr.  &  N.  upon 
the   maine   Riv.    50   acs.   for   his   own 


per.  adv.  &  1650  acs.  for  trans,  of  his 
3  sons:  Jon.,  Fr.,  &  Tho.  Epes  &  30 
servts:  Jon.  Long,  Jon.  Baker,  Jon. 
Warden,  Jon.  Joyce,  Tho.  Foanes,  (or 
Feanes)  Tho.  Cropp,  Rich.  Stayle,  Rich. 
Hewett,  Geo.  Adams,  Sarah  Hutmore, 
Tho.  Pattison,  Anth.  Box,  Jonath. 
Elliser,  Barthol.  Swinborne,  Silvester 
Atkins,  Robt.  Fossett,  James  Rowland, 
Ann  Turner,  Geo.  Archer,  Hugh  James, 
Jon.  Nowell,  5  Negroes:  Bashaw, 
Jabina,  Andrea,  Magdilina,  Cesent; 
Richard  Litchfeild,  Edward  Ames,  Susan 
Mills,  Jane  Long,  in  the  Spanish  fregat 
1629  (or  1621). 

WILLIAM  CRANAGE,  400  acs.  Up. 
Co.   of  New  Norf.,    10   Feb.    1637,   p. 

538.  Ely.  side  of  Pagan  point  Cr.,  Nly. 
upon  the  red  point,  S.  into  the  woods, 
W.  upon  the  Cr.  &  E.  upon  James  Riv. 
Due  for  his  own  per.  adv.,  the  trans, 
of  his  wife  Elizabeth  Cranage,  4  chil- 
dren: Margarett  Cranage,  Eliza.  Cran- 
age, Mary  Cranage,  &  Edmund  Cranage, 
&  2  servts:  Edward  Sadler,  Richard 
Garner.  Note:  This  pattent  surren- 
dered &  another  made  for  300  acs. 
elsewhere. 

JOHN  WILKINS,  500  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  10  Mar.  1637,  p.  539.  Butt- 
ing upon  the  upper  end  of  the  Secre- 
taries Land  joyning  to  Kings  Cr., 
parallel  with  the  same  1  mi.  &  extend- 
ing in  breadth  toward  land  of  Obedience 
Robins,  Gent.    Trans,  of  10  pers.* 

THOMAS  SAWYER,  250  acs.  Low. 
Co.   of  New  Norf.,    10  Mar.   1637,   p. 

539.  About  2  mi.  up  the  E.  br.  of  Eliz. 
Riv.,  Nly.  upon  sd.  br.,  Sly.  into  the 
woods,  W.  upon  Nehuntas  Cr.  &  E.  up- 
on Billinsgate  Cr.  Due  for  trans,  of  5 
pers:  Christopher  Hamond,  Wm.  Spack- 
ford,  Tho.  Kirke,  Tho.  White,  Isabell 
Ablesome. 

HUMPHRY  SCONE,  200  acs.  Up. 
Co.  of  New  Norf.,  10  Mar.  1637,  p. 
539.  In  the  Cross  Cr.  adj.  land  of 
Margarett  Rogers,  now  the  wife  of  John 
Gerrard,  on  N.  side  of  sd.  Cr.  Due  by 
purchase  from  Francis  Hough,  to  whom 
it  was  due  for  trans,  of  4  pers.*  Note: 
Pattent  renewed  &  100  acs.  added. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


85 


FRANCIS  HOUGH,  of  Nansamund, 
to  HUMPHRY  SCOEN,  assignment  of 
full  right,  title  &c.  to  300  acs.,  which 
is  for  6  servants  belonging  to  sd. 
Hough.  26  Dec.  1636,  p.  540.  Signed: 
Francis  Hough.  Witnesses:  Thomas 
Addison  &  Jon.  Skinner. 

ROBERT  PITTS,  (Pitt)  Merchant, 
550  acs.  Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  14  Feb. 
1637,  p.  540.  About  3>4  mi.  up  New 
Towne  haven  Riv.,  opposite  land  of 
William  Denham  now  in  the  occupa- 
tion of  sd.  Pitts,  &  near  land  of  Tho- 
mas Bush.  Due  for  his  per.  adv.  & 
trans,  of  10  pers:  William  Denson, 
Edwd.  Hartwell,  Rich.  Gaunt,  Edward 
Butler,  Francis  Burly,  Nath.  Carter, 
Hen.  Symons,  Wm.  Seldome,  Richard 
Burges,  Rich.  Groves  (first  written 
Graves  ) . 

EDWARD  MORTH,  100  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  16  Dec.  1637,  p.  541.  In 
Smiths  fort  Cr.,  Ely.  into  the  woods  & 
a  great  marsh  or  swamp  to  the  S.  S.  W. 
&  another  marsh  to  the  Nwd.  comonly 
called  Erasmus  Carters  his  Neck.  Due 
for  trans,  of  himself  &  1  servt.  Richard 
Deane. 

HENRY  TOMPSON,  150  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  16  Dec.  1637,  p.  541.  Ely. 
upon  Smiths  Fort  Cr.,  Sly.  upon  land 
now  leased  to  John  Buckmaster,  W.  in- 
to the  woods  &  N.  upon  a  reedy  Sw. 
lying  upon  sd.  Cr.  50  acs.  for  his  own 
per.  adv.  &  100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2 
pers:  Jon.  Gee,  Robt.  Medle.  Note: 
Renewed  16  Apr.  1644  in  the  name  of 
John  Newman. 

THOMAS  EATON,  400  acs.  Eliz. 
Citty  Co.,  5  June  1638,  p.  542.  S.  W. 
towards  the  head  of  the  back  river. 
Due  in  the  right  of  Mr.  John  Woodall 
according  to  an  order  of  court  10  Dec. 
1633. 


250  acs.  by  certificate  from  the  Monthely 
Court  at  Eliz.  Citty. 

WILLIAM  PARKER,  350  acs.  Co.  of 
Up.  Norf.,  18  June  1638,  p.  543.  N.W. 
upon  Nansamund  Riv.,  beg.  at  Powells 
Cr.  &  butting  upon  his  own  land. 
Trans,  of  7  pers:  Roger  Salisbury, 
Richard  Savage,  Dorothy  Cole,  Edward 
Laughson,  Walter  Williams,  Jon.  Hat- 
ton,  Robert  May. 

PETER  KNIGHT,  Merchant,  400  acs. 
Up.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  18  Nov.  1618, 
p.  543.  On  S.  E.  side  of  Nansamund 
Riv.,  &  about  3  mi.  up  the  E.  side  of  a 
Cr.,  lying  over  against  land  of  Richard 
Bennett  &  adj.  land  of  Robert  Bennett. 
Due  by  assignment  from  Thomas  Bur- 
bage.    (Note:    Evident   error   in  date.) 

JOHN  SEAWARD,  400  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  18  June  1638,  p.  544.  Up- 
on N.  side  of  a  Sw.  or  banck  setting 
out  of  the  maine  Cr.,  lying  N.  W.  upon 
the  main  Cr.  comonly  called  Caryes 
Neck.  Due  for  trans,  of  8  pers:  John 
Seaward,  John  Williams,  Edward 
Brantly,  Wm.  Frye,  Anth.  Mathews, 
Gerson  Gromwell,  Jon.  Lippett,  Phillipp 
Plumblye.  Note:  This  land  surrendered 
&  soe  much  taken  up  in  another  place. 

GEORG  SALISBURY,  500  acs.  Up. 
Co.  of  New  Norf.,  18  June  1638,  p. 
544.  N.  E.  upon  Chuckatuck  Riv.,  S. 
W.  upon  the  same  &c.  Granted  by 
order  of  Ct.  at  James  Citty  4  Dec.  1634. 

JOSEPH  BOARNE,  500  acs.  Chas. 
Citty  Co.,  6  May  1638,  p.  544.  In 
Apamattuck  Riv.,  N.  toward  land  of 
John  Baker  &  S.  towards  land  of  Henry 
Miller.  Due  for  his  own  per.  adv.  & 
trans,  of  9  pers:  Roger  Crewe  (or 
Crawe),  John  Clarke,  Elizabeth  Davis, 
Gilbert  Dakins,  Richard  Delabeere,  Tho. 
White,  Daniell  Keyes,  Alex.  Summers, 
Geo.  Birch. 


SAME.  650  acs.,  same  county,  date 
&  page.  N.  E.  upon  the  Beaver  Damms, 
W.  towards  the  head  of  the  back  river 
&  S.  E.  into  the  woods.  250  acs.  due 
by  patent  dated  11  Mar.  1634  &  150 
acs.  by  patent  6  June  1635,  assigned  to 
him  by  Henry  Cotnam  (or  Totnam)   & 


NICHOLAS  JARNEW  (Jernew), 
400  acs.  Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  6  May  1638, 
p.  545.  E.  upon  sd.  river,  bounded  S. 
E.  with  Queens  Cr.,  runing  parallel  to 
same  untill  cutt  of  by  a  Cr.  called  Jar- 
newes  Jorney.  Due  by  assignment  from 
John  Brocke. 


86 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


EDWARD  STEPHENSON  &  HEN- 
RY COOKENEY,  350  acs.  on  S.  side 
of  the  maine  river  over  against  James 
Citty  called  the  pynie  point,  bounded 
with  Capt.  Powells  land  on  the  W.  & 
E.  upon  land  of  John  Long.  Due  by 
assignment  from  Henry  Hart.  6  May 
1638,  p.  545.  Note:  This  pattern  sur- 
rendered the  bounds  being  mistaken  & 
renewed  by  Sir  Francis  Wyatt. 

JOHN  RADFORD,  200  acs.  Low. 
Co.  of  New  Norf.,  6  May  1638,  p.  546. 
N.  upon  Wrights  Cr.,  S.  upon  Brownes 
Baye  &  E.  upon  the  Westermost  br.  of 
Eliz.  Riv.  Due  by  assignment  from 
John  Slaughter. 

JEREMIAH  DICKENSON,  500  acs. 
James  Citty  Co.,  6  May  1638,  p.  546. 
W.  upon  upper  Chippoeks  Cr.,  beg.  at 
Swann  Baye,  joyning  upon  a  Sw.  Tun- 
ing E.  into  the  woods.  N.  towards  the 
river  mouth  &c.  Trans,  of  10  pers: 
Eliza.  Flinton,  Henry  Hayes,  Elias  Jue, 
James  Hayes,  Robert  Newton,  Robt. 
Muxford,  Sarah  Henchley,  Eliza.  Hayes, 
Wm.  Gage,  Symon  Roufe   (or  Renfo.) 

EDWARD  SPARSHOTT,  350  acs. 
Chas.  Citty  Co.,  6  May  1638,  p.  546. 
Beg.  at  the  N.  side  of  a  small  Indian 
feild  some  2  mi.  or  more  up  Merchants 
hope  Cr.  at  a  small  bottome  on  the  N. 
side  of  sd.  feild  &c.  Due  for  his  per. 
adv.  &  trans,  of  his  wife  Mandelin  (or 
Maudelin)  Canes  (or  Caves),  his  son 
Edward  Sparshott  &  4  pers:  Robert 
Honnywood,  Jer.  Hayles,  Jer.  Watts, 
Jonathan  Grayne.  Note:  This  pattent 
renewed  &  50  acs.  added. 

WILLIAM  CLARKE,  1100  acs.  Hen- 
rico Co.,  6  May  1638,  p.  547.  Beg.  at 
a  little  Cr.,  lying  S.  thereupon,  E.  up 
the  maine  river,  W.  into  the  woods, 
butting  N.  upon  the  Cominers;  100  acs. 
to  be  allowed  for  marshes  &  swamps. 
Due  in  right  of  his  now  wife  Dorothy 
Gardiner  late  widdowe  to  Edward  Gar- 
diner, to  whom  it  was  due  for  trans,  of 
22  pers:  Eliza.  Willis,  Edmd.  Pullum, 
Tho.  Lawly,  Tho.  Somerdale,  Jon. 
Humphry,  Barth.  Farthing,  Jon.  Meader, 
Wm.  Everidge,  Jon.  Wall,  Nich.  Pleg, 
Robt.  Currant,  Tho.  Cooper,  Cha.  Max- 
ney,  Rich.  Jenings,  Oliver  Dennington, 


Nich.  Oliver,  Wm.  &  Teage — Irishmen, 
Joane  Bullock,  Eliza.  Curtis,  Isabel! 
Stubbs,  Hester  Partridge. 

ANN  HALLOM,  Widdow,  &  the 
heires  of  Robert  Hallom,  deed.,  1000 
acs.  Henrico  Co.,  6  May  1638,  p.  547. 
Lying  N.  by  E.  into  the  woods,  S.  by 
W.  upon  the  river,  W.  by  N.  toward 
Bremo  joyning  land  of  Mr.  Richard 
Cocke,  E.  by  S.  toward  Turkey  Island 
Cr.,  joyning  land  of  John  Price,  etc. 
Due  by  bargain  &  sale  from  Arthur 
Bayly,  Merchant. 

JOHN  FLUDD,  Gent.,  2100  acs. 
James  Citty  Co.,  12  May  1638,  p.  548. 
E.  upon  land  of  Capt.  Henry  Browne, 
N.  upon  the  maine  river,  S.  into  the 
maine  woods  &  W.  upon  Benjamine 
Harrisons  marked  trees  being  upon  the 
W.  side  of  Sunken  marsh  Cr.  Trans, 
of  42  pers:  John  Fludd,  Jon.  Conna- 
way,  Morgan  Welch,  Roger  Horner, 
Rich.  Thornbury,  Thomas  Wood,  Jone 
Granley,  Wm.  Wood,  Jon.  Lawrence, 
Jon.  Cole,  Jon.  Rubue,  Jon.  Auerine 
(Averine  ?),  Jon.  Cooper,  Joseph 
Marsh,  Geo.  Bell,  Geo.  Crossland, 
Willi.  Arnold,  Wm.  Sarsonn,  David 
Hayes,  Rich.  Hinde,  Eliza.  Browne, 
Rich.  Bruse,  Ann  Rightsome,  Thomas 
Toolye,  Jon.  White,  Barth.  Horton,  Wm. 
East,  Jon.  Cooke,  Rich.  Hewes,  Dorothy 
Bradly,  Margt.  his  wife,  Frances  Finch 
her  daughter,  John  Fludd,  Junr.,  John 
Right,  Fr.  Shelton,  Wm.  Gage,  Geo. 
Hilliard,  Thomas  Bramston,  John  Buck- 
worth,  Geo.  Watkins. 

JOHN  MERRYMAN,  150  acs.  Chas. 
Citty  Co.,  10  May  1638,  p.  549.  Adj. 
to  Weyanoke,  next  alsoe  adj.  land  of 
Perce  Lennon,  E.  upon  David  Joanes, 
&  N.  N.  W.  into  the  woods.  Due  by 
assignment  from  James  Merryman. 

RICE  HOE,  700  acs.  at  a  place  called 
Capt.  Martins  shipps,  James  Citty  Co., 
9  May  1638,  p.  549.  S.  upon  land  of 
Alice  Edloe,  beg.  over  against  the 
mouth  of  upper  Chippokes  Cr.  Granted 
by  order  of  Ct.,  5  June  1637  &  due 
for  trans,  of  14  pers.*  Note:  This 
pattent  renewed  16  Oct.  1643  &  an- 
other patt.  for  300  acs.  dated  4  June 
1639  &  969  acs.  added  to  them. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


87 


SAME.  1200  acs.  Chas.  Citty  Co., 
same  date  &  page.  Neare  Martin 
Brandon  &  Capt.  Wards  land,  S.  upon 
Capt.  Wards  Cr.  &c,  all  which  land  is 
called  Capt.  Wards  plantation.  100  acs. 
for  the  per.  adv.  of  himself  &  wife  & 
1100  acs.  for  trans,  of  22  pers.* 

JAMES  WARRADINE,  150  acs. 
Chas.  Citty  Co.,  10  May  1638,  p.  550. 
To  begin  next  to  350  acs.  granted  to 
him  3  Nov.  1637.  Trans,  of  3  pers: 
Howell  Palmer,  Jon.  Gosall,  Margarett 
Sinckler. 

THOMAS  BAGWELL,  450  acs. 
Chas.  Citty  Co.,  12  May  1638,  p.  550. 
In  Apamattuck  Riv.,  S.  upon  a  Cr.,  N. 
towards  the  Connjurers  feild,  E.  upon 
the  river  &  W.  into  the  maine  woods. 
100  acs.  due  as  being  an  Ancient 
Planter,  50  acs.  for  his  wife  Joane  & 
300  acs.  for  trans,  of  6  pers:  William 
Wayder,  Walter  Collins,  Benis  (or 
Bevis)  Bulmer,  Jon.  Weaver,  William 
Gill.  Note:  Renewed  in  the  name  of 
John  Cookeney  &  the  old  pattern  sur- 
rendered up  into  the  office. 

ELIZABETH  BALHASH,  300  acs. 
Henrico  Co.,  2  May  1638,  p.  551. 
Within  the  4  Mi.  Cr.  neare  Curies, 
bounding  S.  by  W.  upon  land  of  Wil- 
liam Vincent.  Due  in  part  of  100  acs. 
graunted  by  order  of  Ct.  9  Dec.  1636. 

WALTER  CHILES,  Merchant,  250 
acs.  in  Apamattuck  Riv.  in  Chas.  Citty 
Co.,  2  May  1638,  p.  551.  Nly.  &  Sly. 
upon  the  river,  Wly.  into  the  woods 
from  a  Sw.  on  this  side  a  Cr.  above 
land  of  Edward  Tonstall.  Due  for  his 
own  per.  adv.  &  trans,  of  4  pers:  Henry 
Tutton,  Jon.  Gerry,  Jon.  Shaw,  Sarah 
Cole.  Note:  Renewed  &  150  acs.  added. 

BRYAN  SMITH,  140  acs.  at  Curies 
within  Henrico  Co.,  2  May  1638,  p. 
552.  Adj.  land  of  Thomas  Markham, 
and  E.  by  S.  into  the  woods.  Due  for 
the  per.  adv.  of  himself  &  wife  &  trans, 
of  1  servt.:    John  Lupton. 

ROGER  DAVIS,  550  acs.  in  Apamat- 
tuck Riv.,  Chas.  Citty  Co.,  4  May  1638, 
p.    552.    W.    upon    sd.    river,    abutting 


South  upon  the  Swampe  belonging  to 
Henry  Miller.  Due  for  trans,  of  3 
servts.  &  the  adv.  of  John  Pasmore  & 
Mary  his  wife,  which  sd.  Mary  is  now 
wife  to  sd.  Davis,  &  trans,  of  6  pers: 
Wm.  Serjeant,  Jon.  Panier  (?),  Alex. 
Brett,  Rowland  Williams,  Jane  Honine 
(?),  Tho.  Jent.  Tho.  Jennings,  Alexan- 
der Maties,  Oliver  Simmons.  (Note: 
No  distinction  is  made  between  "ser- 
vants"   &    "persons.") 

WILLIAM  HAYWARD,  200  acs.  in 
Appamattuck  Riv.,  Chas.  Citty  Co.,  5 
May  1638,  p.  553.  Being  marsh  & 
swamp  lying  before  his  plantation 
comonly  called  by  the  name  of  Conjurers 
feilde,  beg.  where  the  land  of  Mr.  John 
Baug(h)  ends.  Due  for  his  own  per. 
adv.,  the  adv.  of  his  wife  Ellen  Hay- 
ward  &  trans,  of  2  pers:  John  Kendall, 
James  Hewes.  Note:  It  appeareth  by 
certificate  from  Edward  Wigg,  Surveyor, 
that   this   land   conteyned   but    130   acs. 

CHRISTOPHER  BRANCH,  250  acs. 
Henrico  Co.,  8  May  1638,  p.  553.  At 
Kings  land  over  against  Arro  Attocks, 
E.  upon  the  maine  river,  bounded  with 
the  second  Cr.  on  the  W.  &  adj.  Sly. 
upon  land  of  John  Griffin  now  in  the 
tenure  of  sd.  Branch  &  Nly.  towards 
land  of  Thomas  Sheffeild.  50  acs.  for 
his  own  per.  adv.  &  200  acs.  for  trans, 
of  4  pers:  Jon.  Gibson,  Jon.  Macham, 
Wm.  Butler,  Wm.  Possell. 


WILLIAM  ROOKINS,  150  acs. 
James  Citty  Co.,  5  May  1638,  p.  554. 
Wly.  upon  upper  Chippokes  Cr.,  N. 
upon  James  Riv.  &  E.  upon  land  of 
Samuell  Edmonds.  Sd.  land  being 
called  by  the  name  of  flying  point.  50 
acs.  due  for  per.  adv.  of  his  wife  Jane 
Baxter  &  100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers: 
Robert  Rigby,  John  Allen. 

WILLIAM  PILKINTON,  200  acs. 
James  Citty  Co.,  4  May  1638,  p.  554. 
S.  upon  Chippokes  Cr.,  W.  into  the 
maine  woods  a  small  cr.  lying  upon 
each  side.  Due  for  trans,  of  4  persons.* 
Note:  This  pattent  renewed  by  Rich- 
ard Kemp,  Govr.,  in  the  name  of  Nicho. 
Perry  &  950  acs.  added,  18  Sept.  1644. 


88 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


CAPT.  WILLIAM  BROCAS,  Esqr., 
one  of  the  Councell  of  State,  50  acs. 
Warwick  River  Co.,  24  May  1638,  p. 
554.  Bounded  Nly.  by  a  Cr.  running 
into  Warwick  Riv.  within  a  quarter  of 
a  mile  of  the  Mills,  more  or  less,  at 
the  head  of  a  Greene  Sw.  close  by  the 
Brooke,  etc.    Due  for  trans,  of  1  servt.* 

JOHN  COOKENEY,  20  acs.  Henrico 
Co.,  17  May  1638,  p.  555.  Being  a 
swamp  within  a  neck  of  land.  Due  for 
trans,  of  1  servt.* 

SAME.  150  acs.,  same  Co.  &  page. 
18  May  1638.  S.  upon  land  of  Joseph 
Chadd,  W.  upon  land  of  Richard  Tay- 
lor, E.  upon  the  maine  river  &  N.  to- 
wards the  4  Mi.  Cr.  Due  for  trans,  of 
3  pers:  Robert  Martin,  Walter  Brookes, 
Tho.  Mitchell. 

HENRY  ROWEN,  300  acs.  Chas. 
Citty  Co.,  neare  adj.  to  Weyanoke,  22 
May  1638,  p.  555.  W.  upon  Mathews 
Cr.,  N.  N.  W.  into  the  woods  &  S. 
upon  James  Riv.  Due  by  assignment 
from  Perce  Lemon. 

BENJAMINE  CARRILL,  700  acs. 
James  Citty  Co.,  16  May  1638,  p.  556. 
Beg.  at  a  sandy  point,  extending  down 
the  river  to  danceing  point,  bounded 
S.  W.  upon  the  Riv.  &  N.  W.  upon 
land  of  Mathew  Edloe.  Due  for  his 
owne  per.  adv.,  trans,  of  his  wife 
Elizabeth  &  12  pers:  Henry  Carrill, 
Ann  Peterson,  Rich.  Reeks,  James 
Whitehead,  Wm.  Hills,  Edmond 
Camellin,  Edwd.  Ellis,  Eliza.  Talley, 
Humphry  Williams,  Jonathan  Darson, 
Laur.  Jackson,  Alex.  Norey. 

JOHN  GRAVES,  200  acs.  Eliz.  Citty 
Co.,  15  May  1638,  p.  556.  Neare  the 
back  river,  Nly.  upon  land  of  sd. 
Graves,  S.  E.  upon  the  Cr.  &c.  Due  by 
assignment  from  John  Trussell. 

ABRAHAM  WOOD,  400  acs.  Chas. 
Citty  Co.,  14  May  1638,  p.  557.  In 
Appamattuck  Riv.,  N.  upon  land  of 
John  Baker,  E.  into  the  maine  woods, 
S.  upon  land  of  Joseph  Bourne  &  W. 
upon  the  maine  river  over  against 
Peircies  Toyle  Cr.  Trans,  of  8  pers: 
Thomas    Croiney,    Robt.    Powell,    Nich. 


Meader,  Jon.  Baylye,  Edmond  Edwards, 
Jone  Higgins,  Allen  Tucker,  Roger 
Kenney. 

PETER  STAFFERTON,  200  acs. 
Eliz.  Citty  Co.,  13  May  1638,  p.  557. 
S.  E.  upon  the  head  of  the  little  Poquo- 
son Cr.,  on  W.  side  of  the  land  of 
Dictoris  Christmas  &  bounded  on  E. 
with  land  of  John  Moore.  Due  by  as- 
signment from  John  Trussell. 

CHARLES  FOARD,  250  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  19  May  1638,  p.  557.  Over 
against  Danceing  point  on  the  S.  side 
of  the  river,  E.  side  of  Sunken  Marsh 
Cr.,  W.  upon  sd.  Cr.  &c.  Due  by  as- 
signment from  Edward  Minter. 

JOHN  HOLLIS  &  RICHARD  BEN- 
NETT, 200  acs.  Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  21  May 
1638,  p.  558.  E.  Sly.  upon  Chisopeian 
Baye,  N.  upon  the  back  Cr.,  W.  Nly. 
upon  Cheesemans  Cr.  Due  by  assign- 
ment from  Capt.  John  Cheesman. 

MATHEW  PRICE,  sonn  &  heire  to 
John  Price,  late  of  Va.,  Labourer,  150 
acs.  Henrico  Co.,  upon  Turkey  Island 
Cr.,  23  May  1638,  p.  558.  E.  by  S. 
upon  sd.  Cr.,  W.  by  N.  toward  Bremo, 
S.  by  W.  upon  land  granted  to  his  late 
father,  now  in  possession  of  his  mother 
Ann  Hallom,  widdowe,  towards  the  gr. 
river  &  N.  by  E.  into  the  woods.  Due 
in  right  of  his  father  who  had  a  pattent 
of  150  acs.  graunted  20  Feb.  1619,  by 
Sir  Georg  Yeardly. 

EDMOND  MORECROFT  &  JOHN 
DANSEY,  700  acs.  James  Citty  Co.,  20 
May  1638,  p.  559-  In  Chichahominy 
Riv.  some  4  mi.  above  Clay  banck 
somewhat  better  than  a  mile  from  the 
river  side,  Ely.  towards  the  river  be- 
hind land  of  William  Frye,  W.  above 
the  head  of  Pasbye  hayes  Cr.,  S.  upon 
a  gr.  Sw.  full  of  dead  trees  neare  land 
of  Theodore  Moyses.  Trans,  of  14 
pers.* 

JOHN  BAUGH,  Gent,  250  acs.  in 
Appamattuck  Riv,  Henrico  Co,  11 
May  1638,  p.  559-  N.  E.  by  E.  upon 
land  lately  belonging  to  Mr.  Abraham 
Peircey,  extending  S.  W.  by  W.  up  the 
river    &c.    Due    for    trans,    of    5    pers: 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


89 


Geo.     Channon,     Tho.     Butler,     Ann 
Streets,   Rich.  Plant,  William  Peterson. 

WILLIAM  HATCHER,  150  acs.  in 
Apamattuck  Riv.,  Nly.  upon  the  first 
Cr.  by  the  wading  place,  E.  upon  land 
of  Mary  Box  &  S.  into  the  maine  woods. 
29  May  1638,  p.  559.  Trans,  of  3 
pers:  Nicholas  Ison,  Francis  Dunell, 
Francis  Dunell,  Henry  Lilley. 

SARAH  CLOYDEN,  Widdowe,  200 
acs.  Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  28  May  1638, 
p.  560.  Adj.  land  of  Humphry  Sconen. 
Due  in  right  of  trans,  of  4  pers:  Tobias 
Horton,  Giles  Taylor,  John  Taylor, 
Henry  Symons.  Note:  This  pattern  as- 
signed to  John  Allen,  who  assigned  to 
Humphry  Scoen  &  by  him  to  Henry 
Bradly,  in  whose  name  it  was  renewed 
21  Nov.  1643. 

SAME.  150  acs.  Up.  Co.  of  New 
Norf.,  same  date  &  page.  Adj.  land  of 
Peter  Rey.  Due  in  right  of  trans,  of  3 
pers:  John  Cole,  Tho.  Hart,  Mould 
Snackson.  Note:  Assigned  as  above. 
This  &  the  former  pattern  joyned  &  100 
acs.  more  added. 

MATHEW  HAYWARD,  150  acs. 
Low.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  26  May  1638, 
p.  561.  E.  upon  the  W.  br.  of  Eliz. 
Riv.  &  N.  upon  the  broad  cr.  runing 
out  of  sd.  branch.  Due  for  trans,  of 
his  wife  Ann  &  2  pers.* 

JOSEPH  FAR  YE,  250  acs.  in  Apa- 
mattuck Riv.,  Chas.  Citty  Co.,  27  May 
1638,  p.  561.  W.  upon  the  falls,  N. 
upon  land  of  Thomas  Bagwell,  a  Cr. 
runing  between,  &  upon  the  N.  side  of 
the  Riv.  opposite  land  of  Nathaniell 
Tatum.  Due  for  his  own  per.  adv.,  his 
wife  Ann  Farye  &  trans,  of  3  pers: 
Edward  Hutchinson,  Richard  Sadd,  John 
Lewis. 

EDWARD  OLIVER,  500  acs.  upon 
the  E.  side  of  Chichahominy  Riv., 
called  by  the  name  of  Pynie  point,  W. 
upon  the  Riv.,  N.  by  E.  upon  the  upper 
Cr.,  &  S.  S.  E.  upon  Chechqeroes  Baye. 
1  May  1638,  p.  562.  Due  in  right  of 
trans,  of  10  pers:  Thomas  Golding 
Dorothy  Golding,  John  Smith,  Thomas 
Grindall,    John    Turner,    Francis    Web- 


ster, Thomas  Boaton,  Georg  Barber, 
Ann  Edmonds,  servts.  to  Xpher.  Ed- 
wards, Thomas  Edwards.  Note:  This 
pattent  surrendered  up  &  soe  much 
taken  in  another  place. 

GLOYD  BLOYS  alias  St.  Andrew, 
50  acs.  Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  26  May  1638, 
p.  562.  Adj.  land  of  Joseph  Croshawe 
upon  Vincopo  (?)  Cr.,  &  E.  upon  sd. 
River.  Due  for  trans,  of  one  servt. 
called   Joseph   Crashaw. 

ABRAHAM  SPENCER,  150  acs. 
James  Citty  Co.,  called  the  Greene 
Swamp,  25  May  1638,  p.  562.  Adj. 
plantation  in  possession  of  Thomas 
Loveing,  N.  W.  into  the  woods  towards 
the  midle  plantation  &  S.  E.  upon  the 
river.    Trans,  of  3  pers.* 

CHRISTOPHER  STOAKES,  200  acs. 
Warwick  River  Co.,  20  May  1638,  p. 
563.  At  the  head  of  Blunt  point  Cr. 
Trans,  of  4  pers.* 

JOHN  CLARKSON,  400  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.  Co.,  7  May  1638,  p.  563.  At  the 
back  Cr.  at  the  head  of  his  first  devdt., 
runing  to  a  br.  of  Cheesmans  Cr.,  thence 
E.  Sly.  three-quarters  of  a  mile  untill  it 
meete  with  a  Cr.  out  of  the  Baye,  thence 
to  the  mouth  of  Chewes  Cr.  &  thence  to 
the  midle  of  his  first  devdt.  Due  for 
trans,  of  8  pers:  William  Allen,  Wm. 
Hackney,  Richard  Hole,  Elizabeth 
Huson,  Ann  Clarkson,  Jane  Clarkson, 
Ann  Clarkson,  Wid. 

JOHN  POWELL,  50  acs.  Eliz.  Citty 
Co.,  2  May  1638,  p.  564.  Upon  the 
narrow  of  the  back  river  &c,  between 
land  of  Thornborough  on  the  S.  W.  & 
William  Morgan  alias  Brookes  on  the 
N.  E.  Due  in  right  of  trans,  of  Wil- 
liam Taylor. 

CHRISTOPHER  LAWSON,  400  acs. 
James  Citty  Co.,  1  May  1638,  p.  564. 
At  the  head  of  Rolphes  Cr.,  beg.  E. 
upon  a  reedy  Sw.  &  into  the  woods  W. 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  William  Reynolds, 
William  Coyt,  Roger  Aderson,  Nicholas 
Williams,  Anthony  a  boy,  Thomas 
Wood,  Georg  Griffin,  Thomas  Womb- 
well  (first  written  Rombwell). 


90 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


WILLIAM  ARMESTEAD,  300  acs. 
Eliz.  Citty  Co.,  16  May  1638,  p.  564. 
E.  upon  the  mouth  of  broad  Cr.,  S. 
upon  the  back  river,  N.  upon  John 
Branch,  a  small  Cr.  runing  between,  & 
W.  into  the  woods.  Due  by  assignment 
from  Leift.  Richard  Popeley,  to  whom 
it  was  due,  viz:  200  acs.  in  right  of 
Giles  Jones  for  exchange  of  100  acs.  at 
Point  Comfort  Island  &  100  acs.  in 
right  of  Elizabeth,  late  wife  to  sd.  Jones 
&  now  wife  to  sd.  Popelev,  which  sd. 
Elizabeth  lived  here  in  the  time  of  Sir 
Thomas  Dale. 

WILLIAM  RAINSHAW,  300  acs. 
Low.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  5  May  1638, 
p.  565.  About  6  mi.  up.  the  Ewd.  br. 
of  Eliz.  Riv.  &c.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
Cevell  Gaskins,  William  Brewer,  Henry 
Jones,  Richard  Sternall,  Jon.  Hackley, 
John  Wells. 

COBB  HOWELL,  400  acs.  in  Lynn 
haven,  within  the  Low.  Co.  of  New 
Norf.,  7  May  1638,  p.  565.  N.  E.  upon 
Chesopeian  river  alias  Lynn  haven,  N. 
W.  upon  a  small  Cr.  &c.  Due  for  his 
own  per.  adv.  &  trans,  of  7  pers: 
Christopher  Nugent,  Edward  Brough- 
ton,  William  Hunt,  William  Mathews, 
Charles  Clarke,  Edward  Clarke,  Robert 
Cape. 

RICHARD  MAIOR,  300  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.  Co.,  12  May  1638,  p.  566.  S.  up- 
on Queens  Cr.,  bounded  on  the  W. 
with  a  Sw.  runing  N.  W.  &c.  Due  in 
right  of  trans,  of  6  pers:  Georg  Gaton, 
Ann  Drake,  James  Holding,  Thomas 
Breamer,  Richard  Miller,  Margarett 
Miller. 

RICHARD  YOUNG,  100  acs.  in 
New  Towne  haven  river,  runing  N.  N. 
W.  into  the  woods  &  adj.  land  of 
Richard  Preston.  11  May  1638,  p.  566. 
Due  for  trans,  of  2  pers.*  Renewed  24 
Aug.  1643  &  a  pattern  of  25  Nov. 
1636  added. 

HENRY  SENIOR  &  HENRY  CAR- 
MAN, 150  acs.  James  Citty  Co.,  10 
May  1638,  p.  566.  N.  upon  Up.  Chip- 
pokes  Cr.,  W.  upon  land  of  Thomas 
Weekes,  E.  on  a  little  Cr.  &  S.  into  the 
woods.    Due    for    trans,     of     3     pers: 


William     Lambdin,     Martha     Lambdin, 
Robert  Lambdin. 

THOMAS  SWAN,  300  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  9  May  1638,  p.  567.  N.  up- 
on James  Riv.,  S.  into  the  woods,  W. 
upon  land  lately  belonging  to  Capt. 
Ralph  Hamer  &  now  in  possession  of 
Jerimiah  Clements  &  E.  upon  land  of 
Edward  Minter.  Due  in  right  of  trans, 
of  6  pers.*  by  his  late  father  Wm. 
Swan. 

THOMAS  ELLIS,  50  acs.  Henrico 
Co.,  7  May  1638,  p.  567.  Between  two 
brookes  parting  Neck  of  land  from  land 
lately  belonging  to  Sir  John  Zouch,  Kt., 
Nly.  upon  the  maine  river  &  Sly.  into 
the  woods  lying  next  to  Shipp  Cr.  Due 
in  right  of  trans,  of  1  servt:  Richard 
Morris. 

HUMPHRY  TABB,  100  acs.  Eliz. 
Citty  Co.,  6  May  1638,  p.  567.  Beg. 
Nly.  upon  a  br.  of  Harris  his  Cr.  &c, 
runing  to  land  lately  belonging  to  Capt. 
Richard  Stephens  neare  land  of  Ralph 
Fludd,  W.  Sly.  adj.  land  leased  to  Elias 
Leguard,  S.  into  the  woods  &  E.  upon 
that  side  of  Harris  his  Cr.  which  James 
Vaberitt  liveth.  Due  for  trans,  of  2 
pers:    Copeland,  Richard  Ball. 

JOHN  MOYE,  300  acs.  Low.  Co.  of 
New  Norf.,  5  May  1638,  p.  568.  With- 
in the  second  baye  of  a  Cr.  proceeding 
Ely.  out  of  Chisopeian  Riv.  alias  Lynn 
haven,  N.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Henry 
Woodhowse  &  W.  into  the  woods.  Due 
for  his  own  per.  adv.,  trans,  of  his 
wife  Dorothy  Moye  &  4  pers:  William 
Martin,  Thomas  Thorne,  Christopher 
Wynn,  William  Titon. 

HENRY  WALKER,  175  acs.  Acco- 
macke  Co.,  17  May  1638,  p.  568.  Butt- 
ing upon  the  baye  &c,  bounded  on  N. 
by  the  deepe  ditch  &  on  S.  by  land  of 
James  Berry.  Due  for  trans,  of  4  pers.*, 
there  being  yett  due  25  acs. 

JOHN  UTYE,  sonn  &  heire  of  Capt. 
John  Utye,  Esqr.,  late  of  Va.,  1250  acs. 
at  the  head  of  Utye  his  Cr.  in  Charles 
Riv.,  12  May  1638,  p.  569.  Bounded 
towards  James  Riv.  with  midle  way 
Swamp,  which  sw.   is   included   in   this 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


91 


grant,  towards  the  midle  plantation, 
with  the  woods  towards  sd.  Riv.  neare 
upon  his  own  land  &  E.  upon  sd.  Cr. 
Due  in  right  of  his  father,  600  acs. 
whereof  graunted  by  order  of  Ct.,  8 
Oct.  1630  for  his  per.  adv.  to  the  sd. 
Chiskiake;  the  other  650  acs.  due  for 
the  adv.  of  13  pers.*  the  first  yeare  to 
sd.  Chiskiack.  Note:  "This  pattern 
never  passed  the  seale." 

JOHN  WAYNE,  300  acs.  Chas.  Riv. 
Co.,  10  May  1638,  p.  569.  N.  upon 
Utyes  Cr.,  E.  upon  the  Gleab  land,  S. 
upon  land  of  Capt.  Robert  Felgate  & 
W.  by  N.  into  the  woods.  Due  accord- 
ing to  the  order  for  the  adv.  of  him- 
selfe  &  5  pers.  the  1st  yeare  to  sd. 
Chas.  River:  Ann  Wayne  his  wife, 
Mary  Ackland,  Georg  Ackland,  Wm. 
Watts,  Charity  Ellerye. 

ABRAHAM  ENGLISH,  50  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.  Co.,  7  May  1638,  p.  569.  N.  upon 
the  Riv.,  bounded  on  W.  with  land  in 
possession  of  Robert  Todd  &  on  E. 
with  land  of  Francis  Carter.  Due  ac- 
cording to  order  for  his  own  per.  adv. 
the  first  yeare  to  Charles  Riv. 

NICHOLAS  CLARKE,  150  acs. 
Chas.  River  Co.,  11  May  1638,  p.  570. 
N.  upon  the  maine  river,  bounded  on 
W.  with  land  of  Capt.  Christopher 
Wormely  &  E.  with  land  of  Nicholas 
Cossin,  S.  S.  W.  into  the  woods  a  mile, 
crossing  the  back  Cr.  Due  in  right  of 
adv.  of  3  pers.  the  1st  yeare  to  sd.  Chas. 
River:  Nicholas  Clarke,  Robert  Todd, 
Jeffery  Powers. 

NICHOLAS  COSSIN,  50  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.  Co.,  9  May  1638,  p.  570.  N.  upon 
the  river,  bounded  on  the  W.  by  land 
of  Nicholas  Clarke,  E.  with  land  of 
Nicholas  Dale  &c.  Due  for  his  adv. 
the  1st  yeare  to  sd.  Chas.  River. 

NICHOLAS  DALE,  75  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.  Co.,  8  May  1638,  p.  571.  N.  upon 
the  Riv.,  bounded  on  W.  with  land  of 
Nicholas  Cossin,  on  E.  with  land  of 
Robert  Todd,  S.  S.  W.  into  the  woods 
&c.  Due  by  order  for  the  per.  adv.  of 
himself  &  wife  the  first  yeare  to  sd. 
Chas.  River,  there  being  25  yett  due  for 
sd.  adv. 


LIVEING  (orLineing)  DENWOOD, 
50  acs.  Accomack  Co.,  15  July  1638,  p. 

571.  E.  upon  Cabbin  branch,  W.  on 
Georg  Travellors  plantation  Cr.  S.  on 
the  maine  creek  called  the  old  planta- 
tion Cr.,  &  N.  into  the  woods.  21  yr. 
lease.    Fee  Rent:    2  bbls.  Indian  Corne. 

JOHN  LEWIN,  500  acs.  Co.  of  Up. 
Norf.,  6  May  1638,  p.  571.  On  the 
back  side  of  land  lately  belonging  to 
Thomas  Jordan,  bounded  with  a  Cr. 
runing  Nly.  into  the  woods  &c.  Due 
in  right  of  Mary  his  wife,  late  the  wife 
of  Thomas  Butler,  Clerke,  whoe  trans, 
himselfe  &  9  pers.* 

WILLIAM  CARTER,  1000  acs. 
James  Citty  Co.,  21  May  1638,  p.  572. 
About  3  mi.  from  James  Riv.,  beg.  at 
a  Reedy  Sw.,  W.  into  the  woods,  N. 
into  the  bay  tree  neck.  Trans,  of  20 
pers:  Avis  Turtley,  Ann  Mathis,  Alice 
Croxon,  Wm.  Atherson  (or  Acherson), 
Andrew  Robinson,  Richard  Cooke,  Fr. 
Bick,  Richard  Bick,  Alice  Watkins, 
Alice  Johnsons,  Eliz.  Johnson,  Henry 
Snow,  Nich.  Barnett,  Edward  Bland, 
Math  Briste,  John  Bell,  Hercules 
Messenger,  Tho.  Streete,  Wm.  Higgen- 
son,  Rose  Hill. 

WILLIAM  MORGAN,  600  acs.  in 
Chichahominy  Riv.  within  half  a  mile 
of  the  head  of  the  second  Cr.  below  the 
Gulfe  upon  the  E.  side  of  the  river, 
this  br.  of  the  Cr.  lying  N.  into  the 
woods  bearing  from  the  Cr.  N.  W.  into 
the  woods  with  a  little  Indian  feild 
neare   the   Cr.    side.    20   May    1638,    p. 

572.  Trans.  of  12  pers:  Mathew 
Beaver  (or  Beaner),  Leonard  Clackett, 
Isabell  Sanders,  Margarett  Wignoll, 
Melchesidec  Lawrance,  Susan  Hare, 
John  Cane  (or  Cave),  Edward  Lang- 
ford,  David  Mack  Williams,  James 
Taylor,  Wm.  Dorman,  Lazarus  Thomas. 
Note:  Renewed  22  Oct.  1643  &  216 
acs.  added. 

THOMAS  BURBAGE,  Merchant,  600 
acs.  Up.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  7  May 
1638,  p.  573.  Upon  E.  side  of  the 
mouth  of  Nansamund  Riv.,  adj.  land  of 
John  Parrott  Westerly,  &  Ely.  upon 
land  of  Capt.  John  Sibsey.  Due  for 
trans,    of    12    pers:    Thomas    Burbage, 


92 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Christo.  Young,  Richard  Goodman, 
William  Hayes,  Nicholas  Troton,  Tho- 
mas Deering,  Patrick  Wishart,  5  pers. 
assigned  from  Mr.  Edward  Cage. 

JONATHAN   LANGWORTH,    Chi- 

rurgion,  400  acs.  at  Lyn  haven,  Low. 
Co.   of   New  Norf.,    10   May   1638,   p. 

573.  Upon  Bennetts  Cr.  Due  for  trans, 
of  8  pers.* 

JOSEPH  CROSHAW,  600  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.  Co.,  22  May  1638,  p.  573.  Being 
a  long  sandy  point  to  the  Nwd.  of 
Queens  Cr.,  about  2  mi.  from  same, 
N.  E.  upon  the  maine  river  &c.  Due 
by  assignment  from  William  Prior, 
Gent.  Note:  This  pattern  surrendered 
&  renewed  in  the  name  of  William 
Allen.    Test:    Richard   Lee. 

ROBERT  FREEMAN,  Merchant,  50 
acs.   Chas.   Riv.    Co.,    8   May    1638,    p. 

574.  In  the  New  Poquoson,  lying  from 
the  ponds  in  Brice  his  neck  N.  E.  to 
the  side  of  sd.  river.  Due  in  right  of 
one  servant  trans.* 

SAME.  200  acs.,  same  location,  date 
&  page.  Due  by  assignment  from  Wil- 
liam Freeman. 

JOHN  STRATTON,  200  acs.  in  Lyn 
haven,  Low.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  9  May 
1638,  p.  574.  Upon  West  his  Cr.,  Tun- 
ing E.  out  of  Lyn  haven  Riv.  &c.  Due 
for  trans,  of  4  pers:  Olive  Strey,  James 
Walker,  John  Phillipps,  Tho.  Gregory. 

RICHARD  HILL  &  ROGER  ARN- 
WOOD,  300  acs.  in  Chichahominy 
Riv.,  James  Citty  Co.,  4  May  1638,  p. 

575.  Being  a  neck  of  land  in  the 
second  Cr.  below  the  Gulfe  on  the  E. 
side  of  sd.  river,  beg.  at  the  lower  end 
of  sd.  Neck  &c.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
Katherine  Hill,  (his)  wife,  Richard 
Hill,  John  Davie,  servt.  to  R.  Hill; 
Roger  Arnwood  his  own  adv.,  Nicholas 
Martin,  Thomas  Smith,  John  Edlin,  his 


NICHOLAS  JARNEW,  500  acs. 
Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  15  May  1638,  p.  575. 
E.  upon  sd.  river,  bounded  on  the  S.  E. 
with  Queens  Cr.,  parallel  with  same 
untill  cut  off  by  Jarnew  Cr.    100  acs. 


being  marsh  land  lying  about  his  plan- 
tation. 400  acs.  by  deed  of  sale  from 
John  Broche  13  Mar.  1637  &  100  acs. 
for  trans,  of  2  pers:  John  Davis, 
Robert  Arnoll. 

JOHN  BROCHE  to  NICHOLAS 
JARNEW,  400  acs.  (above  land),  13 
Mar.  1638,  p.  576.  Signed:  John 
Broche.  Witnesses:  Fnces.  Moryson  & 
Tho.  Clarke. 

MATHEW  IRELAND,  300  acs. 
Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  23  May  1638,  p.  576. 
About  2  mi.  above  Queens  Cr.,  up  the 
maine  river,  joyning  upon  600  acs.  pur- 
chased by  Joseph  Croshaw  of  Mr. 
William  Prior.  Due  in  right  of  descent 
from  his  father  John  Ireland,  who  trans, 
himself,  his  wife  Martha  Ireland,  son 
John  Ireland,  Junr.,  Mathew  Ireland, 
daughter  Martha  Ireland,  &  Thomas 
Reaves,  a  servant. 

AUGUSTINE  WARNER,  450  acs.  at 
the  New  Poquoson,  within  the  Co.  of 
Chas.  Riv.,  called  Pynie  Neck,  13  May 
1638,  p.  577.  E.  upon  the  Baye,  S. 
upon  land  of  Samuell  Bennett  &  Nly. 
upon  Pettye  his  land.  Due  for  his  own. 
personal  adv.,  the  adv.  of  his  wife  Mary 
Warner  &  trans,  of  7  pers:  John  Max- 
feild,  Martin  Tam.   (Others  not  given). 

THOMAS  TODD,  250  acs.  Low.  Co. 
of  New  Norf.,  12  May  1638,  p.  577. 
Being  a  neck  of  land  lying  up  the  back 
creek  called  the  Little  Cr.,  between  the 
plantations  of  Capt.  Adam  Thorogood 
&  Capt.  Thomas  Willoughby,  about  a 
mile  up  the  Cr.  on  the  W.  side,  N.  Ely. 
above  an  Indian  feild  about  the  space 
of  a  mile,  sd.  feild  haveing  a  fresh 
water  pond  joyning  unto  it.  Due  for 
trans,  of  5  pers:  John  Williams,  Rich- 
ard Wootton,  John  Withers,  John 
Johnsons,  John  Fells. 

THOMAS  WATTS,  150  acs.  in  Lyn 
haven,  Low.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  26 
July  1638,  p.  577.  N.  W.  upon  land  of 
Cobb  Howell.  Due  for  trans,  of  3 
pers:  Jon.  Rochester,  Edward  Morgan, 
Ellen  Edwards. 

THOMAS  BUSH,  100  acs.  Up.  Co. 
of  New  Norf.,   26  July   1638,   p.   578. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


93 


In  the  river  called  Chuckatuck,  S.  upon 
the  Cr.  of  sd.  river.  Due  for  his  own 
per.  adv.  &  trans,  of  one  servt:  Peter 
Brookes. 

JOHN  GATER,  800  acs.  Low  Co.  of 
New  Norf.,  26  July  1638,  p.  578.  In 
the  E.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  E.  upon  a  Cr. 
called  dum  out  of  the  Mire,  Ely.  &  Sly. 
beyond  Oyster  shell  point.  Due  for 
trans,  of  16  pers:  John  Gater,  Jane 
Gater,  Tho.  Hale,  Christ.  Barston,  Ed- 
ward Besaker,  Tho.  Rouse,  Wm.  Ples- 
bery,  Rich.  Tisley,  Thomas  Merrideth, 
Fr.  Merrideth,  Tho.  Meades,  Robert 
,  Wm.  Goldsmith,  Wm.  Rice,  Ed- 
ward Windett,  Wm.  Johnson. 

WALTER  ASHTON,  Gent.,  590  acs. 
Chas.  Citty  Co.,  26  July  1638,  p.  578. 
Between  land  of  Sherly  hundred  &  land 
he  purchased  of  Nathaniell  Causey,  Sly. 
upon  Watkins  his  Cr.,  Wly.  upon  the 
head  of  land  of  Sherly  hundred.  Due 
for  the  per.  adv.  of  himself  &  his  wife 
Warbowe  Ashton  &  trans,  of  10  pers: 
James  Jefferson,  William  Ward,  Tho- 
mas Sheild,  Richard  Williams,  Jon. 
Williams,  Wm.  Johnes,  John  Hobbs, 
John  Esquire,  Jon.  Roberts,  John 
Macey. 

EDWARD  HILL,  Gent.,  450  acs. 
Chas.  Cittie  Co.,  neare  unto  a  place 
called  by  the  name  of  Jordans  or  Beg- 
gars bush,  25  July  1638,  p.  579.  N. 
upon  the  head  of  land  called  Jordans, 
towards  the  river,  S.,  into  the  maine 
woods,  West  upon  land  of  John  Wood- 
liffe  &  E.  towards  Chaplins  land.  Due 
for  his  own  per.  adv.  &  trans,  of  8  pers: 
Daniell  Garner,  Barbary  Hale,  Morris 
Bowen,  Christ.  South,  Wm.  Milton, 
John  Frederick,  Elias  Collins,  Nicholas 
Maton  (or  Matou). 

NATHANIELL  TATUM,  100  acs. 
on  Appamattucke  Riv.,  Chas.  Cittie  Co., 
25  July  1638,  p.  579.  S.  into  the 
woods,  N.  upon  the  river,  E.  upon  a 
Cr.  parting  sd.  land  from  his  own  500 
acs.  &  W.  upon  the  river  towards  land 
of  John  Baker.  Due  for  trans,  of  his 
wife  Ann  &  his  daughter  Mary  Tatum. 

JOHN  WOODLIFFE,  Gent.,  200 
acs.  Chas.  Cittie  Co.,  neare  unto  a  place 


called  Jordans,  25  July  1638,  p.  580. 
Upon  the  head  of  his  former  devdt. 
towards  the  river,  S.  into  the  woods,  E. 
towards  land  called  Beggars  bush  &  W. 
upon  land  of  Francis  Poythers.  Due  for 
his  own  per.  adv.  &  trans,  of  3  pers: 
John  Smith,  Henry  Stephens,  Elizabeth 
Wills.  Note:  This  pattern  renewed  & 
adj.  to  patt.  of  750  acs. 

ELIZABETH  GRAYNE,  (orGrayve) 
Widdowe,  750  acs.  Chas.  Citty  Co.,  25 
July  1638,  p.  580.  E.  into  the  woods, 
W.  upon  the  river,  N.  upon  land  of 
John  Morgan,  S.  towards  Doggins  Cr., 
part  of  sd.  land  bounded  with  a  br.  of 
Turkey  Island  Cr.  Due  in  right  of 
trans,  of  15  pers:  Rowland  Grayne, 
James  Grayne,  Nich.  Cliffe,  Hen.  Bent- 
ly,  William  Rowly,  Robert  Holman, 
Martha  Fludd,  Jon.  Parker,  Robt.  Fute, 
Fr.  Downes,  Daniell  Arrye,  Jon.  Doo- 
bees,  Sarah  Keelin,  Jon.  Dale,  Richard 
Falconer. 

JOHN  GEORGE,  900  acs.  in  Baylyes 
Cr.,  Chas.  Cittie  Co.,  25  July  1638,  p. 
581.  N.  by  W.  upon  sd.  Creek,  E.  by 
N.  upon  land  of  Thomas  Bayle  &  W. 
by  S.  upon  the  head  of  sd.  Cr.  Trans, 
of  18  pers:  Jane  George  his  wife, 
Hugh  Davie,  Wm.  Parsons,  Jon.  (or 
Tho.)  Jones,  Ellianor  Clayden,  Tho. 
Osben,  Ralph  Cony  (or  Covy — first 
written  Long),  Christ.  Williams,  Fran- 
cis Biggs,  Tho.  Head,  John  Vaus, 
Jeffery  Evans,  Richard  Reynolds,  John 
Annice,  Mary  Hodgkins,  John  Cooke, 
Georg  Miller,  Thomas  Bernard. 

EDWARD  SPARSHOTT,  400  acs. 
Chas.  Cittie  Co.,  25  July  1638,  p.  581. 
W.  by  S.  into  the  woods  towards  the 
head  of  Merchants  hope  Cr.,  E.  by  N. 
upon  same,  N.  by  W.  upon  a  tract  of 
land  called  Merchants  hope,  S.  by  E. 
upon  land  of  Sergeant  Richard  Tisdell. 
Due  for  his  own  per.  adv.  &  trans,  of 
7  pers:  Mandlin  Caves,  (or  Canes) 
Edward  Sparshott,  Junr.,  Robert  Honny- 
wood,  Jerimiah  Hayles,  Jerimiah  Watts, 
Jonathan  Grayne,  (or  Grayve)  Thomas 
Carter. 

JOHN  UTYE,  sonn  &  heire  of  Capt. 
John  Utye,  late  of  Va.,  Esqr.,  1250  acs. 
Chas.  Riv.  Co.,   25  July   1638,  p.   581. 


94 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


At  the  head  of  Utye  his  Cr.,  bounded 
towards  James  Riv.  with  Midleway  Sw., 
which  is  included  in  this  grant,  towards 
the  midle  plantation  towards  Chas.  Riv. 
neare  upon  his  own  land  &  E.  upon  sd. 
Creek.  Due  in  right  of  trans,  of  25 
pers.*  by  his  father. 

WILLIAM  BANNISTER,  (Banister) 
1000  acs.,  25  July  1638,  p.  582.  300 
acs.  butting  upon  Footeball  quarter  Cr. 
on  the  E.  side,  Ely.  towards  Tinkers- 
heires  Neck;  also  a  neck  of  land  upon 
the  old  Poquoson  called  Tinkersheires 
Neck  Nly.  towards  the  New  Poquoson. 
What  these  2  parcels  shall  want  of 
1000  acs.  to  bee  supplyed  at  Boare 
quarter  at  the  head  of  the  Great  Marsh. 
Due  in  right  of  trans,  of  20  pers.  by 
Georg  Downes,  late  of  Va.,  Merchant, 
which  right  was  purchased  by  sd.  Banis- 
ter: John  Patrick,  Jon.  Forbush,  Wil- 
liam Cotton,  Tho.  Cadby  (or  Cadly), 
Jon.  Baker,  Mathew  Morgan,  James 
Harrison,    Tho.    Hewes,    Tho.    Trotter, 

Elias    ,     Richard     Bayly,     William 

Banister,  Jon.  Cerye,  Wm.  Lethermore, 
"Bas  a  Negar",  Anthony,  William, 
Mary,  John,  Jacob,  Negars. 

EDWARD  MINTER,  300  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  25  July  1638,  p.  583.  At 
the  Up.  Chippokes,  bounded  on  the  W. 
with  a  great  Sw.  next  to  land  of  Ben- 
jamine  Harrison,  runing  along  the  S. 
side  of  James  Riv.  towards  land  of 
Jerimiah  Clements.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
Grace  Minter  his  wife,  Richard  Hyde, 
Ann  Emmerton,  Hen.  Patrick,  Edward 
Young,  John  Cooper. 

JOHN  HACKER,  150  acs.,  25  July 
1638,  p.  583.  Upon  the  W.  side  of  the 
Up.  Chippokes,  being  a  neck  of  land 
betwixt  2  small  creeks,  Ely.  upon  the 
maine  Cr.  of  Chippokes  &c.  50  acs.  for 
his  own  per.  adv.  &  100  acs.  for  trans, 
of  2  pers:  Abraham  Hill,  Christopher 
Hold. 

NATHANIELL  TATUM,  500  acs. 
in  Appamattuck  Riv.,  W.  upon  a  great 
Cr.,  S.  into  the  maine  woods,  E.  upon 
Causeys  feild  Cr.  &  N.  upon  sd.  river. 
24  July  1638,  p.  583.  Due  by  assign- 
ment from  Thomas  Causey. 


RANDALL  CREW,  750  acs.  Up. 
Co.  of  New  Norf.,  24  July  1638,  p. 
584.  E.  upon  a  Cr.  in  Nansamund  Riv., 
N.  upon  the  river,  W.  along  same  &  S. 
into  the  woods,  the  land  being  called 
by  the  name  of  Georg  his  feild.  150 
acs.  due  according  to  an  order  of  court 

5  Oct.  1631  in  right  of  his  wife  Doro- 
thy Behethland  &  650  acs.  in  right  of 
trans,  of  13  pers:  Richard  Manshipp, 
Lowry  Thomas,  John  Johnes,  (or 
Joines)  Fr.  Geere,  Nich.  Martin,  Georg 
Lodg,  Anth.  Proctor,  Edward  Clarke, 
John  Paine,  Judith  Tompson,  Edward 
Oliver,  Edward  Luckston,  Maria  a 
Negroe. 

LEIFT.  ROBERT  SHEPPARD,  650 
acs.  James  Citty  Co.,  26  July  1638,  p. 
584.  S.  side  of  James  Riv.,  at  the  Low. 
Chippokes  Cr.  above  the  uppermost 
little  Cr.,  between  two  branches  thereof, 
bounding  Wly.,  upon  land  of  John 
Dunston,  beg.  at  the  head  of  the 
Westermost  swamp.    Due  for  trans,  of 

13  pers:  Robert  Swett,  Robert  Howse, 
Henry  Middowes,  Georg  Griffin,  John 
Hacherne,  Phillipp  Harringham,  Jeri- 
miah Bridges,  Joseph  Spering,  William 
Taylor,  John  Parson,  Daniell  Walton, 
Randall  Whitley,  Thomas  Johnson. 

WILLIAM  MORGAN,  150  acs. 
James  Citty  Co.,  28  July  1638,  p.  585. 
Being  a  small  island  in  Chichahominy 
Riv.,  Sly.  down  the  river  butting  upon 
the  Pynie  point.  Due  for  trans,  of  his 
now  wife  Margarett,  late  the  wife  of 
Richard  Sanders  &  2  pers.  trans,  by  sd. 
Sanders:    Christ.  Banckes,  Richard  Hill. 

THOMAS  WALLIS,  a  practitioner  of 
Physicke,  700  acs.  called  Juring  point, 
James  Citty  Co.,  28  July  1638,  p.  585. 
Sly.  upon  James  Riv.,  Nly.  upon  a  Cr. 
parting  land  of  Bridges  Freeman,  gent. 

6  sd.  Juring  point,  W.  to  land  of  Mr. 
Benjamine  Carrill,  N.  upon  land  of  Mr. 
Francis  Fowler,  runing  bet.  lands  of  sd. 
Carryls    &    Fowler.    Due    for    trans,    of 

14  pers:  John  Hollingsworth,  Sarah  his 
wife,  Thomas  Wallis,  Richard  Foster, 
James  Whiting,  Thomas  Davis,  Samuell 
Hudson,  Robert  Allen,  Melchesedick 
Floyd,  Richard  Weston,  Margarett 
Sanders,  William  Worminger,  Jon. 
Spencer,  Katherine  Harrison. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


95 


NICHOLAS  SABRELL,  150  acs. 
Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  30  July  1638,  p.  586. 
Nly.  upon  land  of  Richard  Davis,  & 
William  Watts,  a  small  gutt  between, 
E.  upon  Mayden  Swampe,  S.  into  the 
woods,  &  W.  upon  the  Midle  planta- 
tion, a  great  Sw.  lying  betweene.  Due 
for  trans,  of  3  pers:  Katherine  Lewis, 
Dasey  Baldock,  Edward  Phillipps. 

WILLIAM  WATTS  &  RICHARD 
DAVIS,  75  acs.  N.  upon  Queens  Cr., 
bounded  on  E.  with  a  Cr.  deviding  their 
land  from  land  of  Robert  Booth, 
bounded  on  W.  with  a  Sw.  deviding 
their  land  from  land  of  Leift.  Richard 
Popeley  &  into  the  woods  Y\  of  a  mi. 
30  July  1638,  p.  586.  50  acs.  for  the 
adv.  of  sd.  Watts  &  his  wife  the  second 
yeare  to  Chas.  River  &  25  acs.  for  adv. 
of  sd.  Davis  the  second  yeare. 

THOMAS  DEWE,  400  acs.  in 
Nansamund  River,  Up.  Norf.  Co.,  1 
Aug.  1638,  p.  587.  Lying  about  one 
mile  from  the  plantation  of  Thomas 
Powell.  200  acs.  by  assignment  from 
Thomas  Powell  &  200  acs.  due  for 
trans,  of  4  pers:  Georg  Castle,  Robert 
Low,  Francis  Goodman,  William  Bessett. 

SAME.  150  acs.  Up.  Co.  of  New 
Norf.,  same  date  &  page.  In  Nansa- 
mund Riv.,  beg.  at  the  first  point  next 
to  land  now  seated  by  Thomas  Powell. 
Trans,  of  3  pers:  William  Brase,  Eliz. 
Hutchinson,  Eliz.  Bayley. 

RICHARD  KEMP,  Esqr.,  a  parcell  of 
land  in  James  Citty  conteyning  10  pole 
in  length  towards  the  water  side  &  8 
pole  in  breadth,  the  totall  being  80 
pole,  bet.  land  of  Mr.  Thomas  Hill  & 
Richard  Tree.  1  Aug.  1638,  p.  587. 
Fee  Rent:  1  Capon  yearely  at  the  feast 
of  St.  Thomas  the  Apostle.  Provided 
&c.  By  Act.  of  Assembly  20  Feb.  1636. 

MR.  THOMAS  HILL,  6  po.  in 
breadth  &  8  po.  in  length.,  in  a  direct 
line  on  the  W.  side  to  land  of  Richard 
Kemp,  Esqr.  1  Aug.  1638,  p.  588.  As 
above. 

GRESHAM  (Gressom)  COFFEILD 
&  THOMAS  STAMP,  200  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight    Co.,    14    Aug.    1638,    p.    588. 


Joyning  upon  land  of  Epaphroditus 
Lawson  Ely.,  N.  W.  upon  Nansamund 
Riv.  Due  by  assignment  from  Arthur 
Haslington. 

RICHARD  EWEN,  150  acs.  Up.  Co. 
of  New  Norf.,  14  Aug.  1638,  p.  588. 
Neare  the  head  of  the  W.  branch  of 
Chuckatuck  Cr.,  E.  upon  land  of  Tho- 
mas Bush,  W.  up  towards  the  head  of 
sd.  creek  &c.  Due  for  his  own  per. 
adv.  &  trans,  of  2  pers:  Nicholas 
Ewen,  Christopher  Roades. 

GEORG  WHITE,  Clarke,  300  acs. 
Up.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  6  Mar.  1638,  p. 
589.  E.  into  the  woods  adj.  land  of 
John  Wilkins,  gent.,  W.  upon  his  own 
land,  S.  upon  sd.  Wilkins  &  N.  upon 
land  of  John  Parrott.  50  acs.  for  the 
per.  adv.  of  his  wife  Blanka  White  & 
250  acs.  for  trans,  of  5  pers:  Peter 
White,  Zachariah  Taylor,  Joane  Butler, 
Martha  Smith,  Edward  Dicker. 

SAMUELL  WATKEYES,  150  acs. 
Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  15  Aug.  1638,  p.  589- 
In  Queens  Cr.  &  behind  land  now 
seated  by  John  Bell,  S.  W.  into  the 
woods  &  land  of  John  Hartwell  on  the 
N.  Due  for  his  own  per.  adv.  &  trans, 
of  2  pers:  William  Bembridge,  Thomas 
Grayes. 

RALPH  WYATT,  Gent,  to  RICH- 
ARD JOHNSON,  ROGER  DAVIS  & 
ABRAHAM  WOOD,  Planters,  21  year 
lease;  last  day  of  Dec.  1636,  p.  590. 
One  parcell  of  land  lying  &  being  from 
Sizemores  Cr.  &  soe  up  the  Cr.  as  farr 
as  Capt.  Buttons  land  doth  extend,  from 
thence  up  to  the  Rock  in  Apamattock 
Riv.,  thence  along  the  river  &  soe  into 
the  Baye  &  from  thence  to  Seizmore 
his  Cr.  againe.  Said  Wyatt,  his  assigns 
&c.  shall  possess  &  enjoy  10  acs.  of 
the  land  aforesaid  runing  down  from 
the  Rock  above  mentioned.  Signed: 
Ralph  Wyatt.  Witnesses:  Joseph  Fister, 
Daniell  Lewellin. 

FRANCIS  MORGAN,  100  acs.  Chas. 
River  Co.,  20  Aug.  1638,  p.  591.  N.  E. 
upon  the  river,  S.  by  W.  into  the 
woods,  betwixt  land  of  Mr.  William 
Pryor  &  his  own  land.    Due  by  right  of 


96 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


adv.  of  2  pers.  the  first  yeare  to  the 
said  Charles  River:  Lewis  Cock,  Arthur 
Grimes. 

JOHN  CONGDON  (Congden),  50 
acs.  Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  21  Aug.  1638,  p. 
591.  Nly.  upon  the  back  Cr.,  S.  upon 
Cheesmans  Cr.,  E.  upon  a  br.  from  the 
back  Cr.  comonly  called  Gwynn  his  Cr., 
W.  upon  the  maine  woods,  the  land 
being  called  Cooper  his  Neck.  Due  in 
right  of  adv.  of  2  pers.  the  2nd  yeare  to 
sd.  Chas.  River:  Edward  Palmer, 
Nicholas  Gibson. 

THOMAS  ILES,  75  acs.  Chas.  Riv. 
Co.,  21  Aug.  1638,  p.  592.  N.  upon 
the  back  Cr.,  S.  into  the  woods,  E.  upon 
John  Clarksons  land  &  W.  upon  a  br. 
of  sd.  creek,  called  Gwyn  his  Cr.  Due 
in  right  of  adv.  of  3  pers.  the  2nd  yeare 
to  sd.  Chas.  River:  Tymothy  Stockden, 
Richard  Roades  &  1  Negroe.  Note: 
This  pattent  surrendered  up  &  renewed 
2  Oct.  1640.  Test:  Richard  Lee; 
Georg  Read,  deputy  Seer. 

PERCIVALL  CHAMPION,  250  acs. 
in  Nansamund  Riv.,  in  Up.  Co.  of  New 
Norf.,  23  Aug.  1638,  p.  592.  Within 
Dumpling  Island  Cr.  on  the  E.  side, 
butting  upon  land  of  Epaphroditue 
Lawson,  S.  by  W.  upon  sd.  Cr.  &  N. 
by  E.  into  the  woods.  Due  for  trans, 
of  5  pers:  Humphry  Trent,  Edward 
Gibbs,  James  Midleton,  Sibbill  Walter, 
John  Jones. 

WILLIAM  HATFEILD,  300  acs.  in 
Nansamund  Riv.,  Up.  Co.  of  New 
Norf.,  22  Aug.  1638,  p.  592.  Adj.  land 
of  Percivall  Champion,  runing  up  the 
E.  side  of  Dumpling  Island  Cr.  Due 
for  trans,  of  6  pers:  Samuell  Firmant, 
Jon.  Sheppard,  Tho.  Browne,  Tho. 
Fisher,  Jon.  Sharpe,  John  Morgan. 

SAME.  100  acs.,  same  Co.  &  page 
593,  24  Aug.  1638.  Upon  S.  br.  of 
Nansamund  Riv.  Due  by  right  of  trans. 
of  2  pers:    Symon  Griffin,  Ann  Griffin. 

SAME.  200  acs.,  same  location,  date 
&  page.  Due  in  right  of  trans,  of  4 
pers:  Joane  Ashton,  Eliza.  Edes,  Tho- 
mas Georg,  Richard  Walter. 


FRANCIS  BARRETT,  600  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  29  Aug.  1638,  p.  594.  S.  W. 
upon  Chichahominy  Riv.,  N.  E.  into  the 
woods  &  bounded  on  S.  E.  with  land  of 
John  Robins.  Due  for  trans,  of  his 
wife  &  11  pers.* 

JOSEPH  MOORE,  200  acs.  Eliz. 
Citty  Co.,  at  the  old  Poquoson  river, 
28  Aug.  1638,  p.  594.  Bounded  upon 
W.  with  footeball  quarter  Cr.,  adj.  land 
of  Thomas  Symons  on  the  E.,  With 
Moores  Cr.  &  N.  W.  into  the  woods. 
Due  for  trans,  of  4  pers:  Gilbert  Rey- 
nolds, William  Richards,  Barbary  Chap- 
man, Mary  Shorter   (or  Shorten). 

HUMPHRY  SCOEN,  300  acs.  Up. 
Co.   of  New  Norf.,   29  Aug.    1638,  p. 

594.  In  the  Cross  Cr.  &  adj.  100  acs. 
graunted  to  Margarett  Rogers,  now  the 
wife  of  John  Garrard.  Due  by  purchase 
from  Francis  Hough,  to  whom  it  was 
due  for  trans,  of  6  pers.* 

MR.  GEORG  LUDLOWE,  Merchant, 
500  acs.  in  Nansamund  Riv.,  Up.  Co. 
of  New  Norf.,  last  day  of  Aug.  1638, 
p.  595.  On  the  back  side  of  Francis 
Maulden  his  land,  S.  upon  the  W.  br. 
of  the  river  &  N.  W.  from  land  of  sd. 
Maulden  into  the  woods.  Trans,  of  10 
pers.* 

ROBERT  JOHNS,  Merchant,  16 
poles  in  James  Citty,  last  of  Aug.  1638, 
p.  595.  Conteyning  4  poles  on  every 
side,  S.  upon  the  maine  river,  bounded 
on  E.  with  land  of  Thomas  Goulding 
&  on  W.  with  land  not  yett  disposed  of. 
21  yr.  lease.  Fee  Rent:  1  Capon  on 
the  feast  of  St.  Thomas. 

ARGOLL  YEARDLEY,  Esqr.,  3700 
acs.   Accomacke   Co.,    6   Sept.    1638,    p. 

595.  On  the  E.  side  of  Chisopeian 
baye,  butting  N.  on  the  river  of  Hun- 
gars  soe  called  by  the  Indians,  S.  upon  a 
small  river  called  Savages  Cr.,  W.  on 
the  sd.  baye  &  E.  to  the  maine  land 
towards  the  Sea.  Said  land  being 
graunted  to  Sir  Georg  Yeardley,  Kt., 
father  to  the  sd.  Argoll,  by  pattent  from 
the  late  Treasurer  &  Co.  &  confirmed 
by  order  of  Court  9  May  1623  &  now 
due  sd.  Argoll  in  right  of  descent  from 
his  sd.  father. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


97 


JOHN  MOORE  &  ROWLAND 
BURNAM,  200  acs.  in  Chichahominy 
Riv.,  James  Citty  Co.,  4  Sept.  1638,  p. 
596.  Near  the  head  of  the  second  Cr. 
belowe  the  Gulfe  on  the  E.  side  of  sd. 
river,  toward  the  head  of  same  br.  that 
Richard  Hill  &  Roger  Armwoods  land 
lyeth  on.  100  acs.  due  for  their  own 
per.  advs.,  &  100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2 
Negroes,  one  for  each  of  them. 

THOMAS  PLOMER  &  SAMUELL 
EDMONDS,  400  acs.,  James  Citty  Co., 
at  the  Up.  Chippokes  Cr.,  7  Sept,  1638, 
p.  596.  E.  upon  the  maine  Cr.,  &c. 
Due  for  trans,  of  8  pers:  Humphry 
Harwood,  Katherin  Adwell,  Edwd. 
Dunckley,  Wm.  Midleton,  Hen.  Arden, 
Tho.  Swaine,  Ann  his  wife,  servts.  to 
Thomas  Plommer;  Wm.  Chandler  (or 
Chandley)  servant  to  Samuell  Edmonds. 

ROBERT  FREEMAN,  Merchant,  700 
acs.  in  Chichahominy  Riv.,  James  Citty 
Co.,  11  Sept.  1638,  p.  597.  S.  W.  upon 
sd.  river,  into  the  woods  N.  E.,  beg. 
where  land  of  Francis  Barrett  ends.  Due 
for  trans,  of  14  pers:  John  Moore, 
Wm.  Rebell,  Robert  Drewry,  Robert 
Haywood,  Jon.  Markedon,  Jerimiah 
Slye,  Robert  Selbee,  Math.  Dixon,  Tho. 
Moore,  Georg  Whitaker,  William 
Charles,  John  Chappell,  Tho.  Besson, 
John  Fricker. 

RICHARD  WILCOX,  700  acs.  in 
Chichahominy  Riv.,  James  Citty,  11 
Sept.  1638,  p.  597.  N.  E.  adj.  land  of 
Robert  Freeman.  Due  for  trans,  of  14 
pers:  John  February,  Wm.  Lowder, 
Jon.  Warren,  Wm.  Pippin,  Rich.  Ste- 
phens, William  Hix,  Jon.  Butler, 
Humphry  Blackman,  Roger  Crabbe, 
Humphry  Dale,  Jon.  Chappell,  John 
Richford,   Tho.    Fowler,    Peter    Willett. 

JOELL  VINON,  (or  Union)  50  acs. 
in  Martins  Hundred  Parish,  James 
Citty  Co.,  21  Sept.  1638,  p.  597.  Sly. 
upon  land  of  Thomas  Smith  &  Nly, 
into  the  woods.  Due  unto  him  by  deed 
guift  from  Thomas  Smith,  to  whom  it 
was  due  for  trans,  of  1  servant  named 
John  Greenfeild. 

WILLIAM  PARRY,  a  parcel  of  land 
conteyning  6  po.  in  breadth  &  4  po.  in 


length,  in  James  Island.  22  Sept.  1638, 
p.  598.  Due  by  Act  of  Assembly,  dated 
20  Feb.  1636.  Fee  Rent:  1  Capon 
yearely  at  the  feast  of  St.  Thomas,  etc. 

ARTHUR  BAYLY,  Merchant,  halfe 
an  acre  of  land,  viz:  6  po.  in  breadth 
&  14  po.  in  length,  in  James  Citty 
Island,  22  Sept.  1638,  p.  598.  Due  as 
above. 

ALICE  EDLOE,  Widdowe,  150  acs. 
at  Harrow  Attocks,  Henrico  Co.,  24 
Sept.  1638,  p.  599.  W.  upon  the  river, 
N.  to  a  little  creek  over  against  Kings- 
land,  adj.  Sly.  upon  land  of  Georg 
Boate.  Due  for  trans,  of  3  pers:  Tho. 
mas  Ponder  (or  Pouder),  Georg  Phil- 
lipps,  Mary  Billan. 

SERJEANT  ROBERT  HUTCHIN- 
SON, 50  acs.  James  Citty  Co.,  24  Sept. 
1638,  p.  599.  Sly.  upon  a  Sw.,  W. 
upon  the  cleare  ground  of  Pasbyhayes, 
E.  upon  the  Cart  way  &  N.  into  the 
woods.  Due  by  Act  of  Court,  7  June 
1638,  providing  that  the  maine  land  in 
Pasbyhayes  on  this  side  of  Powhetan 
Sw.  should  be  leased  out  in  parcells  of 
50  acs.  for  &  during  the  terme  of  21 
yeares  from  Michaellmas  next,  reserv- 
ing to  the  Govr.  &c.  the  Annuall  rent 
of  2  bbls.  of  Indian  corne,  with  further 
provisoes  that  such  lesseees  doe  plant 
&  seate  upon  such  land  at  Michaelmas 
next,  with  five  men  well  armed,  at  the 
least,  upon  forfeiture  of  their  lease  &c. 
Note:  May  20th  1642.  This  is  sur- 
rendered upp.    Test:    John  Meade,  Clr. 

JOHN  JACKSON  &  ELIZABETH 
KINGSMILL  (Kingsmell)  now  the 
wife  of  William  Taylor,  600  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  26  Sept.  1638,  p.  600.  Be- 
ing a  parcell  of  small  islands  upp 
Chichahominy  river  compassed  round 
with  a  marsh,  S.  S.  W.  on  land  of  Mr. 
Bridges  Freeman,  W.  N.  W.  upon  land 
of  John  Dansey  &  N.  N.  E.  upon  land 
of  Mr.  John  Felgate,  etc.  Dut  by  right 
of  trans,  of  12  pers:  Michael  Batt, 
100  acs.  as  being  an  old  planter;  John 
Gelding,  Patrick  Tailing,  David  Davis, 
Jon.  Vaughan,  Hen.  Daniell,  Edward 
Plowman,  Alexander  Stomer,  Tho. 
Browne,  Tho.  Child,  Jon.  Nurton. 


98 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


ROBERT  WEST,  600  acs.  in  Lyn 
haven  in  the  Low.  Co.  of  New  Norf., 
15  May  1638,  p.  600.  Upon  the  second 
baye  proceeding  out  of  a  Cr.  riming 
Ely.  out  of  Lyn  haven  river  &c,  Ely.  to 
the  Seaboard  lying  over  against  land  of 
Mr.  Henry  Woodhowse.  Trans,  of  12 
persons*.  Note:  This  pattern  surren- 
dered &  renewed  in  the  name  of  Georg 
Rutland  &  William  Jacob,  Nov.   1642. 

MR.  JOHN  FELGATE,  1200  acs. 
upon  Checkeroes  Neck,  N.  N.  W.  upon 
the  river  &  from  the  Landing  place  the 
bodye  of  the  land  lyeth  S.  E.  into  the 
woods.  Graunted  by  order  of  Ct.  23 
Dec.  1635  &  being  due  for  trans,  of 
24  pers.*  26  Sept.  1638,  p.  601.  Note: 
This  patt.  is  renewed  by  reason  of  a 
mistake  in  the  bounds  of  this  pattent. 
See  July  1640.  Test:  Samll.  Abbott, 
Clk. 

JOHN  GIBBS,  300  acs.  Eliz.  Cittie 
Co.,  27  Sept.  1638,  p.  601.  N.  E.  upon 
the  old  Poquoson,  S.  W.  into  the  woods, 
bounded  on  S.  by  land  of  Thomas 
Purifye  &  on  W.  by  land  of  Thomas 
Sewell  now  in  possession  of  Henry 
Batt.    Due  for  trans,  of  6  pers.* 

THOMAS  BOULDING,  200  acs. 
Eliz.  Cittie  Co.,  27  Sept.  1638,  p.  601. 
N.  upon  Benjamine  Syms  his  Cr.,  S. 
into  the  woods,  bounded  on  W.  with 
land  of  John  Moore,  gent.,  &  on  E.  with 
land  of  Thomas  Sewell,  now  in  possess- 
ion of  Henry  Batt.  Due  for  trans,  of 
4  pers:  Robert  Clement,  Nicholas 
Dale,  John  Davis,  Edward  Dobson. 

RICHARD  MILTON,  400  acs.  Chas. 
Cittie  Co.,  3  Oct.  1638,  p.  602. 
Bounded  N.  by  W.  upon  land  of  Ser- 
jeant Richard  Tysdell  &  S.  by  E.  upon 
great  Weynoake  Towne.  Due  for  trans, 
of  8  pers:  Andrew  Parker,  Christopher 
Stanton,  Henry  Palmer,  William 
Deakes,  Henry  Foster,  John  Hammond, 
Eade  Adams,  Hanna  Mawe.  Note:  Re- 
newed 23  Aug.  1643  &  pattent  of  200 
acs.  of  Richard  Tisdell  of  10  Feb.  1635 
added  &  400  acs.  more  added  to  both 
these,  all  of  which  are  in  the  name  of 
Thomas  Wheeler. 

THOMAS  BURBAGE,  Gent.,  300 
acs.  in  the  Up.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  12 


Oct.  1638,  p.  602.  E.  S.  E.  upon  a  Cr. 
adj.  land  of  Capt.  John  Sibsey  &  W.  S. 
W.  upon  his  own  land.  Due  for  trans, 
of  6  pers.*  Note:  6  persons  assigned 
to  Mr.  Burbage  by  the  oath  of  Henry 
Poole  from  Mr.  Georg  Downes. 

DERRICK  CORTSEN  STAM  & 
ARENT  CORTSEN  STAM,  a  parcell 
of  land  in  James  Island,  conteyning  10 
po.  in  breadth  &  8  po.  in  length.  11 
Oct.  1638,  p.  603.  Neare  adj.  to  Capt. 
William  Peirce  his  store.  Graunted  by 
Act  of  Assembly,  20  Feb.  1636  &c.  Fee 
Rent:  1  Capon  on  the  feast  of  St.  Tho- 
mas, provided  &c. 

ROBERT  MARTIN  (Martyn),  250 
acs.  Low.  New  Norf.  Co.,  12  Oct.  1638, 
p.  603.  In  Eliz.  Riv.,  W.  upon  the 
Indian  Cr.,  N.  upon  the  river,  E.  upon 
a  reedy  swamp  &  S.  into  the  woods. 
Due  for  his  own  per.  adv.  &  trans,  of 
his  wife  Elizabeth  Martin  &  3  pers: 
Edward  Wade,  Robert  Masters,  Rebecca 
Smith. 

WILLIAM  TAYLOR,  1200  acs.  in 
Chichahominy  Riv.,  James  Citty  Co.,  9 
Nov.  1638,  p.  603.  Beg.  at  the  next 
point  of  land  above  Warrany  Landing 
place,  W.  Sly.  upon  sd.  river,  E.  Nly. 
into  the  maine  woods  &  Warrany  Cr. 
on  the  N.    Trans,  of  24  pers.* 

JOHN  BISHOPP,  150  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  9  Nov.  1638,  p.  604.  At  the 
head  of  Tappahannock  Cr.,  Northerly 
upon  a  path,  Wly.  towards  a  reedy 
swamp,  E.  towards  a  sunken  marsh  & 
Sly.  into  the  woods.  Due  for  trans,  of 
3  pers:  John  Tompkins,  John  Bonner, 
John  Wright. 

THOMAS  CROWTCH  (Croutch), 
150  acs.  James  Citty  Co.,  10  Nov. 
1638,  p.  604.  Upon  W.  side  of  Tappa- 
hannock Cr.,  bounded  by  a  reedy  swamp 
to  the  S.  W.  &  N.  E.  upon  a  path. 
Due  for  trans,  of  3  pers:  William 
Greene,  Richard  Preslee,  James  Mason. 

LEIFT.  JOHN  UPTON,  1500  acs. 
Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  10  Nov.  1638,  p. 
605.  1000  acs.  Adj.  Ambrose  Bennetts 
land,  500  acs.  of  which  lies  on 
the  other   side  of   the  branch   opposite 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


99 


against  the  aforesaid  land,  runing  E. 
into  the  woods,  beg.  at  an  Indian  path 
which  goeth  over  the  head  of  that 
branch  &c.  Due  for  trans,  of  30  pers: 
James  Parsons,  John  Parker,  Lewis 
Phillipps,  Tho.  Gleed,  Christ.  Lewis, 
Phillipp  Kennersbye,  Morgan  Evans, 
Andrew  Perkins,  John  Fitchett,  Patrick 
Vaughan,  Morgan  Roberts,  Richard 
Baylye,  James  Tallock,  John  Gillgate, 
Thomas  Willis,  Edward  Glover,  Nathll. 
Fairebrother,  Roger  Williams,  William 
Taylor,  John  Shallock,  Francis  Symons, 
Robert  Sudbury,  Francis  Trick,  Richard 
Summer,  Georg  Gillin,  James  Davis, 
David  Clarke,  John  George,  Augustine 
Skidmore,  Thomas  Welch. 

THOMAS  CLIPWELL,  600  acs. 
James  Citty  Co.,  in  Chichahominy  Riv., 
15  Nov.  1638,  p.  605.  Between  land  of 
Richard  Bell  &  Theodore  Moyses,  N.  E. 
over  against  land  of  John  Dansey.  Due 
for  trans,  of  12  pers:  Amey  (Anny) 
Cooke,  Robert  Madlock,  Mary  Johnsons, 
John  Richards,  Thomas  Mash,  John 
Shorter,  Rowland  Pricherd,  Francis 
Rogers,  Richard  Baxter. 

OLIVER  SPRYE,  600  acs.  Up.  Co. 
of  New  Norf.,  being  called  by  the  name 
of  the  thickett,  26  Nov.  1638,  p.  605. 
Beg.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Daniell  Gookins, 
extending  S.  W.  up  a  long  banck  of 
the  maine  river  &  N.  W.  into  the 
woods,  etc.  300  acs.  graunted  by  order 
of  Ct.,  6  June  1635  &  300  acs.  due  for 
trans,  of  6  pers:  Thomas  Roberts, 
William  Spencer,  William  Baker, 
Christopher  Piddington,  Abraham 
Burcher,  William  Collins. 

JONATHAN  LANGWORTH,  600 
acs.  Low.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  6  Dec. 
1638,  p.  606.  On  the  W.  br.  of  Eliz. 
Riv.,  S.  E.  to  the  Riv.  &  N.  E.  to  the 
woods  with  a  creek  on  either  side.  400 
acs.  part  hereof  by  purchase  from  John 
Holmes  being  due  in  right  of  trans,  of 
8  pers.*,  &  200  acs.  for  trans,  by  sd. 
Langworth  (of  4  pers:)  Jonathan  Lang- 
worth,  Thomas  Evans,  Richard  Ragged, 
John  Blunter.  Note:  Memo:  That  I 
John  Holmes  have  bargained  &  sold 
unto  Jonathan  Langworth  400  acs.  of 
land  in  Eliz.  River  now  called  New 
Norfolke,  the  which  land  I  have  taken 


up  by  pattent.    25  Dec.   1637.    Signed: 
John  Holmes. 

CAPT.  CHRISTOPHER  WORME- 
LEY,  1420  acs.  Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  27  Jan. 
1638,  p.  607.  N.  upon  sd.  river, 
bounded  with  Wormeleys  Cr.,  on  E. 
with  land  of  Nicholas  Clarke  &c,  joyn- 
ing  land  formerly  belonging  to  Mr. 
Lionell  Roulston  &c,  crossing  a  ridge 
of  land  &  the  path  leading  to  the  new 
Poquoson  &c,  runing  from  the  edge  of 
the  marsh  to  the  head  of  the  back 
creeke  N.  E.  &  downe  the  same  untill 
it  meete  with  land  of  sd.  Clarke  &c. 
Due  by  right  of  trans,  of  16  pers.  the 
1st  yeare:  Henry  Marshall,  John  Tho- 
mas, Stephen  Losh,  Richard  Header, 
Morris  Coleman,  John  Brownelofe, 
William  Musgrave  (or  Musgrane),  his 
wife  &  2  children,  Joe  &  Samboe 
Negroes,  &  4  servants  more.  For  the 
2nd  yeare:  John  Hampton,  Morris 
Prosser,  Jinkin  Williams,  William 
Baker,  John  Loyse,  Samell.  Jones,  Tho- 
mas Sax,  Edward  Murfeild,  Morris 
Walker,  William  Gingey  (or  Guigey), 
William  English,  Nicholas  Raymon, 
Nicholas  Welch  (or  Wise— altered ) , 
Dickery  Newman,  John  Congden,  Mar- 
garett  Raw,  Richard  Lewis,  Jerimiah 
Lynch,  Thomas  Skirrick,  Richard  Mar- 
maduke,  Thomas  Jenkin,  Henry  Hyves, 
John  Poole,  Peter ,  Leonard  Reeves. 

CHRISTOPHER  BRANCH,  Gent., 
250  acs.  Henrico  Co.,  12  Mar.  1638,  p. 
608.  At  Kingsland  over  against  the 
Long  feild,  E.  upon  the  maine  river,  W. 
by  S.  into  the  maine  woods  &  adj.  Sly. 
upon  land  of  John  Griffin,  now  in  the 
tenure  of  sd.  Branch,  &  runing  thence 
Nly.  towards  the  feilds.  50  acs.  due 
for  his  own  per.  adv.  &  200  acs.  for 
trans,  of  4  pers.* 

HOWARD  HORSEY,  Gent.,  1400 
acs.  Henrico  Co.,  12  Feb.  1638,  p.  608. 
S.  on  land  of  Mr.  Christopher  Branch, 
E.  on  the  river,  W.  into  the  maine 
woods  &  N.  with  a  falling  Cr.  1000  acs. 
graunted  by  order  of  Ct.,  6  June  1635, 
being  alsoe  due  with  the  other  400  acs. 
for  the  trans,  of  28  pers.* 

GEORG  LOBB,  THOMAS  PERCE 
(Peirce)    &  THOMAS  WARNE,   1550 


100 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


acs.  in  Chichahominy  Riv.,  James  Citty 
Co.,  10  Feb.  1638,  p.  608.  Beg.  next 
to  land  of  William  Taylor,  E.  S.  E. 
down  the  river,  Wly.  up  the  river  & 
Ely.  into  the  woods,  opposite  to  neck 
of  land  belonging  to  Richard  Peirce. 
Due  for  trans,  of  31  pers:  Thomas 
Warne  his  servants  names:  Andrew 
Emery,  John  Grant,  Mathew  Langley, 
William  Carter,  John  Dove,  Francis 
Durish,  Eliz.  Bradin,  Ann  Waterman, 
Tho.  Stephens,  William  Grymes. 
(Note:    Other  names  not  given.) 

WILLIAM  BARKER,  Marriner,  his 
Associates  &  Co.,  1850  acs.  Chas.  Citty 
Co.,  12  Feb.  1638,  p.  609.  600  acs.  of 
sd.  land  being  heretofore  called  by  the 
name  of  Powlebrooke  &  now  known 
by  the  name  of  Merchants  Hope.  Said 
land  beg.  at  a  Cr.  that  parts  it  from 
Salters  hill,  extending  to  the  water  side 
neare  under  the  howse  of  one  Richard 
Williams  on  the  E.  side  thereof, 
bounded  E.  upon  Merchants  hope  Cr., 
W.  towards  Chaplins,  N.  upon  the 
river  &  S.  into  the  woods.  The  other 
1250  acs.  acs.  extending  backwards  into 
the  woods  &  adj.  upon  the  Cr.  Due, 
vizt:  600  acs.  conveyed  &  assigned  over 
to  sd.  Barker  &  acknowledged  by  him 
equally  to  belong  to  his  said  Associates 
by  John  Taylor,  Cittizen  &  Girdler  of 
London,  being  purchased  by  him  of 
Thomas  Powell  of  Howlton  in  the 
Countie  of  SufTolke,  yeoman,  brother  & 
lawfull  heire  of  Capt.  Nathaniell 
Powell  late  of  Va.,  deceased,  as  by  the 
deed  of  conveyance  now  upon  record 
from  sd.  Taylor  more  at  large  appear- 
eth.  The  other  1250  acs.  being  due 
unto  them  for  trans,  of  25  pers:  Georg 
Gregory,  Tho.  Percocks,  Wm.  Radway, 
Isaac  Radway,  Wm.  Straing,  Jon.  Yates, 
Jon.  Minter,  Dorothy  Standish,  Mathew 
Robinson,  Daniell  Goodwin,  Jon.  Jones, 
Thomas  Johnson,  Georg  Brookes,  Sarah 
Collybancke,  Eliz.  Phillipps,  Jon.  Croft, 
Daniell  Bromly,  Wm.  Woodgate,  Step. 
Godwin,  Robt.  Yates,  Wm.  Griffin, 
Wm.  Andrews,  Benj.  Ray,  Nath.  Deane, 
Wm.  Jackson. 

CORNELIUS  LOYD,  400  acs.  some 
10  mi.  up  the  Westermost  br.  of  Eliz. 
Riv.,  upon  the  S.  side,  Ely.  upon  a  tree 
comonly  called  the  Choice  tree,  W.  up- 


on the  river,  S.  into  the  woods  &N. 
upon  the  river.  Last  of  Nov.  1638,  p. 
610.  Due  for  trans,  of  8  pers:  Thomas 
Bonner,  Henry  Cooke,  John  Brookes, 
William  Woolly,  Richard  Day,  Peter 
Sedberry,  John  Brittaine,  Thomas 
Williams. 

WILLIAM  CLARKE,  200  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.  Co.,  18  Feb.  1638,  p.  610.  E.  upon 
the  new  Poquoson,  bounded  on  the  W. 
with  the  longreach  of  sd.  river  &  on 
the  N.  E.  with  the  Oyster  Cr.  &c.  100 
acs.  graunted  21  Aug.  1637  &  with  the 
other  100  acs.  is  due  for  trans,  of  4 
pers:  Gerrard  Cooke,  Sarah  Coggin, 
John  Morgan,  Georg  Robison. 

MR.  JOHN  CHEW,  750  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.  Co.,  18  Feb.  1638,  p.  610.  Bound- 
ing Sly.  on  Cheesmans  Cr.,  N.  into  the 
woods,  E.  on  land  of  Thomas  Attowell 
&  Wly.  by  a  ridge  of  land  &  crosse  a 
runn  of  fresh  water.  Due  by  assign- 
ment from  Mr.  Georg  Keth,  Clerke. 

JOHN  HARTWELL,  650  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.  Co.,  18  Feb.  1638,  p.  611.  N. 
upon  Queens  Cr.,  bounded  on  E.  with 
land  of  John  Bell,  S.  S.  W.  into  the 
woods  a  mile,  thence  joyning  land  of 
Samuell  Watkeyes,  from  thence  runing 
down  the  Mayden  Swamp  untill  it  meete 
with  Queens  Cr.  Due  for  trans,  of  13 
pers.* 

WILLIAM  EYRES,  100  acs.  in 
Chucatuck  Riv.  in  the  Up.  Co.  of  New 
Norf.,  18  Feb.  1638,  p.  611.  E.  by  N. 
upon  land  of  Georg  Salsbury  now  in 
his  possession,  S.  upon  his  own  land, 
&c.    Due  for  trans,  of  2  pers.* 

MR.  JOHN  GOOKINS,  500  acs.  up- 
on W.  side  of  Nansamund  River  alias 
Matrevers  river,  Up.  New  Norf.  Co., 
18  Feb.  1638,  p.  611.  Beg.  at  a  point 
whereupon  the  channell  of  the  river 
abutteth  heretofore  called  by  the  name 
of  Mossey  point  but  at  present  Bet- 
sanger,  downward  upon  the  aforesd. 
river,  E.  by  N.  into  the  woods,  S.  by 
W.  &c.  Due  for  trans,  of  10  pers: 
Thomas  Box,  Junr.,  Peter  Norman, 
John  Butler,  John  Burden,  Robert 
Hodges,  Walter  Carpenter,  Edward 
Morgan,  John  Lowden,  William  Peasant. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


101 


MR.  EDWARD  SANDERSON,  200 
acs.  in  Chichahominy  river,  James  Citty 
Co.,  18  Feb.  1638,  p.  612.  At  the  head 
of  Piny  point  Cr.,  being  severall  small 
islands  neare  to  Morgans  Island  & 
reaching  from  the  head  of  Piny  pt.  Cr. 
to  the  maine  river.  Due  in  right  of 
trans,  of  4  servts.,  by  Edward  Morecroft, 
Merchant,  &  assigned  to  sd.  Sanderson. 

MR.  ROBERT  BENNETT,  200  acs. 
Up.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  18  Feb.  1638, 
p.  612.  In  the  second  Cr.  on  the  Ely. 
side  of  Matrevers  river,  behind  his  own 
land.  Due  for  trans,  of  4  pers:  John 
Hodgen,  Silvester  Barker,  Thomas  Har- 
wood,  Thomas  Needham. 

JOHN  MOONE,  Gent.,  400  acs.  S. 
side  of  Warresquicke  Riv.,  Wly.  upon 
the  back  Cr.,  N.  upon  land  of  Thomas 
Davis,  E.  upon  his  own  land  &  S.  into 
the  woods.  2  Nov.  1638,  p.  613.  Due 
for  trans,  of  8  pers:  Richard  Jones, 
Thomas  Dawson,  Georg  Nicholson, 
Alice  Newman,  Lancelott  Clay,  Daniell 
Welch,  Thomas  Bourne,  Mathew 
Bassett. 

HENRY  CATELYN,  500  acs.  Up. 
New  Norf.  Co.,  18  Feb.  1638,  p.  613. 
In  the  W.  most  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv. 
50  acs.  due  for  his  own  per.  adv.,  & 
450  acs.  for  trans,  of  9  pers:  Edward 
Silley,  Leonard  Richardson,  John  Bond, 
James  Johnson,  Jesper  Hodgskins,  John 
Tiffeney,  John  Musgrove,  William  Shap- 
well,  Georg  Blowe. 

WILLIAM  RABNETT,  100  acs. 
Warwick  Riv.  Co.,  20  Feb.  1638,  p. 
613.  E.  into  the  woods  from  the  head 
of  a  spring  called  Jacobs  well,  S.  upon 
land  of  Mr.  Thomas  Harwood.  Bein^ 
part  of  land  formerly  leased  to  Jacob 
Avery  &  due  sd.  Rabnett  for  the  trans, 
of  2  pers:  John  Lathropp,  Hester 
Kasey    (or  Lasey.) 

WILLIAM  BERRYMAN,  350  acs. 
Accomacke  Co.,  20  Feb.  1638,  p.  614. 
S.  Wly.  bounded  by  the  old  plantation 
Cr.,  E.  into  the  woods,  &  N.  on  land  of 
Henry  Williams.  Due  for  his  own  per. 
adv.  &  trans,  of  6  pers:  William 
Berryman,  William  Povy,  John  Tru- 
herne,  Bryan  Kelly,  Thomas  Clifton. 


HENRY  WILLIAMS,  200  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  20  Feb.  1638,  p.  614.  On 
the  old  plantation  Cr.,  W.  on  the  maine 
Cr.,  N.  on  land  of  Henry  Charleton  & 
S.  W.  on  the  fishing  point.  100  acs. 
being  due  as  an  ancient  planter  &  100 
acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Susan  An- 
drews,  Margery  Williams. 

WILLIAM  COTTON,  Clerke,  300 
acs.  Accomacke  Co.,  20  Feb.  1638,  p. 
615.  W.  upon  the  first  devdt.  of  Mr. 
William  Andrewes  &  Sly.  upon  the 
maine  Cr.  of  Hungars.  Due  for  his 
own  per.  adv.  &  trans,  of  5  pers:  Henry 
Pace,  John  Hayworth,  Eliz.  Harris, 
Domingo  &  Saconyo  Negroes. 

EDMUND     SCARBOROUGH,     400 

acs.  Accomacke  Co.,  21  Feb.  1638,  p. 
615.  Beg.  at  a  little  br.  to  the  Nwd. 
of  Pemenoec  Cr.,  Ely.  on  the  Seaboard 
side  &  Wly.  into  the  woods.  Due  for 
trans,  of  8  pers:  Thomas  Hathaway, 
Thomas  Sparks,  Thomas  Other,  John 
Selly,  John  Hues,  Christopher  Dixon, 
Jerimiah  Barker,  Henry  Tomlin.  Note: 
This  pattent  assigned  over  to  Thomas 
Savage,  who  assigned  to  Christopher 
Kirke  in  whose  name  it  was  renewed. 

CAPT.  THOMAS  HARRIS,  820  acs. 
comonly  known  by  the  name  of  the 
Long  feild,  Henrico  Co.,  25  Feb.  1638, 
p.  615.  With  Sw.  &  marsh,  beg.  at  a 
little  Cr.  over  against  Capt.  Martin,  N. 
on  the  back  side  of  the  Sw.,  E.  S.  E. 
into  the  woods  towards  Bremo,  W.  N. 
W.  on  the  maine  river.  100  acs.  for 
his  own  per.  adv.,  100  acs.  for  the  per. 
adv.  of  his  first  wife  Adry  Harris,  as 
being  Ancient  Planters,  &  620  acs.  for 
trans,  of  13  pers:  William  Purnell, 
John  Godfrye,  John  Searne,  Thomas 
Kemp,  Richard  Mascoll,  Nath.  Moore, 
John  Edwards,  Ann  Ridley,  William 
Jones,  Thomas  Morgan,  William  Jones, 
2  Negroes — a  man  &  a  woman. 

JOHN  CHEW,  Gent.,  350  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  22  Feb.  1638,  p.  616.  E. 
upon  a  Cr.  next  to  the  Gleab  land  & 
S.  E.  upon  the  maine  Cr.  &c.  Due  by 
assignment  from  Alexander  Stomer. 

PETER  MOUNTEGUE,  50  acs.  in 
the   Up.    Co.    of   New   Norf.,    25    Feb. 


102 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


1638,  p.  616.  N.  E.  upon  the  Long 
pond  Cr.,  S.  E.  upon  land  of  William 
Eyres  &  S.  W.  into  the  woods  called 
by  the  name  of  the  Oyster  banck.  Due 
for  trans,  of  Peter  Cranfeild. 

WILLIAM  CLOYS,  the  son  of  Phet- 
tiplace  Cloys,  750  acs.  Chas.  Riv.  Co., 
25  Feb.  1638,  p.  617.  N.  upon  the  new 
Poquoson  river,  S.  into  the  woods,  E. 
upon  the  Bay  &  W.  along  the  banck  of 
the  river.  Due  in  right  of  trans,  of  15 
pers.  by  his  father:  William  Bullock, 
Martin  Demond,  Thomas  Beeke, 
Michaell  Bartlett,  Ann  Fookes,  Thomas 

Stokes,     William    ,     Susan    , 

Thomas  Seawell,  Richard  Bucher, 
Adrian  Marner,  Richard  Feild,  Sualter 
(or  Snalter)  Jellett,  Tho.  Long,  Wil- 
liam Wheatly. 

JOHN  ROBINS,  1200  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  25  Feb.  1638,  p.  617.  S.  W. 
upon  Chichahominy  Riv.,  N.  E.  into  the 
woods,  beg.  at  a  Marish  Island  at  pease 
hill  point.  50  acs.  due  for  the  per.  adv. 
of  his  first  wife  Dorothy,  50  acs.  for 
the  per.  adv.  of  2nd  wife  Alice  &  1100 
acs.  for  the  trans,  of  22  pers:  Antho. 
Reboore,  Marke  Clevere,  Nich.  Stranger, 
Richard  Bayly,  Symon  Drew,  Tho. 
Morrell,  Nath.  Page,  Rich.  Beedham, 
Georg  Spice,  John  Lawrence,  Edward 
Wakins,  1  Negroe,  Thomas  Wrenn, 
Richard  Hughes,  Patrick  Farrell,  Tho- 
mas Tilsley,  James  Mitchell,  2  Negroes, 
Francis  Sparks,  David  Loyd,  John 
Seberry. 

STEPHEN  HAMBLYN,  250  acs. 
Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  25  Feb.  1638,  p.  618. 
Bounded  N.  by  E.  upon  Queens  Cr.,  W. 
into  the  woods  upon  land  of  Leift. 
Richard  Popely,  S.  upon  a  Sw.  parting 
it  from  land  of  sd.  Popeley  &  E.  upon 
a  Marsh  towards  the  Pallisadoes.  Due 
for  his  per.  adv.  &  trans,  of  4  pers: 
John  Dixon,  Oliver  Juche,  Eliz.  Mar- 
more,  1  Negroe. 

WILLIAM  WIGG,  300  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  22  Feb.  1638,  p.  618.  About 
a  mile  up  Chichahominy  Riv.  above  the 
mouth  of  Warrany  Cr.,  W.  upon  a  Sw. 
or  Cr.  parting  it  from  land  of  John 
Robins,  E.  upon  land  of  Bennett  Free- 
man, N.  into  the  woods  a  little  island 


joyning  to  it  by  part  of  a  br.  of  War- 
rany Cr.  Due  for  his  own  per.  adv.  & 
trans,  of  5  pers:  Robert  Wigg,  Hugh 
Hayward,  Susan  Hayward,  Lawrance 
Pynion,  Robert  Woover. 

JOHN  POTEET  (Poteete),  Chirur- 
gion,  100  acs.  Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  22  Feb. 
1638,  p.  619.  Butting  upon  Mr.  Roul- 
stons  first  devdt.  N.,  bounded  on  the  W. 
with  land  of  Robert  Bew  &  E.  side  with 
land  of  Hugh  Allen.  Due  in  right  of 
trans,  of  2  pers.  by  Edward  Reynolds: 
Eliz.  Reynolds  Ux  (wife),  Edward 
Reynolds,  George  Hayly  his  servants. 

PHILLIPP  CLARKE,  200  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  10  Nov.  1638,  p.  619.  S.  E. 
upon  Sunken  Marsh  &  Nly.  upon  land 
of  Mr.  Ewing.  Due  for  his  own.  &  per. 
adv.  of  his  first  wife  Elizabeth,  his  now 
wife  Mary  &  the  trans,  of  one  servt: 
Mary  Thorrogood. 

GEORG  HIGGINS,  100  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.  Co.,  25  Feb.  1638,  p.  619.  N. 
upon  the  back  Cr.,  bounding  on  both 
sides  with  land  of  John  Clarkson.  Due 
by  right  of  trans,  of  William  English 
the  first  yeare,  &  John  Thomas  &  Henry 
Marshall  the  2nd  yeare  to  Chas.  River. 

JOHN  LAYDON,  500  acs.  Eliz. 
Citty  Co.,  3  Oct.  1638,  p.  620.  At  the 
old  Popuoson,  lying  by  Burrowes  his 
neck,  Ewd.  from  it,  joyning  land  of 
Georg  Hull.  Due  upon  a  consideration 
expressed  in  an  order  of  Ct.,  29th  Feb. 
1631. 

ROBERT  PITTWAY,  (Pitway)  200 
acs.  Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  24  Feb.  1638,  p. 
620.  Adj.  land  of  John  Utye,  gent. 
Due  for  the  per.  adv.  of  himself,  his 
wife  Mary  Pitway,  Edward  Pitway,  his 
son  &  Mary  Pitway  his  daughter. 

ABRAHAM  PELTREE,  50  acs.  Up. 
Co.  of  New  Norf.,  within  Nansamund 
Riv.  alias  Matrevers  Riv.,  25  Feb.  1638, 
p.  620.  S.  upon  Mr.  Randall  Crew  his 
Cr.,  E.  towards  the  Sw.,  W.  towards  the 
maine  river  &  N.  towards  land  of  Tho- 
mas Powell.    Due  for  his  per.  adv. 

THOMAS  STAMP  (Stampe),  500 
acs.  James  Citty  Co.,  24  Feb.  1638,  p. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


103 


621.  Upon  a  Sw.  at  the  head  of 
Lawnes  Cr,,  S.  E.  upon  land  of  Nicho- 
las Reynolds.  50  acs.  for  his  own  per. 
adv.  &  450  acs.  for  trans,  of  9  pers: 
by  Richard  Tree:  Charles  Lockley, 
Hannah  Jones,  Christopher  Feild,  Rich- 
ard Sutton,  John  Markham,  Walter 
Willis,  Lawr.  Littleboy,  Edward  Bryan, 
Richard  Andrews. 

THOMAS  WHEELER,  200  acs.  Chas. 
Citty  Co.,  10  Nov.  1638,  p.  621.  At 
the  head  of  Merchants  Hope  Cr., 
bounding  N.  by  W.  upon  land  of  Ed- 
ward Sparshott.  Due  by  assignment 
from  Serjeant  Richard  Tisdell,  (Tisdall) 
to  whom  it  was  due  for  trans,  of  4 
pers.* 

ROBERT  BRASSURE  &  PETER 
REY,  600  acs.  Up.  Co.  of  New  Norf., 
24  Feb.  1638,  p.  622.  Upon  Nansa- 
mund  River  alias  Matrevers  Riv.  Due 
by  assignment  from  Peter  Johnson. 

WILLIAM  BARKER,  Marriner,  24 
poles  square,  Ely.  upon  land  of  John 
Corker,  W.  upon  land  of  William 
Parry  &  N.  into  the  Island.  27  Feb. 
1638,  p.  622.    Fee  Rent:     1  Capon,  etc. 

RICHARD  BARNHOWSE,  (Barne 
Howse),  Marriner,  250  acs.,  James  Citty 
Co.,  27  Feb.  1638,  p.  622.  Butting  upon 
a  drye  gutt  or  deepe  hollow  Sw.  to  the 
Swd.  of  William  Berrys  howse,  runing 
S.  W.  from  the  path  at  the  head  of  sd. 
gutt  &c,  crossing  a  runn  of  water  into 
land  that  was  cleared  by  George  Holmes 
&c.  to  S.  W.  side  Kethes  Cr.  Due  by 
purchase  from  Jerimiah  Blackman, 
Marriner,  Admr.  of  Jacob  Avery,  dec'd., 
which  land  is  part  of  500  acs.  leased  to 
sd.  Avery,  &  now  confirmed  by  pattern. 

STEPHEN  WEBB,  250  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  2  Mar.  1638,  p.  623.  Neare 
the  head  of  Sunken  Marsh,  E.  upon  land 
of  William  Nusam,  N.  upon  the  main 
Sunken  Marsh  Sw.  &  S.  upon  a  Sw. 
150  acs.  for  the  per.  advs.  of  himself, 
his  wife  Clare  Webb,  his  son  Robert  & 
100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Eliza. 
Morris,  William  Briggs.  Note:  Re- 
newed by  sd.  Webb  &  pattern  dated  18 
Sept.  1636  put  unto  it  &  100  acs.  more 
added. 


ELI  AS  HARTREE,  100  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  last  of  Feb.  1638,  p.  623. 
S.  upon  the  Gleab  land,  N.  upon  the 
persimon  ponds  &  W.  upon  the  Bay. 
21  yr.  lease.  Fee  Rent:  4  bbls.  of 
Corne,  etc. 

THOMAS  SYMONS,  250  acs.  Up. 
Co.  of  New  Norf.,  2  Mar.  1638,  p. 
624.  E.  upon  Nansamund  Riv.,  bounded 
on  N.  with  Majors  Cr.  &  on  S.  by  land 
of  John  Slater.  Due  for  trans,  of  5 
pers:  David  Lewis,  Thomas  Annis, 
Robert  Sanders,  Robert  Coleman,  Tho. 
Dickson. 

JOHN  WATKINS,  150  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  at  the  Low.  Chippokes,  2 
Mar.  1638,  p.  624.  Upon  N.  side  of 
Sunken  Marsh  &  N.  E.  upon  land  of 
Phillipp  Clarke.  Due  for  trans,  of  3 
pers:  Richard  Austin,  Richard  Millard, 
Robert  Knight. 

ROBERT  HOLT  &  RICHARD  BELL, 
500  acs.  James  Citty  Co.,  in  Chicha- 
hominy  Riv.,  2  Mar.  1638,  p.  624. 
Towards  the  head  of  Checqueroes  Cr. 
&  W.,  upon  land  of  Mr.  John  Felgate. 
50  acs.  due  to  each  for  their  own  per. 
adv.,  &  400  acs.  for  trans,  of  8  pers: 
John  Newhowse,  Wm.  Allin,  Stephen 
Beane,  Antho.  Luco,  Samuell  Lucas, 
Robert  Phillipson,  Tho.  Keyes,  William 
Willeford.  Note:  Renewed  23  July 
1640  in  the  name  of  Robert  Holt. 

THOMAS  SWANN,  1200  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  upon  S.  side  of  James  Riv., 
1  Mar.  1638,  p.  625.  Bounded  W. 
from  Smiths  mount  to  the  halfe  way 
neck.  Due  in  right  of  trans,  of  24  pers. 
by  his  late  father  William  Swan: 
Richard  Jones,  Henry  Dawkes,  John 
Swan,  Nich.  Stalling,  Joseph  Momus, 
Kath.  Crippin,  "Richard  Maddison,  Tho. 
Williams,  Willi.  Motts,  Georg  Yeo- 
mans,  John  Fludd,  Edward  Swan,  Rich. 
Thimbleby,  Nicholas  Foster,  Edward 
Champion,  Judith  Greene,  Nich.  Bar- 
nett,  Rich.  Perry,  John  Goodson,  Rich- 
ard Fludd,  Alice  Eeds,  Mary  Hawkes, 
Andrew  Jacob,  Kath.  Cripps. 

WALTER  CHILES,  400  acs.  Chas. 
Citty  Co.,  1  Mar.  1638,  p.  625.  W. 
upon   Apamattuck   Riv.,   N.    upon   land 


104 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


of  Edward  Tunstall  &  S.  towards  the 
falls.  200  acs.  for  the  per.  advs.  of 
himself,  his  wife  Elizabeth  Chiles,  his 
sons:  William  &  Walter,  &  200  acs. 
for  trans,  of  4  pers:  Hen.  Tutton,  Jon. 
Gerry,  Jon.  Shaw,  Sarah  Cole. 

RICHARD  BENNETT,  300  acs.  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  2  Mar.  1638,  p.  626. 
150  acs.  butting  upon  the  baye  behind 
Ambrose  Meders  point  &  150  acs.  beg. 
at  the  miles  end  &  upon  the  W.  side  of 
Thomas  Davis  his  land.  Due  by  right 
of  trans,  of  6  pers.,  by  John  Myles: 
John  Myles,  Tho.  Whitlock,  Silvester 
Fitcher  (?),  Robert  Willey,  William 
Harrison,  Andrew  Blackwell. 

EDWARD  TRAVIS  &  JOHN 
JOHNSON,  sonn  of  John  Johnson, 
deed.,  900  acs.  James  Citty  Co.,  25 
Feb.  1638,  p.  626.  Upon  the  head  of 
Up.  Chippokes  Cr.  adj.  upon  S.  W. 
side  of  land  of  Jerimiah  Dickeson  &c. 
200  acs.  due  by  right  of  adv.  of  his 
father,  his  wife  &  2  children  (also 
written  3  children)  &  250  acs.  for  trans. 
of  5  pers.  by  sd.  Johnson,  the  elder; 
450  acs.  for  trans,  of  9  pers.,  by  sd. 
Travis:  (which  names  appear,  viz:) 
Jon.  Johnson,  his  wife  &  3  children, 
Walter  Travis,  Nich.  Cosons,  Walter 
Johnson,  Dorothy  Bornett,  Kath.  Dowse, 
Tho.  Hewson,  Robt.  Simpson,  Peter 
Hill,  Jon.  Turvy,  Fr.  Camber,  Jon. 
Jenings,  Richard  New,  Tho.  Bach,  (or 
Bath). 

RICHARD  KEMP,  Esqr.,  840  acs., 
called  the  meadowes  neare  unto  the 
Rich  Neck  upon  Archers  hope  Cr.  pur- 
chased by  sd.  Kemp  of  Georg  Minifye, 
Merchant;  4  Mar.  1638,  p.  627.  Beg. 
at  the  horse  path  over  against  part  of 
the  sd.  Rich  Neck,  N.  N.  W.  downe 
the  side  of  the  meadowes  to  a  br.  of 
Powhetan  Sw.  &c.  50  acs.  due  for  his 
own  per.  adv.  &  800  acs.  for  trans,  of 
16  pers:  Henry  Fenton,  Thomas  Cooke, 
Robert  Sumers,  John  How,  Georg  Har- 
rison, Francisco,  Mingo,  Maria,  Mathew, 
Peter,  Cosse,  old  Gereene,  Bass,  young 
Peter,  Paule,  Emmanuell,  Negroes. 

GEORG  GRACE,  Merchant,  1000  acs. 
James  Citty  Co.,  7  Mar.  1638,  p.  627. 
Within    Chichahominy   Riv.,    W.    upon 


land  of  Bridges  Freeman,  runing  down 
towards  head  of  Pagan  Cr.,  &  S.  W. 
towards  sd.  Freeman  &  Francis  Fowlers 
Cr.    Due  for  trans,  of  20  pers.* 

PETER  KNIGHT,  Merchant,  200 
acs.  Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  13  Mar.  1638, 
p.  628.  S.  E.  Ely.  upon  the  maine  Cr., 
S.  W.  into  the  woods  upon  land  of 
Leift.  John  Upton  Sly.,  &  upon  the 
Batchelors  plantation  Nly.  Due  by  as- 
signment &  exchange  to  &  with  sd. 
Leift.  Upton  to  &  with  Mr.  Thomas 
Hill  for  200  acs.  in  any  other  place 
ungraunted  &  by  sd.  Hill  sold  to  sd. 
Knight  for  a  valuable  consideration. 

CHRISTOPHER  BURROUGH,  200 
acs.  Low.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  21  Feb. 
1638,  p.  628.  E.  upon  the  W.  side  of 
Lynhaven  river,  S.  upon  a  Cr.  of  the 
same  &  N.  W.  into  the  woods.  Due 
for  trans,  of  4  pers:  Richard  Gardiner. 
Note:    Other  names  not  given. 

SAME.  150  acs.  Same  Co.,  date  & 
page.  Nly.  upon  Bennetts  Cr.  Trans, 
of  3  pers:  Thomas  Francis,  Andrew 
Bodman,  Daniell  Scott. 

JOHN  BRADSTON,  350  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  26  Sept.  1636,  p.  629.  On 
the  S.  side  of  the  river  in  the  bottome 
of  Pipscoes  Bay,  E.  upon  the  Sw.  &c. 
50  acs.  for  his  own  per.  adv.  &  300  acs. 
for  trans,  of  his  wife  Dorothy  Bradston 
&  5  pers.*  Memo:  That  I  John  Brad- 
ston doe  utterly  disclaime  and  renounce 
all  right  &  title  of  land  that  I  have 
formerly  laid  claime  to  in  Pipscoes  Bay 
in  the  Co.  of  James  Citty  all  of  which 
right  and  title  I  have  assigned  over  to 
John  Fludd  of  Westover  plantation  in 
Va.  Witness  my  hand  this  20th  of 
March  1638.  Alwayes  provided  that  I 
shall  bee  tolerated  to  take  up  the  same 
proportion  of  land  that  I  have  dis- 
claimed elsewhere  making  the  same  to 
appeare  to  bee  due.  (Note:  The  fol- 
lowing names  appear  under  this  record: ) 
Thomas  Hooker,  John  Hackworth.  (By 
Capt.  John  West,  Govr.  &c.) 

ARON  CORSESTAM  &  DERRICK 
CORSESTAM,  860  acs.  Eliz.  Cittie  Co., 
23  March  1638,  p.  629.  S.  upon  the 
maine  river,  into  the  woods  N.  parallel 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


105 


to  land  of  Bartholomew  Wethersbye, 
bounded  on  the  W.  with  Newport  News 
Cr.  &c.  Graunted  unto  them  upon  con- 
sideration expressed  in  an  order  of  Ct., 
4  Oct.  1638. 

These  presents  witnes  that  whereas 
Capt.  William  Brocas,  Esqr.,  Thomas 
Harwood,  Gent.  &  Clement  East, 
Chirurgion  of  the  Gleabe  of  London, 
Attys.  for  Thomas  Grindon,  of  London, 
Merchant,  by  virtue  of  their  Letter  (of) 
Atty.,  have  bargained  &c.  to  Capt.  John 
Browning  in  consideration  of  3000  lb. 
waight  of  good  &  Merchantable  Tobacco 
in  leafe  due  to  bee  paid  at  or  on  the 
10  Nov.  next  after  the  date  hereof,  all 
the  land  lying  in  Mounts  bay  &  be- 
longing to  sd.  Grindon,  late  in 
possession  of  John  Warham,  dec'd.,  & 
called  by  the  name  of  Hampton  Key. 
12  Apr.  1638.  It  is  likewise  agreed 
that  sd.  Browning  shall  pay  as  much 
Caske  as  shall  containe  the  sd.  Tobacco. 
Signed:  W.  Brocas  &  Tho.  Harwood. 
Witness:    John  Moore.    Pa^e  630. 

JOHN  NORTON,  of  James  Island, 
Smith,  unto  EDWARD  SANDERSON, 
Merchant,  1  howse  &  12  acs.  of  land  in 
James  Island,  bounded  to  the  Ewd.  of 
James  Cittie,  W.  upon  a  marsh  parting 
the  same  from  land  lately  in  possession 
of  Edward  Grindon,  E.  upon  another 
marsh,  S.  upon  the  maine  river  &  N. 
along  a  ridge  of  land  between  the  two 
sd.  marshes.  Consideration:  2200  lbs. 
Tobacco.  1  Nov.  1638,  p.  630.  Signed: 
John  Norton  (his  mark).  Witnesses: 
Daniell  Hill  &  Robt.  Portman. 

JOSEPH  ROYALL,  200  acs.  Chas. 
Citty  Co.,  4  May  1638,  p.  631.  In 
Diggs  hundred  &  S.  upon  land  of  Tho- 
mas Oggs.  (Record  incomplete.)  Due 
for  trans,  of  4  pers:  Robert  Wornall, 
John  Wells,  Tho.  Swift,  Ralph.  Higson. 

THOMAS  GRAY,  550  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  26  May  1638,  p.  631.  On 
S.  side  of  the  maine  river  over  against 
James  Cittie,  adj.  on  N.  side  of  land 
of  Thomas  Swan,  E.  upon  Rolfes  Cr. 
&  S.  W.  into  the  woods  towards  the 
Crosse  Cr.  100  acs.  due  as  being  an 
Ancient  Planter,  50  acs.  for  the  per. 
adv.  of  his  first  wife  Avis  Gray,  50  acs. 


for  the  per.  adv.  of  his  now  wife  Re- 
becca Gray  &  350  acs.  for  trans,  of  7 
pers:  Wm.  Gray,  Tho.  Gray,  Jon.  Bis- 
hopp,  Robt.  Broome,  Robt.  Welch,  Luke 
Mille,  John  Bancks. 

RICHARD  KEMP,  Esqr.,  1200  acs, 
comonly  called  the  Rich  Neck,  in 
Archers  hope  Cr;  also  100  acs.  more 
between  the  sd.  1200  acs.  &  the  Pallisa- 
does  of  the  Midle  plantation;  the  whole 
1300  acs.  bounding  N.  W.  into  the 
woods,  S.  E.  upon  Archers  hope  Cr.  & 
part  of  the  Pallisadoes  of  the  midle 
plantation,  S.  S.  W.  upon  a  gutt  of 
marsh  &  swamp  parting  it  from  the 
barren  Neck  &  N.  N.  E.  upon  land  of 
John  Saines.  1200  acs.  purchased  of 
Mr.  Georg  Minifye,  Merchant  & 
graunted  to  him  23  Feb.  1636  but  not 
truly  bounded  as  appeares  by  the  survey 
of  William  Wigg,  one  of  the  Surveyors 
authorized  by  the  Court;  &  the  other 
100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Tonie  & 
Gereene,  Negroes.    3  Jan.  1638,  p.  632. 

THOMAS  STOWT,  300  acs.  in 
Chichahominy  Riv.,  N.  upon  land  of 
John  White,  W.  upon  sd.  river,  S.  upon 
a  small  Cr.  &  E.  into  the  woods.  10 
Apr.  1639,  p.  632.  Due  for  trans,  of 
6  pers:  William  Morgan,  Jon.  Badham, 
Richard  Vardale,  William  Westwood, 
Elell  Hackes,  John  Pargiter. 

THOMAS  DEW,  300  acs.  Up.  Norf. 
Co.,  10  Oct.  1638,  p.  632.  In  Nansa- 
mund  Riv.,  beg.  at  a  small  Cr.  at  the 
old  Indian  Towne,  S.  E.  into  the  woods 
a  small  Island  being  opposite  against 
sd.  land.  Due  for  trans,  of  6  pers: 
Wm.  Broughton,  Peter  Morgate,  Brasen- 
burne  Loyer,  Nicholas  "the  surname  out 
of  the.  Certificate."  Note:  Renewed  18 
Jan.  1643  &  450  acs.  added. 

NICHOLAS  GEORGE  &  JOHN 
GRYMSDITCH,  300  acs.  Isle  of  Wight 
Co.,  20  Feb.  1638,  p.  633.  Runing  up 
Pagan  Cr.,  &  E.  &  W.  at  the  head  of 
Grymsditch  his  Cr.  200  acs.  to  sd. 
George  by  assignmt.  from  William 
Clapham,  to  whom  it  was  due  for  trans, 
of  4  pers.,  John  Munger,  Rich.  Shelton, 
Anthony  Lee,  John  Evans,  &  100  acs. 
due  sd.  Grymsditch  for  the  per.  adv. 
of  himself  &  wife. 


106 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


HUGH  ALLEN,  225  acs.  Chas.  Riv. 
Co.,  18  Oct.  1638,  p.  633.  N.  upon 
Mr.  Roulstons  first  devdt.,  bounded  on 
W.  with  land  graunted  to  Martin  Baker 
&  on  E.  with  land  of  Robert  Beaw.  150 
acs.  in  right  of  trans,  of  3  pers.  the  1st 
yr.  to  said  Chas.  Riv:  John  Potter, 
Thomas  Jefferyes,  Thomas  Man;  &  75 
acs.  for  the  adv.  of  himself  &  2  pers: 
Abraham  Caine,  Charles  Allen  the  2nd 
yr. 

SAME.  100  acs.  Same  Co.,  date  & 
page.  Adj.  the  above  tract  &  on  the 
W.  adj.  land  of  John  Poteete.  Due  for 
his  own  per.  adv.  &  trans,  of  his  son 
Charles  into  this  colony. 

JOHN  SEAWARD,  400  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  18  June  1638,  p.  634.  Upon 
Warresquike  Riv.  now  called  New 
Towne  haven,  beg.  at  a  pynie  point  by 
a  little  gutt  runing  into  the  woods  right 
over  against  the  land  of  Nathaniell 
Floyd  &  neare  his  former  pattent.  Due 
for  trans,  of  4  pers:  John  Seaward, 
John  Williams,  Edward  Brantly,  Wil- 
liam Winnfrye  (the  first  syllable  crossed 
out,  leaving  the  name  thus:  frye), 
Anth.  Mathews,  Gersion  Gromwell, 
John  Lippett,  Phillip  Plumblye. 

CHRISTOPHER  BRANCH,  450  acs. 
Henrico  Co.,  28  Feb.  1638,  p.  634.  E. 
by  N.  upon  the  great  river,  S.  by  E. 
upon  Proctors  Cr.  etc.,  &  N.  by  E.  upon 
land  graunted  to  John  Griffin,  now  in 
the  tenure  of  sd.  Branch.  100  acs.  due 
by  exchange  from  James  Place,  to  whom 
in  was  due  in  right  of  2  servts.,  &  350 
acs.  for  trans,  of  7  pers:  Richard 
Peirce,  James  Hunt,  Edward  Salter, 
Thomas  Morgan,  Samuell  Fitch,  Tho. 
Richardson,  Robert  Elam  Charles 
Steward,  Richard  Bumpas. 

EDWARD  WHITAKERS,  (Whita- 
ker),  100  acs.,  8  Feb.  1638,  p.  635. 
Joyning  upon  the  Pallisadoes  of  the 
midle  plantation  without  the  forrest,  W. 
N.  W.  into  the  woods,  S.  E.  upon  the 
pallisadoes,  S.  W.  upon  land  of  Robert 
Guy  &  N.  E.  upon  land  of  Leift.  Rich- 
ard Popeley.    Due  for  trans,  of  2  pers.* 

DAVID  MANSELL,  250  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,    10  Oct.   1638,  p.  635.    W. 


upon  land  of  Thomas  Loveing  in  Mar- 
tins hundred,  N.  by  a  ridge  of  land 
whereon  the  Church  standeth,  E.  upon 
land  of  John  Oberry  &  S.  upon  Keths 
Cr.  Due  for  trans,  of  5  pers:  Thomas 
Armye,  Robert  Sharpe,  Ralph  Roberts, 
Robert  Huett,  Lewis  Baker. 

THOMAS  MELTON,  200  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  6  Feb.  1638,  p.  635.  At 
Lyn  haven  upon  the  E.  side  of  the  river 
at  the  head  of  a  little  cr.  &c.  50  acs. 
for  his  own  per.  adv.,  50  acs.  for  his 
wife  Hannah  Melton  &  100  acs.  for 
trans,  of  2  pers:  Edward  Cooper, 
Gowin  Laur  (?). 

JOHN  YATES,  100  acs.  Low.  New 
Norf.  Co.,  10  Mar.  1638,  p.  636.  On 
the  S.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  up  a  Cr.  on  the 
E.  side  of  the  river  &c.  50  acs.  due  for 
the  per.  adv.  of  his  son  Richard  Yates 
&  50  acs.  for  trans,  of  1  servt:  John 
Merriday.  Note:  Renewed  20  Feb. 
1643  &  150  acrs.  added. 

SAME.  Same  acreage,  Co.,  date  & 
page.  Due  for  his  owne  &  the  per.  adv. 
of  his  wife  Joane  Yates. 

CHRISTOPHER  THOMAS,  200  acs. 
Accomacke  Co.,  10  Mar.  1638,  p.  637. 
N.  E.  upon  land  of  Capt.  John  Howe, 
W.  on  a  br.  of  Cherrystones  Cr.  &  S. 
upon  land  of  Edward  Drew.  50  acs. 
for  his  own  &  50  acs.  for  the  per.  adv. 
of  his  father  Christopher  Thomas  & 
100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Georg 
Meuslye  (or  Menslye),  John  Greenfeild. 

EPAPHRODITUS     LAWSON,     250 

acs.  Up.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  15  Mar. 
1638,  p.  637.  N.  side  of  Chuckatuck 
Riv.,  adj,  his  own  land  &c.  Due  for 
trans,  of  5  pers:  John  Bebee,  Mary 
Peirce,  Ellen  Quarrell,  Edmund  Knight, 
James  Clansey  (Clausey). 

JOHN  WALTON,  200  acs.  Acco- 
macke Co.,  24  Mar.  1638,  p.  637.  E. 
upon  the  Seaboard  side,  W.  into  the 
woods  with  Peminoe  Cr.  runing  in  the 
midle.  Due  for  trans,  of  4  pers:  Tho. 
Carter,  Robert  Munday,  Wm.  Glover, 
John  Roberts. 

JOHN  ROBINS,  200  acs.  Eliz.  Citty 
Co.,  1  Apr.  1639,  p.  638.    N.  upon  the 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


107 


back  river  adj.  land  of  John  Robins  &c. 
Due  by  right  of  trans,  of  4  pers:  John 
Holden  (or  Holder),  Eliz.  Holder, 
(his)  wife,  James  Sampson,  Jane  Davis. 

JOHN  ROBINS,  300  acs.  in  Chicha- 
hominy River,  N.  upon  the  same,  beg. 
at  a  little  Cr.  above  pease  hill  &c.  1 
Apr.  1639,  p.  638.  Due  for  trans,  of 
6  pers:  Georg  Holliday,  Jon.  Charter, 
Alice  Williams,  Mary  Garner,  Wm. 
Cranfeild,  Roger  Rigby.  Note:  This 
pattern  assigned  to  Edward  Travis,  re- 
newed in  his  name  &  his  pattern  of  800 
acs.,  dated  15  Apr.,  added  to  it. 

JOHN    BATTS    &    JOHN    DAVIS, 

750  acs.  Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  2  Apr.  1639,  p. 
638.  At  the  head  of  Queens  Cr.,  W. 
N.  W.  into  the  woods,  N.  upon  land  of 
Richard  Maior.  50  acs.  each  for  their 
own  per.  adv.  &  650  acs.  for  the  trans, 
of  13  pers:  Samll.  Charywell,  Wm. 
Thomas,  Joseph  Drewer,  Edward  Mar- 
shall, Tho.  Lockly,  John  Fling,  due  to 
John  Batts;  Richard  Thomas,  Robert 
Freiston,  Charles  Lockley,  Henry  Low- 
der,  Wm.  Holman,  Dorothy  Skillorne, 
William  Holland,  due  to  John  Davis. 
Note:  Renewed  in  the  name  of  John 
Davis  for  450  acs.  &  300  acs.  in  the 
name  of  Stephen  Gill. 

WILLIAM  CROUTCH,  250  acs.  Low. 
New  Norf.  Co.,  6  Apr.  1639,  p.  639. 
Being  a  peece  of  land  called  the  Woolfe 
Neck.  Due  for  trans,  of  5  pers:  John 
White,  John  Watford,  Tho.  Smith, 
Peter  Hill,  William  Minnokes. 

OWEN  LANCASTER,  100  acs.  at 
Lynhaven,  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  10  Apr. 
1639,  p.  639.  Upon  the  E.  side  of  the 
river  neare  the  head  of  a  salt  Cr.,  beg. 
above  a  point  called  the  Woolfes  Snare. 
Due  for  his  own  per.  adv.  &  trans,  of 
1  servt:    Robert  Hawkin. 

EDWARD  OLIVER,  450  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  16  Apr.  1639,  p.  640.  S. 
side  of  Chichahominy  Riv.,  S.  E.  &  N. 
W.  into  the  woods,  S.  W.  Sly.  called 
by  the  name  of  Mattahunck  (or  Matta- 
hauck).  150  acs.  due  by  assignmt.  from 
John  Brodwell  &  300  acs.  for  trans,  of 
6  pers:  Thomas  Golding,  Dorothy 
Golding,  John  Smith,  Thomas  Grindall, 


Wm.    Grames,    Richard    Baker.    Note: 
Renewed  &  300  acs.  added. 

SAME.  Same  Co.,  date  &  page.  At 
the  head  &  upon  the  N.  side  of  Chicha- 
hominy Riv.  called  by  the  Indians  with 
the  name  Custipa,  E.  upon  a  great  Sw. 
Due  for  trans,  of  6  pers:  John  Turner, 
Francis  Webster,  Tho.  Boughton,  Georg 
Barker,  Ann  Edmonds,  Thomas  Edwards. 
Note:  This  pattern  surrendered  &  land 
taken  up  to  the  former  pattent. 

SAMUELL  TRIGG  &  RAPHAELL 
JOYNER,  300  acs.  in  Chichahominy 
Riv.,  James  Citty  Co.,  17  Apr.  1639,  p. 
640.  E.  into  the  woods,  W.  upon  a  br. 
of  the  Cr.  parting  it  from  land  of  Wil- 
liam Wigg  &  S.  upon  an  Island  of 
William  Wigg,  being  neare  2  mi.  with- 
in the  mouth  of  Warranye  Cr.  towards 
the  head.  50  acs.  due  sd.  Trigg  for  his 
own  per.  adv.,  50  acs.  for  his  wife 
Ellianor  Trigg,  50  acs.  for  his  brother 
William  Triggs;  50  acs.  for  the  per. 
adv.  of  said  Joyner  &  100  acs.  for  trans, 
of  2  pers:  Dorothy  Rute  (or  Rule), 
Joane  Graunt.  Note:  This  pattent  as- 
signed over  wholy  to  Joyner  &  renewed 
in  the  name  of  Joyner  &  Porter  &  50 
acs.  added. 

WILLIAM  BASSETT,  150  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  18  Apr.  1639,  p.  641.  E.  & 
W.  upon  Chichahominy  Riv.,  Nly.  into 
the  woods  called  by  the  Indians  with 
the  name  of  Pottacocock.  50  acs.  for 
his  own  per.  adv.,  50  acs.  for  the  adv. 
of  his  wife  Iszabella  Bassett  &  50  acs. 
for  trans,  of  1  servt:    Richard  Sanders. 

JOHN  OSBORNE,  300  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  26  Apr.  1639,  p.  641.  At 
the  upper  Chippokes  Cr.,  adj.  N.  E. 
upon  land  of  Jerimiah  Dickenson.  100 
acs.  due  for  the  per.  advs.  of  his  wife 
Margarett  Osborne,  &  his  son  John  Os- 
borne, Junr.,  &  200  acs.  for  trans,  of 
4  pers:  Walter  Gibson,  James  Bad- 
worth,  Susan  Suelgreene  (or  Snel- 
greene),   Eliza.   Gellett    (Sellett.) 

WILLIAM  WIGG,  350  acs.  upon  the 
Nly.  br.  &  at  the  head  of  Warrany  Cr., 
adj.  his  pattent  land  &c.  13  Apr.  1639, 
p.  462.  Due  in  right  of  trans,  of  7 
pers:    Hugh     Loyd,     Ann     Wooleston, 


108 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Susanna  Jannaway,  Hen.  Harback,  Nich. 
Watkins,  Hector  Godbere,  Edward 
Smith. 

EDWARD  TRAVIS,  300  acs.  in 
Chichahominy  Riv.,  James  Citty  Co., 
25  Apr.  1639,  p.  642.  In  Warrany  Cr., 
W.  upon  land  of  Bennett  Freeman,  N. 
upon  land  of  William  Wigg,  a  Cr.  be- 
tweene  &  S.  upon  the  mouth  of  sd.  Cr. 
Due  for  trans,  of  6  pers:  Edward 
Johnson,  Luke  Bromly  (first  written 
Barnaby),  Tho.  Croutch,  Mary  Jackson, 
Jonathan  Addington,  Bridgett  Osborne. 

SAME.  800  acs.  Same  Co.  &  date, 
p.  643-  In  Chichahominy  Riv.,  being  a 
neck  of  land  called  pease  hill  ,one  side 
butting  downe  the  maine  river  Ely.,  & 
the  head  of  the  neck  upon  the  Ely.  side 
adj.  land  of  William  Beard  &c.  Due 
for  his  own.  per.  adv.  &  trans,  of  15 
pers:  Ambrose  Poyner,  Richard  Sutton, 
Katherine  Wilkins,  Robert  Pittway, 
Francis  Raison,  Bryan  Viccars,  Evan 
Jones,  John  Sewell,  Tho.  Scarborough, 
John  Higgins,  Joseph  Batts,  Humphry 
Frey,  Rebecca  Leach,  William  Davis, 
Thomas  Hill.  Note:  Renewed  17  Feb. 
1643  &  a  pattent  of  John  Robins  as- 
signed to  him,  dated  1  Apr.  1639  of 
300  acs.,  added. 

WALTER  PAKES,  200  acs.  on  E. 
side  of  Chichahominy  Riv.,  being  a 
tract  of  land  called  by  the  name  of 
Momtapweake,  (?)  lying  N.  &  S.  upon 
the  river.  2  May  1639,  p.  643.  Due  in 
right  of  trans,  of  4  pers:  Richard 
Baskirrel  (? — first  written  Baskin, ) 
Tho.  Hill,  John  Woodcocke,  Nicholas 
Robinson.  Note:  Surrendered  &  land 
taken  in  another  place. 

ALICE  WILSONN,  200  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  11  May  1639,  p.  644.  On 
the  Seaboard  side,  N.  to  a  thickett  & 
donne  Cr.,  runing  Sly.  &c.  Due  in  right 
of  assignmt.  from  Edmund  Scarborough 
to    her   late   husband,    Henry    Wilsonn. 

THOMAS  CURTIS,  100  acs.  at  the 
head  of  the  old  Poquoson,  Ely.  towards 
land  of  John  Laydon  at  the  persimon 
ponds,  N.  upon  a  Sw.  parting  at  the 
head  of  his  plantation  &c.  Due  for 
trans,  of  2  pers:  John  Lether,  John 
Roberts.    11  May  1639,  p.  644. 


GEORG  HIGGINS,  100  acs.  Chas. 
Riv.  Co.,  11  May  1639,  p.  644.  30  acs. 
butting  upon  Cheesemans  Cr.  Wly., 
bounded  on  the  N.  with  land  of  John 
Clarkson,  S.  with  land  of  Richard  Ben- 
nett, runing  E.  S.  E.  &c.  70  acs.  butt- 
ing upon  his  first  devdt.,  parallel  to  sd. 
Cr.,  to  the  poplar  branch  &  thence  to 
the  head  of  Thomas  Isles  first  devdt. 
Due  for  his  own  per.  adv.  &  trans,  of 
John   Young. 

WILLIAM  BARKER,  Marriner,  1300 
acs.  Chas.  Citty  Co.,  11  May  1639,  p. 
645.  500  acs.  bounding  upon  land  he 
purchased  of  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Stephens, 
now  the  Lady  Harvey,  lying  up  to  the 
head  of  the  Cr.,  &  800  acs.  in  the  same 
Cr.,  being  a  Neck  of  Land  adj.  land 
lately  belonging  to  Capt.  Francis  Hooke 
&c.  Due  for  trans,  of  26  pers:  John 
Huffer,  Edward  Wilsonn,  James  Bagby 
(or  Bayly) — first  written  Basty),  Mar- 
garett  Badham,  Christopher  Hargrave, 
Georg  Waters,  Thomas  Fargason,  Ed- 
mund Callaway,  Mathew  Pacen,  Francis 
Assey,  Robert  Hudson,  Richard  Davey 
(or  Daney),  Ann  Yorke,  William 
Sanders,  William  Barwick,  Morgan 
Glover. 

ROSE  O'BERYE,  widdowe  of  John 
O'berye,  100  acs.  neare  the  head  of 
Keths  Cr.,  N.  upon  land  of  Edward 
Hall  &c.  11  May  1639,  p.  645.  Due 
in  right  of  a  graunt  made  to  her  said 
late  husband.  (Note:  the  following 
names  appear  under  this  record  &  it  is 
assumed  this  land  was  due  said  John 
for  the  trans,  of  the  same: )  Rose 
Oberye,  Henry  Smithcock. 

RICHARD  PRESTON,  150  acs.  Up. 
New  Norf.  Co.,  11  May  1639,  p.  645. 
About  4  mi.  up  Chuckatuck  River,  a 
mi.  from  the  Nly.  side,  upon  the  Wly. 
side  of  a  small  runing  brooke  knowne 
by  the  name  of  the  Indian  Snares,  Sly. 
upon  land  of  Samuell  Onely  &  William 
Ticknard,  runing  Nly.  &c.  Due  for 
trans,  of  3  pers:  Miles  (? — altered) 
Collison,  Lewis  Long,  Walter  Jones. 

WILLIAM  DAVIS,  200  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  4  May  1639,  p.  646.  Adj. 
land  lately  graunted  to  Alexander 
Stomer  &  runing  into  the  woods  E.  by 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


109 


N.    Due  by  assignmt.  from  Christopher 
Edwards. 

THOMAS  MATHEWS,  Chirurgeon, 
1100  acs.  Henrico  Co.,  11  May  1639,  p. 
646.  Beg.  at  the  falling  creek,  bearing 
Wly.  on  the  falls,  N.  on  the  river,  S. 
on  the  woods  &  E.  upon  the  Cr.  Due 
for  trans,  of  22  pers:  Thomas  Mathews, 
William  Lawson,  Edward  Salter,  Georg 
Grace,  George  Bull  (first  written  Ball), 
Georg  Broadie  (or  Broadue)  (first 
written  Browne),  Georg  Greene,  Henry 
Castell,  Roger  Mathews,  Robert  Trustall, 
William  Till,  William  Bowler,  Morgan 
Russer,  Richard  Cooper,  Mathew  Mor- 
ton, Thomas  Waplett,  Robert  Gammock, 
&  5  Negroes. 

WALTER  COOPER,  350  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  last  of  Apr.  1639,  p.  646. 
Lying  due  E.  upon  Powhetan  Sw. 
bridge,  N.  &  by  E.  up  sd.  Swamp, 
butting  Sly.  upon  the  neck  of  Land. 
Due  by  right  of  trans,  of  7  pers:  Wil- 
liam Barton,  Jone  Maylor,  Garrett 
Sumerville,  Richard  Sutton,  Sarah 
Woolgate,  Robert  Lucas,  Thomas  Taylor. 

JOHN  WHITE,  350  acs.  in  Chicha- 
hominy  Riv.,  James  Citty  Co.,  29  Apr. 
1639,  p.  647.  Beg.  at  the  first  point  of 
wood  on  the  hitherside  of  the  Lower 
gulfe,  S.  by  E.  down  the  river,  upon 
the  river  W.  &  by  S.  &  E.  by  N.  into 
the  woods.  Due  for  trans,  of  7  pers: 
Richard  Jenney,  William  Bridges,  Jane 
Harris,  Thomas  Parsons,  Richard  Moore, 
Dorothy  Rule,   Christopher   Bumbridge. 

JOHN  DUNSTON,  250  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  in  Hogg  Island  maine,  20 
May  1639,  p.  647.  E.  upon  land  of 
Robert  Sheppard,  beg.  at  a  great  Sw.  N. 
upon  Chippokes  Cr.  &c.  50  acs.  for 
the  per.  adv.  of  his  wife  Cicely  Dunston 
&  200  acs.  for  trans,  of  4  pers:  Richard 
Wellman,  Edward  Ingleton,  Garrett 
Hewes,  William  Taylor. 

SAME.  600  acs.  Same  location,  date 
&  page.  Beg.  upon  a  Valley  comeing 
out  of  the  great  Sw.  called  the  Arrowe 
reed  swamp  lying  N.  W.  above  the 
head  of  Chippokes  Cr.  &c.  Due  for 
trans,  of  12  pers:  Thomas  Woodall, 
Jon.    Garrett,    Marmaduke    Kitson,    Fr. 


Furbush,  Eliz.  Sames,  Winifred  Newell, 
Rose  Hill,  Rich.  Sharp,  Edward  Hunt, 
Wm.  Hodge,  Martin  Hamond,  John 
Harcock. 

WILLIAM  FAIREFAX,  Yeoman  of 
James  Citty,  200  acs.  in  sd.  county,  Feb. 
20,  1619,  p.  648.  (By  Georg  Yeardlye, 
Knight,  Govr.  &c.)  "An  Ancient  Plan- 
ter who  hath  remained  8  years  in  the 
country  &  performed  all  services  to  the 
Colony  that  might  any  way  belong  to 
his  charge,"  etc.  "in  consideration  of 
his  own  per.  adv.  100  acs.  &  100  acs. 
more  in  the  personal  right  of  Margery 
his  wife,  an  old  planter  also  that  came 
into  the  country  married  to  the  sd. 
William  Fairefax."  12  acs.  of  which 
situated  in  the  Island  of  James  City 
about  the  mansion  house  of  sd.  Fairefax, 
E.  upon  Tuckers  hole,  near  Mary  Bay- 
ly's land  now  in  possession  of  Robert 
Evans,  S.  towards  Joakin  Andrews  & 
John  Grubb,  N.  upon  Richard  Kings- 
mell's  Cr.,  188  acs.  of  same  near  Archers 
Hope,  adj.  William  Cap,  &  Joakin  An- 
drews, S.  upon  the  great  river  &  N. 
upon  the  maine  land.  Certain  considera- 
tions, provisions,  etc.  Fee  rent:  1 
shill.  for  every  50  acs.  etc.  Signed: 
Georg  Yeardly.  Peery,  (or  Poory), 
Seer. 

JOHN  PERROTT,  of  Marrys  Mount, 
to  ROBERT  NEWMAN,  Planter,  of 
Blunt  Point.  450  acs.,  in  consideration 
of  the  full  sum  of  2,500  lbs.  of  good  & 
merchantable  tobacco  with  casque.  Nov. 
11,  1635,  page  649.  Witnesses: 
Mathew  Plant  &  Tho.  Leonard.  Signed: 
John  Perrott. 

ROBERT  NEWMAN  to  RICHARD 
BENNETT,  Merchant,  assignment  of  the 
above  land.  Aug.  20,  1638,  page  650. 
Witnesses:  William  Durant  &  John 
Gookin.    Signed:    Robert  Newman. 

WILLIAM  FAIRFAX  to  RICHARD 
BUCK,  Minister,  of  James  City,  deed  to 
"my  dwelling  howse  and  my  other  little 
howse  thereto  adjoining  with  twelve 
acres  of  land  lying  in  James  Cittie  in 
the  Island  being  my  owne  howse  and 
land,  etc."  Consideration:  Certain  sums 
of  money  in  hand  paid.  Dec.  18,  1620. 
Mr.  Fairefax  haveing  left  the  pattent  for 


110 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


the  above  mentioned  aboard  ship  pro- 
mised to  send  the  same  up  from  Kiquo- 
tan  by  William  Perrye.    Page  650. 

JOHN  PAWLEY,  Chirurgion,  600 
acs.  James  City  Co.,  June  18,  1639,  page 
651.  Above  the  head  of  Lawnes  Cr.,  N. 
upon  Thomas  Stamp,  E.  upon  Mr.  New- 
land.  Trans,  of  12  pers:  Thomas 
Watton,  Richard  Newland,  Geo.  Arme- 
strong,  John  Price,  Hugh  Carron,  Tho. 
Edwards,  Arthur  Hughes,  Samll. 
Cockett,  Eliz.  Luckins,  Rice  Floyd, 
James  Barnett  (altered  to  Burnett), 
Ann  Heyward. 

JAMES  PERREN,  100  acs.  Accomack 
Co.,  May  28,  1639,  page  651.  S.  upon 
Marke  Hammon,  N.  on  Elias  Taylor  & 
W.  on  the  Bay.  50  acs.  due  for  per. 
adv.  of  himself  &  50  acs.  for  per  adv. 
of  1  servt:    Robert  Wyatt. 

FARMER  JONES,  400  acs.  Accomack 
Co.,  June  17,  1639,  page  651.  Due  by 
assignment  from  John  Ford  &  due  sd. 
Ford  for  trans,  of  8  pers.* 

THOMAS  BURBAGE,  1,250  acs. 
Accomack  Co.,  Mar.  10,  1638,  page  652. 
On  N.  side  of  the  mouth  of  Hungars 
Cr.,  adj.  William  Andrewes,  etc.  Sd. 
land  formerly  granted  to  William 
Gayny.  Due  sd.  Barbage  for  trans,  of 
25  pers:  William  Burbage,  Tompson 
Evan,  (first  written  Swan)  Hugh  Price, 
Owen  Doltie,  David  Williamson,  Phil- 
lip Conner,  Richard  Hutchinson,  John 
Dary,  John  Hvre,  Robt.  Young,  William 
Sanders,  William  Brackett,  Jane  Bed- 
ford, Lawrance  Evans  4  times,  James 
Abbin,  3  times,  William  Waltham, 
Georg  Brooke,  Robert  Plaine,  John 
Goodman,  Edward  Craortt. 

RICE  HOE,  300  acs.  James  City  Co., 
June  4,  1639,  page  652.  S.  upon  his 
own  land,  E.  upon  David  Jones.  Trans, 
of  6  pers:  John  Thomas,  John  Rice, 
John  (altered  to  Wm.)  Lewis,  Alice 
Jones,  Thomas  Williams,  William 
Morrice.  Note:  Renewed  16  Oct.  1643 
pattent  of  9  May  1643  for  700  acs.  and 
969  acs.  more  added. 

ABRAHAM  WOOD,  200  acs.  Henri- 
co Co.,  June  8,  1639,  page  653.    Upon 


N.  side  of  Appamattucke  Riv.,  Ely.  up- 
on a  great  bottome  neare  unto  the  great 
Rocke,  W.  up  the  river  towards  Mr. 
John  Baugh,  S.  upon  the  river  opposite 
John  Baker.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  John 
Evans,  John  Greene,  Robert  Taylor, 
Jacob   Norris. 

HENRY  WATSON,  200  acs.  Low. 
Co.  New  Norfolk,  June  10,  1639,  page 
653.  In  Eliz.  Riv.,  at  the  head  of  the 
broad  cr.  Due  by  assignment  from 
Francis  Roulston  alias  Willcox,  &  as- 
signed to  the  sd.  Francis  by  John 
Brockett,  Esqr.  son  to  Sir  John  Brockett, 
Knight,  having  been  granted  the  sd.  Sir 
John  Brockett  by  bill  of  adventure  from 
Sir  Thomas  Smith,  Knight,  late  Treas- 
urer to  the  Company  for  Va. 

JOHN  SAINES,  100  acs.,  May  29, 
1639,  page  653.  Upon  the  Pallasadoes 
of  the  Midle  Plantation,  without  the 
forrest,  S.  W.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Richard 
Kemp  &  N.  E.  upon  land  of  Robert 
Guy.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  John  Burges  & 
John  Dennes. 

GEORG  HULL,  50  acs.  Eliz.  City 
Co.,  June  12,  1639,  page  654.  Upon 
the  old  poquoson,  upon  the  broad  Cr. 
adj.  his  own  land  &  Richard  Robinson, 
and  on  E.  with  Monack.  Trans,  of 
William  Powell,  a  servant. 

WILLIAM  BARKER,  100  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  June  6,  1639,  page  654.  S. 
upon  the  main  river,  E.  on  Skeths  Cr. 
W.  towards  Randall  Smallwood.  Trans, 
of  2  pers:  Robert  Thomas  &  Thomas 
Robinson. 

CAPT.     ADAM     THORROGOOD, 

400  acs.,  June  8,  1639,  page  654.  At 
the  head  of  Samuel  Bennett's  Cr.,  W. 
towards  a  great  reedy  Sw.,  N.  upon 
land  of  John  Langfeild,  E.  upon  sd. 
Creek  which  runs  out  of  Chisopeake 
ah.  Lynhaven.  Due  for  trans,  of  8 
pers:*  This  patent  renewed  in  the  name 
of  Adam  Thorrogood,  Jr. 

JOHN  GRAVES,  150  acs.  Eliz.  City 
Co.,  May  29,  1639,  page  655.  At  the 
head  of  the  back  river,  E.  upon  his  own 
land.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  John  Ander- 
son,  John    Sassell   &   Thomas    Brigson. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


Ill 


ROBERT  WEST,  600  acs.  in  Lyn- 
haven,  Low.  Co.  New  Norfolk,  May  15, 
1638,  page  655.  Over  against  land  of 
John  Stratton.    Trans,  of  12  pers.* 

THOMAS  STEPHENS,  (Steephens) 
200  acs.,  July  18,  1639,  page  655.  At 
the  head  of  the  back  river,  on  the  E. 
side  of  Scones  Dam,  etc.,  E.  by  the  side 
of  the  Poquoson.  Formerly  granted  unto 
Epaphroditus  Lawson  &  by  him  assigned 
to  Samuell  Grosse,  who  assigned  it  to 
John  Davis,  and  by  him  assigned  to 
sd.  Stephens. 

RANDALL  HOLT,  400  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  July  20  ,  1639,  page  656. 
Above  the  head  of  the  Lower  Chip- 
poakes  Cr.,  S.  near  land  of  John  Duns- 
ton.  Due  for  trans,  of  8  pers:  Francis 
Holt,  Robert  Oliver,  Hen.  Grainger, 
Humphry  Tompson,  Tho.  Read,  Wil- 
liam Gee,  Ann  Evans,  John  Harris. 

TRISTRUM  NOSWORTHY,  200 
acs.  Up.  New  Norf.  Co.,  5  June  1639, 
p.  656.  Towards  the  head  of  a  bay 
behind  the  ragged  Islands,  beg.  at  a 
small  creek,  extending  N.  Wly.  upon 
same  &  running  to  a  peece  of  land 
comonly  knowne  by  the  name  of  Poplar 
Neck.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Andrew  Ed- 
wards, Mary  Jackson,  Barthol.  Tucker, 
John  Steward. 

SAME.  150  acs.,  same  Co.,  date  & 
page.  Upon  N.  side  of  Nansamund 
Riv.,  adj.  land  of  Mr.  Daniell  Gookin. 
50  acs.  for  his  own  per.  adv.,  50  acs. 
for  per.  adv.  of  his  wife  Ann  Nos- 
worthy  &  50  acs.  for  trans,  of  a  servt., 
Jone  Bembricke. 

WILLIAM  BURDETT,  Gent.,  200 
acs.,  Accomack  Co.,  June  20,  1639,  page 
657.  Upon  Johnny  Boyes  Cr.,  Trans. 
of  4  pers:  John  Stanbye,  William 
Annis,   Clement   Doune,    Owen   Harris. 

THOMAS  FAULKNER,  300  acs., 
June  5,  1639,  page  657.  A  ridge  of 
land  behind  Nutmeg  Quarter  between 
the  Sw.  and  the  Reedy  damm  &  W. 
upon  plantation  of  Joseph  Stratton.  50 
acs.  due  for  per.  adv.  of  himself  &  wife 
Margarett  Faulkner  &  200  acs.  trans,  of 
4  pers:    Robt.  Richardson,  Leo.  Wood, 


Antonia  de  Grote,  Tho.  Vipon.    Note: 
Renewed  12  Oct.  1642. 

ROBERT  GLASCOCKE,  50  acs.  Low. 
Co.  New  Norfolk,  June  10,  1639,  page 
658.  Up  the  Western  branch  of  Eliz. 
River,  above  land  of  Jonathan  Lang- 
worth.    Trans,    of    Iszabella    Dixon,    a 


AMBROSE  COBBS,  350  acs.  Henrico 
Co.,  July  25,  1639,  page  658.  Upon 
Appamattuck  Riv.,  adj.  land  of  Mr. 
John  Baugh  &  Mr.  Abraham  Wood. 
Trans,  of  7  pers:  Ambrose  Cobbs,  Ann, 
his  wife,  Robert  his  son,  Margarett  his 
daughter,  Richard  Barker,  Hugh  Barker, 
Thomas  Harding. 

MATHEW  GOUGH,  Gent.,  350  acs., 
Henrico  Co.,  July  25,  1639,  page  658. 
W.  upon  the  river,  &  S.  on  land  of  Bal- 
hash.  100  acs.  part  formerly  granted  to 
William  Vincent,  deceased.  Due  in 
right  of  trans,  of  7  pers:  of  whom  only 
the  following  names  appear:  William 
Morgan,  Francis  Derrick,  Nicholas  Nett, 
Mathew  Gough. 

JOHN  WHITE,  Gent.,  50  acs.  Low. 
Co.  New  Norfolk,  June  10,  1639,  page 
659.  Adj.  land  of  Daniell  Tanner, 
called  Julian  his  neck.  Due  for  his  per. 
adv. 

EDWARD  TUNSTALL,  Gent.,  150 
acs.,  Henrico  Co.,  June  5,  1639,  page 
659.  S.  upon  the  falls  of  Appamuttuck 
Riv.  W.  up  the  River,  and  N.  into  the 
woods  including  a  meadow.  Trans,  of 
3  pers.* 

GEORG  GILES,  100  acs.  Up.  Co. 
New  Norfolk,  June  5,  1639,  page  659. 
Upon  N.  side  of  Nansamund  Riv.,  adj. 
Edward  Maior  &  S.  W.  upon  Robert 
Brassure.  Due  for  trans,  of  2  pers: 
Georg  Giles  &  John  Giles. 

GEORGE  FAWDON,  200  acs.,  June 
6,  1639,  page  660.  Upon  Southern 
branch  of  Elizabeth  River,  adj.  John 
Gates    (changed    to    Yates).    Due    for 

trans,  of  4  pers.* 

JEREMIAH  CLEMENTS,  500  acs. 
James  City  Co.,   Mar.    10,    1638,   page 


112 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


660.  At  Upper  Chippoakes  Cr.,  N.  up- 
on  James    River.    Trans,    of    10   pers.* 

ROBERT  NEWMAN,  650  acs.  War- 
wick River.  Co.,  10  Mar.  1639,  p.  660. 
A  ridge  of  land  bet.  the  persimon  ponds 
&  the  gr.  Poquoson  damm  at  upper  side 
of  path  from  Nutmeg  Quarter  to  the 
New  Poquoson,  etc.  Trans,  of  13  pers: 
Richard  Sigmar,  Symon  Tillney,  Robert 
Mouse,  Job  Jefferys,  Balden  Signett, 
Richard  Leake,  Geo.  Taylor,  Rebecca 
Pallington,  Henry  Brignell,  Tho. 
Willoughby. 

WILLIAM  DAVIS,  1,200  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  June  28,  1639,  page  661.  N. 
upon  land  of  Lt.  Richard  Popely,  S.  up- 
on Capt.  Humphry  Higginson,  W.  upon 
head  of  Archers  Hope  Cr.  E.  toward 
bryery  Swamp.  Due  for  trans,  of  24 
pers:  Sarah  Browne,  Isaac  ,  An- 
drew Howell,  Ann  Keeding,  Nicho. 
Goldsmith,  Wm.  Burfur,  Thomas  Thor- 
rogood,  John  Barker,  Morgan  Williams, 
Wm.  Davis,  Richard  Shaw,  John  Bad- 
den,  Abigail  Drewry,  Richard  Vardall, 
Mathew  Burrow,  Tho.  Floyd,  John 
Peirce,  Richard  Prichard,  Joan,  a  Negro. 

JOHN  PAWLEY,  Chirurgeon,  500 
acs.  James  City  Co.,  July  20,  1639,  page 

661.  Binding  E.  &  N.  upon  Justinian 
Cooper,  N.  E.  upon  land  formerly 
granted  sd.  Pawley  &  S.  W.  above  the 
head  of  Lawnes  Cr.  Trans,  of  10  pers: 
John  Gidney,  Christobell  Knight,  Ann 
Purvey,  Wm.  Wilkinson,  Mabell  Rose, 
Thomas  Raston,  Kath.  Arndall,  Jon. 
Mathew,  Tho.  Preese,  Rich.  Rackly. 

JOHN  HOWELL,  150  acs.  Henrico 
Co.,  June  10,  1639,  page  661.  N.  upon 
Robert  Partin,  S.  towards  Capt.  Small's 
land.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  John  Fletcher, 
Tho.  Gibson,  Jane  Price. 

WILLIAM  CHAPMAN,  50  acs., 
Chas.   River   Co.,   July   20,    1639,   page 

662.  S.  E.  upon  the  Bryery  Swamp  adj. 
Samuell  Watkins  on  the  N.  Due  for 
his   per.   adv. 

RICHARD  JOHNSON,  350  acs., 
Henrico  Co.,  at  Neck  of  Land,  June  20, 
1639,  page  662.    N.  upon  land  of  James 


Usher,  E.  upon  the  main  river,  S.  to- 
wards Godspeeds  Forte.  50  acs.  due 
for  the  per.  adv.  of  his  wife,  Elizabeth 
Johnson,  50  acs.  for  his  son  Francis  & 
250  acs.  for  trans,  of  5  pers:  William 
Mums,  John  Wattis,  Robert  Wiseman, 
Eliza.  Boreman,  William  Bentleg  (or 
Bentley). 

CHRISTOPHER    DAWCEY     (Daw- 

sey),  50  acs.  Eliz.  City  Co.,  August  13, 
1639,  page  663.  At  Harris  his  creek, 
S.  upon  Humphry  Meeres.  Due  for 
trans,  of  Mary  his  wife.  (This  name 
has  been  changed  to  Ann  Dawcey). 

CAPT.    WILLIAM    BROCAS,    Esq., 

one  of  the  Councell  of  State,  600  acs. 
in  Charles  Riv.  Co.,  Aug.  13,  1639, 
page  663.  Upon  S.  side  of  the  New 
Poquoson,  E.  towards  Chesopeian  Bay, 
bounded  on  S.  W.  by  Raye  his  creek. 
For  trans,  of  12  pers.* 

EDWARD  SANDERSON,  Gent., 
2,000  acs.  Aug.  13,  1639,  page  664.  In 
Chickahominy  Riv.,  500  acs.  about  a 
mile  above  Pyny  Point,  about  5  mi. 
within  the  mouth  of  said  river,  etc.,  & 
near  Robert  Holt.  500  acs.  by  purchase 
from  the  Execors.  of  Edmond  Morecroft, 
late  of  Va.,  &  1,500  for  trans,  of  30 
pers:  Edward  Sanderson,  Nathaniell 
Stiles,  Humphry  Price,  Daniell  Lile, 
Edward  Haslewood,  Humphry  Evans, 
John  Hill,  Patrick  Simpson,  John  Simp- 
son, Nicholas  Davis,  Edward  Babb, 
John  Winchester,  Awdrey  his  wife, 
Theodor  his  child,  William  Wootton, 
James  Hagate,  John  Sherwood,  Henry 
Bryan,  Nich.  Bush,  Edward  Challis, 
Francis  Fox,  Mathew  Nelson,  John 
Onion,  William  Wood;  2  Negroes 
Thorn  &  Jane. 

HENRY  BAGWELL,  400  acs.,  Acco- 
mack Co.,  Aug.  13,  1639,  page  664. 
On  old  plantation  cr.  &  Johnny  Boyes 
branch,  near  William  Berryman  &  100 
acs.  adj.  his  first  devident.  Due  for 
trans,  of  8  pers:  William  Whitehart, 
Andrew  Bashaw,  Mich.  Williams,  John 
Cley,  Thomas  Evans,  William  Powell, 
Richard  Smith,  Mary  Vaughan. 

THOMAS  SHEPPEY,  (Shippey)  250 
acs.  Henrico  Co.,  Aug.  13,   1639,  page 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


113 


665.  Adj.  land  of:  William  Sharpe, 
Thomas  Rowse,  Arthur  Anthony  &  4 
score  acres  E.  upon  Godspeed  Fort  Cr. 
Due  sd.  Shippey  for  trans,  of  5  pers: 
John  Sebeard,  Phillis  Blackman,  John 
Herbert,  William  Quelche,  Thomas 
James. 

JOHN  POTEETE,  50  acs.  Chas.  Riv. 
Co.,  Aug.  13,  1639,  page  665.  N.  upon 
Aliens  creek  etc.,  adj.  land  of  John 
Chew.  Due  by  purchase  from  Nicholas 
Dale,  and  due  sd.  Dale  for  the  adv.  of 
Ann,  his  wife,  &  Nicholas  Ryman. 

FRANCIS  FOWLER,  1,600  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  4  Aug.  1639,  page  666. 
Lying  on  both  sides  of  Juring  point 
Creek,  beg.  a  mile  above  at  a  small 
Cross  Creek,  bearing  on  E.  side  of  Mrs. 
Edloe's  land  &  N.  side  of  Bridges  Free- 
man. Trans,  of  32  pers.*  900  acs.  of 
the  above  was  bequeathed  to  Capt. 
Henry  Browne  by  will  &  renewed  in 
said  Browne's  name  Feb.  25,  1643. 

THOMAS  HAWKINS,  300  acs., 
Chas.    Riv.    Co.,    Aug.    14,    1639,    page 

666.  S.  E.  upon  the  New  Poquoson 
River  &  E.  upon  Cr.  that  parts  this  & 
land  of  Capt.  Cheesman  &  W.  Sly.  upon 
the  pinye  Bay.  150  acs.  called  the 
Nuttree  Neck,  Wly.  upon  Harwoods 
Creek.  Due  for  trans,  of  6  pers.*,  by 
his  father  Thomas  Hawkins. 

SAMUELL  STEPHENS,  Gent.,  son 
&  heire  of  Capt.  Richard  Stephens,  late 
of  Va.,  2,000  acs.,  Up.  Co.  New  Nor- 
folk, in  Nansemund  Riv.,  July  20,  1639, 
page  667.  Adj.  Percivall  Champion, 
William  Sanders,  William  Parker  & 
Thomas  Powell.  Due  for  trans,  by  his 
father,  Capt.  Richard  Stephens,  of  40 
pers.,  whose  names  are  not  given. 

LT.  RICHARD  POPELEY,  1,250 
acs.,  June  10,  1639,  page  667.  At  tthe 
Midle  Plantation  upon  the  Pallisadoes, 
adj.  Edward  Whitakers  and  N.  N.  E. 
upon  the  head  of  Queens  Cr.  Due  for 
trans,  of  25  pers:  Richard  Budnye, 
William  Medcalfe,  Joseph  Cox,  John 
James,  Hercules  Price,  John  Jefferys, 
Crowder  Joyce,  Robert  Halsey,  Francis 
Viccars,  Martin  Church,  John  Say,  Ed- 
ward Lincolne,  Thomas  Peirce,  William 


Naylor,  Henry  Smith,  Robert  Braxton, 
Henry  Carter,  Robert  Ward,  Nicholas 
Keytin,  Tho.  Kirbye,  James  Stukely, 
Abraham  Moone,  Joane  Gaily,  Mary 
Grand. 

FRANCIS  DERRICK  to  RICHARD 
JOHNSON,  bill  of  sale  for  30  acs., 
Oct.  14,  1638,  page  668.  "Whereas 
John  Baker  &  Dorothy  his  wife,  daugh- 
ter of  the  late  deceased  Serjeant  John 
Harris,  have  by  order  of  Court  at  Henri- 
co the  27th  day  of  August  last  surren- 
dered unto  mee  Capt.  Francis  Derrick 
all  the  right  and  title  which  they  and 
claime  unto  the  devident  of  land  be- 
longing to  the  late  deceased  Georg 
Cawcott  which  was  given  to  the  said 
Dorothy  by  the  last  will  and  testamt. 
of  the  sd.  Cawcott  as  by  the  surrender 
in  the  said  court  and  by  the  pattent  and 
will  recorded  at  James  Cittie"  etc.  For 
good  and  valuable  causes  and  considera- 
tions. Witnesses:  Lawr.  Hulett  &  John 
Owell. 

EDWARD  OLIVER,  750  acs.  James 
Cittie  Co.,  16  Apr.  1639,  p.  668.  S. 
side  of  Chichahominy  Riv.,  etc.,  called 
by  the  name  of  Mattahuncke.  150  acs. 
due  by  assignment  from  John  Brodwell 
&  600  acs.  for  trans,  of  12  pers:  Tho- 
mas Golding,  Dorothy  Golding,  John 
Smith,  Thomas  Grindall,  William 
Graves,  Richard  Baker,  John  Turner, 
Francis  Webster,  Tho.  Boughton,  Geo. 
Barker,  Ann  Edmonds,  Thomas  Ed- 
wards. 

THOMAS  GREY  (Gray),  400  acs., 
James  City  Co.,  upon  the  head  of 
Greyes  Cr.,  July  20,  1639,  page  669. 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  Richard  Deane,  Fran- 
cis Fineash,  Allen  Sadome,  William 
Short,  John  Hancoke  &  3  Negroes. 

LANCELOTT  DAMPERT,  50  acs., 
James  City  Co.,  July  20,  1639,  page 
669.  W.  upon  land  now  planted  upon 
by  Thomas  Grey.    Due  for  his  per.  adv. 

JOHN  LEWIN,  Merchant,  200  acs., 
Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  July  20,  1639,  page 
669.  Adj.  his  own  land.  Trans,  of  4 
pers:  Rowland  Mortimer,  Robert  West, 
Cornelius  Bradfeild,  Henry  Atkinson. 
Note:    Renewed    20    Feb.    1643    in   the 


114 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


name  of  Moore  Fontleroy  and  200  acs. 
granted  to  Tristram  Nosworthy  10  Aug. 
1642  added  to  it. 

SAME.  50  acs.,  Isle  of  Wight  Co., 
July  20,  1639,  page  670.  Trans,  of 
Richard  White,  a  servant. 

ROBERT  ELEY,  600  acs.,  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  Sept.  17,  1639,  page  670. 
Adj.  land  of  John  Pawley  &  Justinian 
Cooper.  50  acs.  due  for  his  per.  adv.  &  550 
for  trans,  of  11  pers:  William  Warren, 
Henry  Barnes,  James  Drake,  Robert 
Parkes,  William  Cockerum,  William 
Fisher,  Eliza.  Hestin,  Robert  Brouse, 
John  Jones,  Henry  Boate,  Elianor  Rogers. 

JOHN  VAUGHAN,  30  acs.,  Acco- 
mack Co.,  July  20,  1639,  page  670. 
Adj.  Clement  Dilke  &  Robert  Browne, 
formerly  leased  to  Capt.  John  How, 
deceased.  21  yr.  lease.  Fee  Rent:  20 
Lbs.  of  Tobacco. 

JOHN  BROCHE,  300  acs.,  Chas. 
River  Co.,  Sept.  16,  1639,  page  671. 
Upon  Queens  Cr.  and  at  the  head  of 
Maiden  Swamp,  etc.,  250  acs.  due  by 
assignment  from  Robt.  Bouth  &  due 
him  by  assignment  from  Stephen  Gill  & 
due  sd.  Gill  by  right  of  trans,  of  5 
pers.,  whose  names  do  not  appear,  & 
50  acs.  for  the  trans,  of  John  Walbridge 
by  sd.  Broche. 

JOHN  BROCHE,  Chirurgion,  in  Vir- 
ginia, etc.  "For  diverse  &  good  con- 
siderations mee  thereunto  moveing  have 
freely  given  and  bestowed  upon  my 
Godsonn  John  Major,  sonne  of  Richard 
Maior  of  Queens  Creeke,  boate  right, 
being  aged  the  day  of  the  date  hereof 
three  years  three  quarters  (that  is  to 
say)  one  Cow  one  heifer  and  one  yearl- 
ing, etc.  To  be  delivered  unto  the  sd. 
child  when  he  shall  have  attained  the 
age  of  eighteene  yeares."  etc.  June  12, 
1638,  page  672.  Witness:  Row.  Bur- 
nam  &  John  Judson. 

PETER  RIDLEY,  200  acs.,  James 
City  Co.,  Sept.  23,  1639,  page  672.  In 
Martins  Hundred,  adj.  Thomas  Smith. 
Due  for  trans,  of  4  pers:  William 
Palmer,  Robert  Daricutt,  Edward  But- 
terworth,  John  Whitaker. 


JOHN  HAYWARD,  150  acs.,  James 
City  Co.,  Sept.  23,  1639,  page  673.  S. 
upon  Kethes  Cr.,  upon  W.  side  of  Wil- 
liam Stafford,  the  land  called  by  the 
name  of  the  Rich  Necke.  Due  for  the 
adv.  of  his  brother  Francis  Hayward  & 
for  the  trans,  of  2  pers:  Thomas  Leigh 
&  Humphry  Gibbs. 

JOHN  JACKSON,  300  acs.,  Chas. 
River  Co.,  Sept.  10,  1639,  page  673. 
At  the  New  Poquoson,  upon  Cheese- 
man's  Cr.,  bounded  on  the  E.  by  land  of 
John  Jackson.  Due  by  right  of  trans. 
of  6  pers:  Christo.  Bartlett,  John 
Babbinton,  John  Hill,  Richard  Lucas, 
Peter  Stephens,  William  Worke. 

WILLIAM  CANHOOE,  300  acs., 
Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  Sept.  26,  1639,  page 
674.  Adj.  John  Burland,  John  Dennett, 
Capt.  Robert  Felgate  &  land  now  in 
possession  of  Thomas  Deacon.  Due  for 
trans,  of  6  pers:  William  Canhooe, 
Thomas  Hollingham,  Thomas  Buck, 
Agnis  Martin,  Peter  Hanbury.  (This 
name  also  spelt  Cainhooe.) 

JOHN  BURLAND,  JR.,  400  acs., 
Chas.  River  Co.,  Oct.  1,  1639,  page  674. 
Son  of  John  Burland,  late  of  Chiskiacke, 
dec'd.  Adj.  land  of  Stephen  Gill  & 
William  Canhooe.  Due  for  the  adv.  of 
his  father,  his  mother,  Dorothy  Burland 
&  6  pers:  Joane  Grove,  Mary  Loyd, 
Christo.  Richett,  John  Haddy,  William 
Locke,  Willi.  Bricketton,  the  1st  yr.  to 
Chas.  Riv. 

JOHN  BELL,  100  acs.,  Chas.  Riv. 
Co.,  Oct.  1,  1639,  page  675.  Upon 
Queens  Cr.,  Adj.  land  of  Henry  Jones 
&  John  Hartwell.  Due  for  trans,  of  2 
pers:    John  Jones  &  Thomas  Perreene. 

WALTER  PAKES,  400  acs.,  James 
City  Co.,  Sept.  1,  1639,  page  675.  Near 
the  head  of  Chichahominy  Riv.,  adj. 
Edward  Oliver.  200  acs.  due  by  as- 
signment from  William  Hatfeild,  to 
whom  it  was  assigned  by  William 
Durand  &  due  Durand  for  his  per.  adv. 
&  trans,  of  3  pers.,  &  the  other  200  acs. 
for  the  trans,  of  4  pers.:  William 
Durand,  Alice  Webb,  Richard  Beck, 
Georg  Best,  Richard  Baskevill,  Tho. 
Hill,  John  Woodcock,  Nicholas  Robin- 
son. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


115 


WILLIAM  PARRY,  350  acs.  Eliz. 
City  Co.,  Oct.  10,  1639,  page  675.  W. 
upon  Hampton  Riv.,  bounded  on  S. 
with  a  creek  dividing  this  from  land 
called  the  Indian  Thickett,  according  to 
Mr.  Stockdens  lease,  etc.,  and  near  land 
of  John  Baker.  100  acs.  due  by  order 
of  court  dated  June  5,  1639  &  250  acs. 
for  trans,  of  5  pers:  Richard  Ridges, 
John  Badham,  Sarah  Chaplin,  Robert 
Powell,  Ann  Badger. 

THOMAS  SMITH,  300  acs.,  Acco- 
mack Co.,  Oct.  11,  1639,  page  676.  At 
Hungars  Cr.  upon  land  called  the  old 
mans  neck,  adj.  William  Cotton  &  Capt. 
William  Stone.  Due  for  trans,  of  him- 
self, wife  Sarah,  daughter  Ann,  &  3 
pers:  John  Farmer,  Richard  Ganey, 
Katherine  Jones. 

THOMAS  STAMP,  500  acs.  James 
Cittie  Co.,  24  Feb.  1638,  p.  676.  Sly. 
from  the  head  of  Lawnes  Cr.,  N.  upon 
land  of  Nicholas  Reynolds  &c.  Due 
for  his  owne  per.  adv.  &  trans,  of  9 
pers:  Charles  Lockley,  Hamon  Jones, 
Christ.  Feild,  Richard  Sutton,  John 
Markham,  Walter  Willis,  Lawrance 
Littleboy,  Edward  Bryan,  Richard  An- 
drewes. 


of  himself  &  brother  Henry  Batts  &  4 
pers.,  50  acs.  by  assignment  from  Wal- 
ter Worshipp,  Gent.,  due  for  his  per. 
adv.,  200  acs.  for  the  trans,  of  4  pers. 
into  the  Colony  &  the  other  250  acs. 
for  the  trans,  of  5  pers.  to  Chicka- 
hominy  Riv.,  according  to  an  order  of 
court  in  that  case  provided.  (The  fol- 
lowing names  appear  under  this  patent) : 
William  Bletsoe,  James  Craven,  George 
Smith,  Robert  Aunley,  (or  Annley) 
Walter  Worshipp,  William  Madwell, 
Robert  Coleman,  Richard  Donne,  Elia- 
nor  Deane,  Richard  Hughes,  Thomas 
Warne,  Thomas  Andrews,  Anthony  a 
Negro.  Note:  This  pattent  relinquished 
&  the  rights  made  use  of  in  a  patt.  of 
800  acs.  granted  18  Oct.  1643. 

JOHN  WALL,  300  acs.,  Chas.  City 
Co.,  Sept.  20,  1639,  page  678.  N.  upon 
John  Hacker,  E.  upon  William  Rookins 
&  William  Pilkinton,  late  deceased.  Sly. 
toward  certain  high  land  called  the  hills, 
etc.  Due  for  trans,  of  6  pers:  Mary 
Webb,  Bryan  Gardiner,  John  Abter- 
crume,  Walter  Marshall,  Eliz.  Mosse, 
Evan  Joseph.  Patent  renewed  by  Govr. 
Berkeley  13  Aug.  1643  &  1,200  acs. 
purchased  of  Hoe  May  2,  1636  &  291 
acs.  added  to  it. 


JOHN  KEMPE,  500  acs.,  James  City 
Co.,  Oct.  24,  1639,  page  677.  In  Grayes 
Cr.,  over  against  James  City,  N.  E.  upon 
Henry  Hart  &  S.  W.  upon  Thomas 
Gray.  Due  by  right  of  trans,  of  him- 
self and  9  pers:  Tho.  Clarke,  Jane 
Moore,  William  Shorte,  William  Mad- 
well,  John  Harmon,  William  Havert, 
John  Cole,  John  Searle,  Henry  Rose. 

ROBERT  ROCKWELL,  250  acs.,  Up. 
Norfolk  Co.,  Oct.  26,  1639,  page  677. 
In  Nansamund  Riv.,  next  to  Edward 
Maior  &  S.  upon  the  river  and  lying 
between  Maior  and  John  Slaughter. 
Due  for  trans,  of  5  pers:  Thomas  Rock- 
well, Mary  Roe,  Martin  Forscue,  James 
Bagly,  John  Chambers. 

THOMAS  SYMONS,  800  acs.,  James 
City  Co.,  June  8,  1639,  page  678.  Up- 
on Chichahominy  Riv.,  adj.  John  Robins. 
50  acs.  due  for  per.  adv.  of  his  wife 
Dorothy  Castle,  300  acs.  by  assignment 
from  William  Batt,  due  him  for  the  adv. 


JOHN  SMITH  &  CHRISTOPHER 
BEA,  100  acs.  Eliz.  City  Co.,  last  day 
of  Oct.,  1639,  page  679.  At  the  head 
of  the  Old  Poquoson  Riv.,  W.  upon 
land  lately  taken  up  by  Thomas  Say- 
well,  now  in  the  occupation  of  sd. 
Smith.    Due  for  their  per.  advs. 

SAMUELL  JACKSON,  200  acs.,  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  Oct.  11,  1639,  page  679- 
E.  upon  Pagan  Cr.  or  New  Towne 
Haven,  near  land  belonging  to  Capt. 
Basse  called  Cedall  Island,  now  in 
possession  of  William  Patteford, 
Southerly  towards  land  of  Hugh  Wynn 
and  William  Taylor.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
John  Prowse,  Richard  Nicholas,  John 
Grigs,  Henry  Smith. 

MARKE  JOHNSON,  50  acs.,  Eliz. 
City  Co.  at  the  backe  river,  Oct.  4, 
1639,  page  680.  Adj.  land  of  Capt. 
William  Tucker,  E.  upon  Thomas 
Wasts,  W.  upon  Christopher  Wormley, 
S.  upon  Nicholas  Hill  &  N.  upon  Capt. 


116 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Purifye,  deed.    (In  2  tracts  of  25  acs. 
each.)    Trans,     of    Georg    Paverell,     a 


THOMAS  BOULDING,  400  acs. 
Eliz.  City  Co.,  upon  the  midle  ridge, 
S.  upon  the  persimon  ponds,  S.  E.  upon 
the  Pynie  swamp,  etc.,  last  of  Oct., 
1639,  page  680.  50  acs.  by  assignment 
from  William  Baulk  &  due  to  him  for 
his  per.  adv.,  &  350  acs.  for  the  trans, 
of  7  pers.  Leonard  Slater,  Mathew 
Gates,  John  Harris,  Robert  Davis,  John 
Dayes,  John  Hitchcox,  Robert  Clements. 

CHRISTOPHER  BOYSE,  300  acs., 
Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  Oct.  23,  1639,  page  681. 
N.  upon  the  head  of  the  New  Poquoson 
Riv.,  E.  upon  Georg  Hadderill.  Due  for 
his  per.  adv.  &  trans,  of  5  pers:  John 
Crispe,  Mordecay  Cooke,  John  Tiplady, 
William  Venice,  John  Johnson. 

EDMOND  PORTER,  JR.,  100  acs., 
Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  Oct.  23,  1639,  page 
681.  N.  upon  Joseph  Cobb.  By  right 
of  adv.  of  himself  &  father  Edmond 
Porter,   Sr. 

JUSTINIAN  COOPER,  850  acs.,  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  Oct.  24,  1639,  page  681. 
E.  &  W.  upon  land  formerly  granted 
unto  him.  Due  by  right  of  trans,  of 
17  pers:  Henry  Roberts,  Robert  Jeffer- 
son, William  Starch,  Eliza.  Phillipps, 
Edward  Roberts,  Eliz.  Small,  Robert 
Kent,  Edward  Parsons,  Teg.  Audley, 
James  Thrift,  William  Ducke,  Joseph 
Loyd,  Tymothy  Johnson,  Alice  Webb, 
Richard  Rible  (or  Kible),  Owen  Seamer, 
Henry  Peadle. 

MAREENE  DELANMUNDAYES, 
200  acs.  Up.  Co.  New  Norfolk,  Oct.  16, 
1638,  page  682.  In  New  Towne  Haven 
Riv.,  bet.  land  of  Henry  Hooper  &  the 
first  point  within  the  river  adj.  a  cr. 
parting  land  of  the  sd.  Hooper  &  this 
land,  being  known  as  Dawsons  Neck. 
50  acs.  for  his  per.  adv.  ,&  the  residue 
by  assignment  from  Epaphroditus  Law- 
son,  &  due  Lawson  by  assignment  from 
William  Dawson  to  whom  it  was 
granted  20  Nov.  1635.  This  pateent 
renewed  in  the  name  of  Moore  Fontle- 
roy  Feb.  20,  1643  &  50  acs.  added  to  it. 
Teste:    Samll.  Abbott,  Clk. 


Lawson's  assignment  to  Delanmun- 
dayes,  who  stated  same  was  bought  from 
John  Gatling.  Witness:  Christopher 
Edwards. 

William  Dawson,  planter,  of  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  Va.  assigns  above  patent  to 
sd.  Gatling  of  the  same  county,  May  2, 
1637.  Witness:  Richard  Downes.  p. 
682. 

HANNAH  BENNETT,  450  acs., 
Chas.  River  Co.,  Nov.  1,  1639,  page 
683.  Daughter  &  heir  of  Samuell 
Bennett,  dee'd.  Upon  the  New  Poquo- 
son River,  N.  upon  the  pinye  swamp 
and  S.  upon  Robert  Thresher.  Due  by 
right  of  trans,  by  her  father  of  9  pers.* 

JOHN  WRIGHT,  200  acs.  Up.  Co. 
New  Norfolk,  Oct.  10,  1638,  page  683. 
Beg.  at  the  miles  end  of  land  of  Tho- 
mas Dewe,  Gent.  Due  for  his  per.  adv. 
&  trans,  of  3  pers:  Emblence  Prouse, 
James  Thrift,  Edward  Parsons. 

THOMAS  CAUSEY,  of  Martins 
Hundred,  to  NATHANIELL  TATUM, 
of  Apamuttuck  Riv,  Oct.  10,  1639,  page 

683.  Bill  of  sale  for  500  acs.  in  Chas. 
City  Co.,  as  by  patent  dated  July  14, 
1637.  Witnesses:  Richard  Webster  & 
Walter  Childs. 

GEORGE  MALLEN  (Marlin-Malen 
or  Martin),  400  acs.,  James  City  Co., 
Oct.  10,  1639,  page  684.  In  Chicka- 
hominy  River,  N.  upon  William  Beard 
&  S.  upon  Thomas  Warne.  Due  for 
trans,  of  8  pers:  Georg  Malen,  Hanna 
Bayford,  Robert  Chamber,  Eliza.  Sale, 
John  Harrison,  John  Huson,  Stephen 
Beach. 

RICHARD  BELL,  150  acs.,  James 
City  Co.,  Oct.  7,  1639,  page  684.  Upon 
Checroes  Cr.,  W.  upon  Georg  Unwin. 
Due  for  trans,  of  3  pers.,  of  whom  only 
Thomas  Taylor  is  mentioned. 

RICHARD  PARSONS,  450  acs.  Low. 
Co.  New  Norfolk,  Oct.  3,   1639,  page 

684.  Near  head  of  eastern  branch  of 
Eliz.  Riv.,  adj.  land  taken  up  in  the 
right  of  Thomas  Davis.  300  acs.  by 
assignment  from  Thomas  Burbage,  Mer- 
chant,  &  due  him  by  assignment  from 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


117 


Oliver  Sprie  &  due  him  for  his  per.  adv. 
&  trans,  of  5  pers.  &  150  for  trans,  of 
3  pers.  by  sd.  Parsons:  Oliver  Sprye, 
Richard  Hawes,  Jasper  Laflyn,  Richard 
Evans,  William  Wright,  Jane  Wright, 
John  Morgan,  Robert  Young,  John 
Davie  (or  Darie). 

THOMAS  STOUTE,  300  acs.,  James 
City  Co.,  Oct.  29,  1639,  page  685.  N. 
upon  Richard  Bell,  W.  upon  George 
Unwin,  etc.  Due  by  assignment  from 
John  White  &  due  sd.  White  for  trans, 
of:  William  Bridges,  Christopher 
Bambridge,  Richard  Moore,  Richard 
Moore,  Richard  Finny,  Dorothy  Rule, 
Thomas  Person. 

EDWARD  DREW,  200  acs.,  Acco- 
mack Co.,  Oct.  10,  1639,  page  685.  W. 
upon  land  of  Thomas  Powell.  Due  for 
trans,  of  4  pers:  Edward  Barnes,  Georg 
Waterman,   Jone  Bayly,   Edward  Jones. 

JOHN  WILSONN,  (Wilson)  50  acs. 
in  Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  Oct.  8,  1639,  page 
686.  Upon  Queens  Cr.,  Adj.  John 
Uty  &  John  Bell.  Granted  by  order  of 
court  at  James  City,  Oct.  8,  1630  &  due 
for  his  per.  adv.  the  1st  year  to  Charles 
River.  "On  the  southern  side  of 
Pamunkie  River  now  called  Charles 
River  and  then  known  by  the  Indian 
name  of  Chiskiake,''  etc. 

WILLIAM  CRANNAGE,  300  acs., 
Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  Oct.  1,  1639,  page 
686.  E.  upon  Joseph  Cobb,  N.  upon 
Vassalls  Cr.  &  S.  upon  Mr.  Arthur 
Smith.  For  trans,  of  6  pers.:  William 
Crannage,  Eliza.  Cranage,  Margarett 
Cranage,  Eliza.  Crannage,  Mary  Cran- 
nage, Edmond  Crannage.  Note:  "Six 
other  names  put  in  the  new  pattern  for 
these."  This  pattent  is  renewed  and  the 
old  surrendered  upp. 

DAVID  MANSELL  of  Va.,  gent.,  to 
WALTER  PENROSE  of  Va.,  planter, 
bill  of  sale  for  his  new  plantation  in 
Martins  Hundred  Parish  in  the  rich 
neck.  No  date.  Page  687.  Witnesses: 
Robert  Wild,  &  Ralph  Roberts. 

RICHARD  MAIOR,  150  acs.,  Chas. 
River  Co.,  Nov.  5,  1639,  page  687.    W. 


upon  land  formerly  granted  him  &  adj. 
John  Judson.  Due  by  assignment  from 
Joseph  Croshaw  (or  Crashaw)  &  due 
sd.  Croshaw  for  trans,  of  3  pers:  Robert 
Salter,   John   Prowse,    Stephen   Younge. 

SAMUELL  WATKEYES,  250  acs., 
Chas.    River   Co.,    Nov.    5,    1639,    page 

688.  Adj.  John  Utye.  Wly.  from  the 
head  of  Kings  Cr.  to  the  Mayden 
Swamp,  &  adj.  his  own  land.  Due  by 
assignment  from  Joseph  Croshaw  &  due 
sd.  Croshaw  for  trans,  of  5  pers: 
Richard  Quayles,  Morgan  Jones,  Rich- 
ard Redman,  Edward  Fox  &  a  maid 
servant. 

DICTORIS  CHRISTMAS,  300  acs., 
Eliz.  City  Co.,  Oct.  24,  1639,  page  688. 
Upon  N.  W.  side  of  the  Old  Poquoson 
River,  adj.  Gilbert  Perkins  and  W.  upon 
Monack.  100  acs.  for  per.  adv.  of  him- 
self &  wife  Isbell  Christmas  &  200  for 
trans,  of  4  pers.* 

NICHOLAS  COMEINGS  (Comings) 
200  acs.,  Chas.  River  Co.,  Sept.  1,  1639, 
page  688.  Upon  Utye's  Cr.,  adj.  Robert 
Pitway  &  Richard  Ford.  Due  for  his 
per.  adv.  &  trans,  of  3  pers:  Tho. 
Rogers,  Benj.  Hubbard,  Robert  Grin- 
feild. 

EDWARD  PRINCE,  Gent,  500  acs., 
Chas.    City    Co.,    Oct.    10,    1639,    page 

689.  Upon  S.  side  of  Apamuttuck  Riv., 
adj.  Nathaniell  Tatum,  running  up  by 
the  falls  of  the  river  one  half  mile.  Due 
for  trans,  of  10  pers:  Seth  Briggs,  John 
Allen,  John  Randall,  Georg  Spurjoye, 
John  Adye,  John  Higgins,  William 
Andrews,  Herbert  GrifTett,  Thomas 
Masters,  Christopher  Rawlings. 

DOROTHY  CLARKE,  Widdow,  800 
acs.,  Henrico  Co,  July  16,  1639,  page 
689.  Beg.  at  a  cr.  formerly  called 
Powells  Cr,  W.  towards  Sizemores  Cr., 
S.  towards  the  main  river.  550  acs.  due 
by  assignment  from  Roger  Davis  &  due 
sd.  Davis  for  trans,  of  11  pers.,  whose 
names  are  not  given,  &  250  acs.  by  right 
of  trans,  of  5  pers.  by  her  late  husband 
William  Clarke,  deceased:  Thomas 
Banister,  John  Grane  (or  Grave),  Rich- 
ard Davye,  Georg  Blankes,  Jane  Foster. 


118 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


THOMAS  HAMPTON,  Clerk,  a  tract 
of  land  in  James  City  Island  on  a  ridge 
of  land  between  2  swamps  behind  the 
Church.  Nov.  4,  1639,  page  689.  Due 
by  virtue  of  an  Act  of  Assembly  at 
James  City  Feb.  20,  1636,  as  in  other 
pattents. 

FRANCIS  MARTIN,  50  acs.,  Apr. 
19,  1638,  page  690.  (This  patent  in- 
complete. Evidently  assigned  to  sd. 
Martin  by  Robert  Swanson  &  due  sd. 
Swanson  for  his  per.  adv.,  as  the  name 
of  Robert  Swanson  appears  under 
patent.) 

CAPT.  CHRISTOPHER  WORMELY, 
500  acs.,  Apr.  7,  1638,  page  691.  (A 
great  part  of  this  patent  has  been  omit- 
ted.) Near  Thomas  Watts,  Nicholas 
Hill,  Capt.  Thomas  Purifye,  Thomas 
Bolden,  Armestead,  William  Mor- 
gan &  Thomas  Thornbury.  Trans,  of 
10  pers:  William  Griffin,  John  Hud- 
son, Roger  Anderson,  Tho.  Dyer,  Peter 
Richardson,  Edward  Jenkins,  Christo- 
pher Bambridge,  John  Holliday,  Tho. 
Dewe,  Thomas  Burrell. 

GEORG  MYNIFIE,  Merchant,  3,000 
acs.,  Apr.  19,  1638,  page  691.  East- 
ward upon  Porrengers  Cr.,  up  the  river 
above  the  falls  with  all  the  islands  & 
creeks  upon  the  S.  side  of  the  river  as 
far  as  the  two  branches  of  the  river. 
(No  mention  of  county  or  river).  Due 
by  order  of  court  at  James  City,  May  9, 
1635.  If,  after  survey  has  been  made, 
more  than  3,000  acs.  is  contained  in  the 
sd.  tract  sd.  Mynifie  is  to  bring  in  the 
name  of  a  servant  transported  at  his 
own  charge  for  every  50  acres.  Also 
due  for  trans,  of  60  pers.,  following: 
Rebecca  Edwards,  Thomas  Dinsdale, 
Alex.  Clarke,  Nich.  Andrews,  Tho. 
Newman,  John  Norway,  William  Harri- 
son, Peter  Arpe,  Garrett  Farrell,  John 
Rogers,  Tho.  Smith,  Martin  Kennett, 
Henry  Haines,  Tho.  Loveing,  Arthur 
Perrin,  Margt.  Cotton,  Thomas  Tarrey, 
John  Shepperd,  Owen  Jones,  John  Tur- 
ner, Patrick  Alexander,  Benj.  Dugdale, 
Thomas  Lewis,  Mark  Haman,  Thomas 
Hart,  Edward  Salsbury,  Richard  Shuter, 
Richard  Ford,  John  Johnson,  Robert 
Croffeild,  Christopher  Tilman,  James 
Prince,    Robert   Edwards,    Tho.    Hatton, 


William  Ellin,  John  Garrince,  Robert 
Wilkinson.  Note:  In  the  foregoing 
list  there  apears  37  names,  while  this 
record  states  for  transportation  of  three 
score.  Before  the  list  of  names  appears 
the  following:  "Negroes  I  brought  out 
of  England  with  me."  (Presumably 
only  the  white  persons  were  named, 
the  unnamed  Negroes  making  up  the 
difference.) 

By  Sir  Francis  Wyatt,  Knight, 
Governor  &c. 

THOMAS  DEW,  250  acs.,  Up.  Co. 
New  Norfolk,  Nov.  7,  1640,  Page  692. 
Upon  his  own  land,  runing  E.  by  S. 
through  a  great  reedy  Poquoson,  etc  50 
acs.  for  trans,  of  1  per.  &  200  acs.  by 
assignment  from  John  Wright.  Witness: 
Thomas  Brice. 

HENRY  BRADLEY,  250  acs.,  Up. 
Norfolk  Co.,  upon  New  Towne  haven 
river,  Nov.  7,  1640,  page  693.  Adj. 
land  of  Georg  Salsburies  &  the  sd. 
Henry  Bradlie.  Due  sd.  Bradlye  as  fol- 
loweth:  100  acs.  part  thereof  by  as- 
signment of  pattent  dated  25  Nov.  1637 
from  John  Wickliffe  and  Michaell 
Rantow  &  150  acs.  for  his  own  per. 
adv.  &  trans,  of  2  pers:  William  Noble 
&  John  Felton. 

JOHN  GARRETT,  150  acs.  New 
Norfolk  Co.,  page  693.  Upon  a  branch 
of  the  W.  branch  of  Nansamund  River, 
adj.  Mr.  William  Eyres.  (Record  un- 
finished, date  not  given.) 

WILLIAM  YARRETT,  150  acs.,  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  Apr.  3,  1641,  page  694. 
Upon  a  branch  of  the  lower  bay  called 
Seaward's  Cr.  beg.  at  the  mouth  of  a 
branch  of  Goosehill  Cr,  etc.,  adj.  Hugh 
Wynn  &  John  Seaward.  Due  for  trans, 
of  3  pers:  William  Yarrett,  John 
Snowson,  Mary  Moody. 

THOMAS  STEGG,  Merchant,   1,000 

acs.   Chas.   City  Co.,  18th,    1640, 

page  694.  Being  a  neck  of  land  between 
the  old  mans  Cr.  &  Queens  Cr.  on  the 
Sly.  side,  etc.  200  acs.  being  formerly 
granted  unto  Thomas  Wheeler  &  later 
assigned  unto  Patrick  Kannaday,  Mari- 
ner, by  James  Turner  &  Thomas  Harris, 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


119 


assignees  &  attorneys  of  sd.  Wheeler,  & 
by  Kannaday  to  Stegg.  Due  by  order 
of  court  dated  Oct.  15,  1640  &  for  trans, 
of  8  pers:  Richard  How,  Richard 
James,  Thomas  Robinson,  John  Gulton, 
Silvester  Ward,  Tho.  Bessen,  (or 
Beffen),  Tho.  Oliver,  Richard  Ricroft, 
Rich.  Haslewood,  Georg  Potteete,  Tho. 
Pattman,  Nich.  Woofed,  Willi.  Fanell, 
Humphry  Chapman,  Rowland  Demson, 
Tho.  Penton. 

CAPT.    THOMAS    WILLOUGHBY, 

300  acs.,  Feb.  28,  1636,  page  696. 
Upon  the  S.  branch  of  Eliz.  River  beg. 
with  the  Ware  neck,  etc.  Due  for  trans, 
of  6  pers.* 

SIR  JOHN  HARVEY,  Knight,  Gov- 
ernor  &c.    to  WILLIAM   UPTON,    of 

Yarmouth,  in  the  Isle  of  Wight,  Mari- 
ner, deed  of  guift  of  500  acs.  of  land 
in  the  Colony  of  Virginia.  Due  sd. 
Harvey  for  trans,  of  divers  persons  into 
the  Colony.  For  divers  good  causes  and 
considerations.  Feb.  28,  1636,  page 
696.  Witnesses:  John  Hobson,  and 
George  Donne  (?). 

RICHARD  TISDALL,  200  acs.,  Feb. 
10,  1635,  page  697.  At  the  head  of 
Merchants  Hope  Cr.,  2^2  mi.  from  the 
dwelling  house  of  Rice  Hoe.  Due  by 
conveyance  from  Peter  Hull,  of  Blunt 
Point,  &  due  sd.  Hull  for  the  trans,  at 
his  own  costs  of  4  pers:  John  Mowser, 
James  Lowden,  Christopher  Medcalfe, 
Manus  Zacher  (or  Lacher).  This  patent 
renewed  by  Sir  Wm.  Berkeley  Aug.  23, 
1643  in  the  name  of  Thomas  Wheeler 
having  been  purchased  by  him  &  a 
patent  for  400  acres  purchased  of  Rich- 
ard Milton  added.  (By  Capt.  John 
West,  Govr.) 

By  Sir  Francis  Wyatt 

JOHN  MAIOR,   400  acs.  Accomack 

Co.,    at    Naswatocks    Cr.,    Sept.    , 

1640,  page  698.  Due  for  trans,  of  8 
servts:  Joane  Filby,  Henry  Larramore, 
John  Maior,   Jane  Maior    (first  written 

Henry),  Anthony ,  Christian  Fisher, 

Francis  a  Negro. 

CHRISTOPHER  KIRKE,  300  acs. 
Accomacke  Co.,  at  Naswatocks  Cr.,  20 


Oct.  1640,  p.  698.  Beg.  at  the  E.  side 
of  land  of  Garrett  Anderson  &c.  50 
acs.  for  his  owne  per.  adv.,  &  250  acs. 
for  trans,  of  5  pers:  John  Dolbin, 
John  Geers,  Christopher  Barker,  Henry 
Moorecroft,  Georg  Trevett.  Note:  Re- 
newed in  1643. 

ELIAS  TAYLOR,  100  acs.  Accomacke 
Co.  at  Nuswatocks  Cr.,  10  July  1640, 
p.  699.  Beg.  at  a  little  branch  parting 
this  from  land  of  John  Towlson,  N.  W. 
along  the  broad  Cr.  &c.  50  acs.  for  the 
adv.  of  his  now  wife  Anna  Taylor  & 
100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2  servts:  Richard 
White,  Edward  Thornecroft. 

EDMUND  SCARBURGH,  600  acs., 
Accomack  Co.,  Aug.  3,  1640,  page  699. 
Part  thereof  beg.  at  Cedar  Island  nigh 

Gogg  on  the  Seaboard  side,  S.  S. 

W.  towards  land  formerly  belonging  to 
John  Neale.  The  other  part  on  the  bay 
side  at  the  southermost  side  of  John 
Jenkin,  along  the  bayside  to  his  own 
land.  100  acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of 
himself  &  wife  Mary,  &  the  other  500 
acs.  for  the  trans,  of  10  pers.:  John 
Katherine,  Alice  Vaulx,  Eliz.  Mathin 
(or  Machin),  John  Wright,  Robert  But- 
ter, Edward  Agard,  Thomas  Orchard, 
Henry  Tomlin,  Jonathan  Lewis,  Edward 
Jennis.  Note:  Renewed  10  Apr.  1644 
and  450  acres  added. 

GEORG  TRAVELLER,  200  acs.  Ac- 
comack Co.,  Nov.  27,  1640,  page  700. 
At  the  seaboard  side,  beg.  at  the  land 
of  Mr.  William  Burdett,  N.  N.  E.  to- 
wards land  of  Georg  Smith.  150  acs. 
by  right  of  a  former  patent  &  50  acs. 
due  for  trans,  of  Nicholas  Scott,  a  ser- 


JOHN  GEARY,  250  acs.  Up.  Nor- 
folk Co.,  Apr.  22,  1640,  page  700.  Bet. 
land  late  in  the  possession  of  Mr.  Tho- 
mas Dew  &  by  him  assigned  to  Thomas 
Davis  &  land  now  in  possession  of 
Thomas  Powell  bounded  N.  W.  on  the 
S.  branch  of  Matravers.  Due  for  trans. 
of  5  pers:  Robert  Ward,  William 
Collins,  Walter  Gary,  Richard  Gooday, 
John  Herst. 

PERCIVALL  CHAMPION,  50  acs., 
Up.  Norfolk  Co.,  Oct.   12,   1640,  page 


120 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


701.  Upon  Nansamund  River,  etc.,  by 
W.  side  of  the  Gleab  Land,  adj.  his 
own  250  acs.  &  land  of  William  John- 
son.   Due    by    a    former    patent    dated 

August  ,    1637   for    500   acs.,   450 

acs.  of  which  was  surveyed  out  for  the 
Gleab  land. 

THOMAS  SPARROW,  300  acs.  Low. 
Norfolk  Co.,  upon  western  branch  of 
Eliz.  River.  (Record  unfinished.)  Page 
702. 

HENRY  PERRY,  2,000  acs.  known 
by  the  name  of  Buckland,  Chas.  City 
Co.,  extending  from  the  head  of  Her- 
ring Cr.  unto  the  old  mans  Cr.  and  so 
high  as  it  ebbeth  and  floweth  up  these 
creeks.  March  9,  1639,  page  702.  Son 
&  heir  of  Capt.  William  Perry,  late  of 
Va.,  deceased.  Bequeathed  to  sd.  Henry 
Perry  by  will  of  his  father  dated  Aug. 
1,  1637.  Granted  to  Capt.  William 
Perry  by  order  of  court  dated  Sept.  19, 
1633,  and  also  by  pattern  to  said  Henry 
dated  18  Dec.  1637. 

GEORG  MINIFYE,  Esqr.  &  one  of 
the  Councell  of  State,  3,000  acs.  upon 
N.  side  of  Charles  River,  Mar.  9,  1639, 
page  704.  Beg.  at  the  Creek  upon  W. 
side  of  the  Indian  feilds.  Opposite 
Queens  Cr.  &  down  the  river  to  Tim- 
berneck  Cr.  To  be  augmented  & 
doubled  when  he  or  his  assignes  shall 
have  sufficiently  peopled  &  planted  the 
same.  Due  by  order  of  court  dated 
Oct.  11,  1639  &  for  trans,  at  his  own 
costs  of  60  pers.:  Benjamine  Pixley, 
Thomas  Greene,  John  Chapman,  Henry 
Martin,  John  Burgis,  Mathew  Ward, 
Thomas  Prince,  James  Sheers,  Richard 
Turner,  4  Negroes  bought  of  Mr.  Oldis, 
2  Negroes  bought  of  Randall  Holt, 
William  Menifie,  Francis  Garrett,  Tho- 
mas Sharpies,  James  Sherbourne,  Robert 
Williams,  William  Jones,  John  Wilkin- 
son, Joane  Wilkinson,  Thomas  Wag- 
gatt,  Georg  Kennon,  John  Kennon,  John 
Richards,  Edward  Andrewes,  Francis 
Young,  James  Hawkins,  Joseph  Willis, 
Francis  Blacke,  Thomas  Morter,  9 
Negroes  bought  of  Mr.  Constable,  John 
Brooke,  Thomas  Howler,  Humphrey 
Dennes,  John  Tabor,  Henry  Ashwell, 
Robert  Mason,  Thomas  Hearne,  John 
Williiam,  Thomas  Holmes,  Adam  Key, 


Samll.  Walker,  Stephen  Leech,  Julian 
Reed,  William  Hill,  William  Munday, 
Adam  Coote,  William  Powell,  Humphry 
London. 


CAPT.  RICHARD  TOWNSEND, 
650  acs.,  Charles  River  Co.,  Mar.  10, 
1639,  page  705.  Bet.  Martians  (or 
Martiaus)  &  Townsend's  Crks.,  N.  W. 
upon  William  Prior,  S.  E.  upon  Capt. 
Martian,  (or  Martiau)  &  N.  E.  upon 
Charles  River.  To  be  augmented,  etc. 
350  Due  for  the  adv.  of  himself,  wife 
&  5  servants  the  1st  yr.  to  Chiskiake  & 
the  residue  by  grant  dated  last  day  of 
April,  1636  for  the  trans,  of  himself, 
wife  &  4  pers.  into  the  Colony.  Capt. 
Richard  Townsend,  Frances  Townsend, 
Henry  Cuckney,  John  Painter,  3  Negroes 
adv.  the  1st  yr.  to  Chiskiake.  Luce 
Duckley  (?),  Margarett  Bayly,  Hum- 
phry Buckley,  Thomas  Needham  who 
with  Capt.  Townsend  &  wife  adv.  to 
the  Colony. 

RICHARD  COCKE,  Gent.,  2,000  acs. 
Henrico  Co.,  Mar.  10,  1639,  page  707. 
To  be  augmented,  etc.  300  acs.  lying 
at  Bremo,  E.  &  S.  upon  Turkie  Island, 
S.  by  W.  upon  the  river,  W.  by  N. 
upon  Curies,  etc.  1700  acs.  upon  the 
head  of  Turkey  Island  Cr.  called  by  the 
name  of  Mamburne  hills,  etc.  W.  by 
N.  upon  land  of  Mrs.  Hallom,  etc. 
Formerly  granted  sd.  Cocke  by  patent 
dated  March  8,  1636,  1,000  of  which 
3,000  acs.  was  surrendered  unto  Ann 
Hallom,  widow  of  Robert  Hallom.  The 
sd.  2,000  acs.  due  by  order  of  Ct.  1 
Dec.  1639,  and  also  due  in  right  of 
trans,  of  40  pers:  Morrice  Rose,  Tho- 
mas Person,  Symon  Morley,  a  Negro 
woman,  Ellis  Gargame,  Vallentine 
Fletcher,  Wm.  Rogers,  Tho.  Lowe,  John 
Marlin,  Daniell  Evans,  Ann  Burfoote, 
Richard  Hill,  Anth.  Wamblin,  (or 
Wanklin)  Erasmus  Harrison,  John 
Hearne,  Joane  Elye,  John  Andrewes, 
William  White,  John  Jones,  Humphry 
Burcher,  Henry  Pandle,  Thomas  Wil- 
liams, William  Harris,  Roger  Chapman, 
Nicholas  Oliver,  John  Cooke,  Thomas 
Parcroft,  Margarett  Powell,  Mary  Luffe, 
William  Hastings,  Isaac  Horton,  Georg 
Harrison,  John  Smith,  James  Tompson, 
John     Huett,     Robert     Cheyney,     John 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


121 


Shore,    Katherine    Shore,    Jonas    Shore, 
Richard   Cooke. 

CAPT.  NICHOLAS  MARTIAN,  (or 
Martiau)  1,300  acs.  Chas.  River  Co., 
March  14,  1639,  page  709.  To  be  aug- 
mented, etc.  S.  E.  towards  land  of  Sir 
John  Harvey,  N.  W.  upon  Capt.  Rich- 
ard Townsend.  600  acs.  due  for  the 
adv.  of  himself,  his  wife  &  10  pers. 
the  1st  yr.  to  Chiskiake,  &  700  acs.  due 
for  the  trans,  at  his  own  charges  of  14 
persons  into  this  Colony:  Capt.  Nicho- 
las Martian,  (or  Martiau)  Mrs.  Jane 
his  wife,  Nicholas  Martian  his  son, 
Eliz.  Martian  his  daughter,  Jane  Barke- 
ley  her  daughter,  Edward  Bowles,  Giles 
Tavernor,  Robert  Browne,  Georg  Brooke, 
Eliz.  Sharpies,  2  Negroes  (adv.  to 
Cheskiake)  Henry  Cunney,  Mark  Leech, 
John  Smith,  Allin  de  Cude,  John 
Galliott,  William  Turner,  Tho.  Cart- 
wright,  John  Cooper,  Henry  List,  John 
Brouch,  a  Negro  woman,  Robert  Ashly, 
John  Felton,  John  Vallett,  adv.  to  the 
Colony.  Note:  This  pattern  renewed 
without  alteration  in  the  name  of  sd. 
Capt.  Nicholas  Martian  (or  Martiau) 
10  June  1651. 

EDWARD  STEPHENSON  & 
HENRY  COOKNEY,  350  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  Mar.  16,  1639,  page  710.  To 
be  augmented,  etc.  On  S.  side  of  the 
maine  river  over  against  James  City 
called  the  Pyney  Point,  bounde  on  S.  E. 
by  land  lately  belonging  to  Capt.  Powell, 
N.  W.  upon  land  of  Thomas  Rolfe. 
Due   by   assignment   from   Henry   Hart. 

SAMUELL  ALMOND  (Allmond), 
600  acs.  Henrico  Co.,  16  Mar.  1639, 
p.  711.  200  acs.  beg.  at  the  cleare  feild 
upon  the  E.  side  of  the  river  over 
against  the  Lower  Island  about  2  mi. 
below  the  falls  &c,  running  downward 
towards  James  Place  his  devdt. ;  400 
acs.  Sly.  upon  said  land,  W.  upon  the 
river,  N.  towards  the  falls  &  E.  into 
the  woods.  200  acs.  graunted  to  him 
by  pattern  dated  21  Nov.  1637  &  due 
for  his  owne  per.  adv.  &  trans,  of  3 
pers.,  &  400  acs.  by  bargain  &  sale 
from  Thomas  Crosby,  26  Feb.  1638,  to 
whom  it  was  graunted  16  Jan.  1637  & 
due  for  trans,  of  8  pers.  The  follow- 
ing   names    appear:    Samuell    Almond, 


William  Wood,  Barnaby  Richeson, 
Miles  Cooke,  William  Rider,  Edward 
Evans,  William  Ridley,  John  Bennett, 
Richard  Childs,  William  Barker,  Robert 
Phelps,   Charles   White. 

THOMAS  CROSBY,  of  Curies 
Planter,  400  acs.  to  Samuell  Almond. 
Feb.  26,  1638,  page  712.  One  half  of 
patent  taken  up  by  sd.  Crosby  &  Arthur 
Bayly,  of  Curies,  Merchant,  in  Henrico 
Co.,  S.  upon  Allmond,  W.  upon  the 
river,  &  N.  towards  the  falls.  Wit- 
nesses: Richard  Cocke  &  Christopher 
Branch. 

WILLIAM  BURDETT,  1,050  acs. 
Accomack  Co.,  Mar.  18,  1639,  page  713. 
To  be  augmented,  etc.  E.  upon  the  Sea- 
board side,  N.  upon  Henry  Wilsonn,  S. 
upon  Edmond  Scarburgh  &  W.  upon 
land  lately  belonging  to  Roger  Sanders. 
Due  for  his  per.  adv.  &  trans,  of  20 
pers:  John  Stanley,  William  Annis, 
Clemt.  Donn,  Owen  Harris,  Daniell 
Stocke,  William  Johnson,  John  Dallion, 
Arthur  Raymond,  John  Johnson,  Tho- 
mas Pagett,  John  Coss,  Randall  Renall, 
Giles  Budd,  Thomas  Lancton,  Annis 
Sutton,  Thomas  Browne,  James  Head, 
John  Wallis,  William  Gelding,  William 
Caper. 

CAPT.  ROBERT  FELGATE,  400  acs. 
Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  Mar.  18,  1639,  p.  714. 
To  be  doubled,  etc.  Near  William  Bar- 
ber &  adj.  his  former  devident.  For 
trans.  8  pers:  of  himself,  Margarett 
Felgate,  his  wife,  Erasmus,  his  son, 
Judith  Felgate,  his  daughter,  Robert 
Siler,  James  Giles,  Richard  Davis,  John 
Jackgive. 

WILLIAM  DENHAM,  200  acs.  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  Mar.  18,  1639,  p.  714 
To  be  doubled,  etc.  E.  upon  Pagan 
Shoare  Baye  against  Butchers  Island  & 
Reed  Pt.,  adj.  William  Puttivatts,  Hugh 
Winn  &  W.  into  the  woods.  Due  for 
trans,  of  4  pers:  Elianor  Ellice,  John 
Midleton,  Edward  White,  John  Waters. 

RICHARD  NANCE,  300  acs.  Henri- 
co Co.,  18  Mar.  1639,  p.  715.  W.  upon 
land  of  William  Gates,  S.  upon  Appa- 
mattuck  Riv.  etc.  Due  for  trans,  of  6 
pers:    Alice     his     now     wife,      Robert 


122 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Perry,   Robert  Chappell,   Geo.   Prebedy, 
Edward  Rowlington,  Mary  Viccars. 

THOMAS  MARSH  alias  RIVERS, 
150  acs.  Up.  Co.  of  New  Norfolke, 
Mar.  21,  1639,  p.  716.  To  be  doubled, 
etc.  N.  upon  Eliz.  Riv.,  &  W.  upon 
Oystershell  Cr.  Due  by  assignment 
from  Peter  Mountegue  &  due  to  him 
for  trans,  of  3  pers:  William  Jones, 
Thomas  Kedbey,  Margarett  Starford. 

MR.  THOMAS  OLDIS,  50  acs.  at 
the  Strawberry  banckes  wherein  he  now 
liveth,  Eliz.  Cittie  Co.,  22  Mar.  1639, 
p.  716.  21  yr.  lease.  Paying  to  the 
Capt.  of  the  Fort  &  his  successors 
which  shall  bee  from  time  to  time  Cap- 
tains of  the  sd.  Fort  at  Point  Comfort 
in  Va.,  the  annuall  rent  of  2  bbls.  of 
Merchantable  Indian  Corne  upon  the 
feast  of  the  blessed  Apostle  St.  Thomas. 

JOHN  UTYE,  Gent.  &  Mary,  his 
wife,  of  the  one  part,  &  William  Tayloe, 
Gent.,  of  the  other  part,  witnesseth: 
For  divers  good  causes,  especially  for  a 
valuable  consideration  to  them  already 
paid  &c.  assign  all  their  right  &c.  of  2 
patents,  unto  Capt.  Capt.  John  Utye, 
father  of  sd.  John,  dated  15  Mar.  1630 
&  4  Mar.  1638;  all  howses,  edifices, 
buildings,  orchards,  gardens  &c.  8  Apr. 
1640,  p.  717.  Signed:  John  Utye  & 
Mary  Utye.  Witnesses:  Nicholas  (his 
marke)  Jarnew,  Jon.  White,  Abraham 
English,  Richard  Lee. 

CAPT.  JOHN  CHEESEMAN,  of  the 
New  Poquoson  in  Va.,  "doe  sell  unto 
my  brother  EDMOND  CHEESMAN" 
certain  land  upon  the  New  Poquoson, 
adj.  a  neck  of  land  cleared  by  John 
Cumber.  Adj.  the  broad  Necke.  Con- 
sideration: 200  acs.  of  land  by  inden- 
ture which  sd.  Cheesman  has  taken  up 
at  a  place  called  the  Runney  to  the 
New  Poquoson  in  Va.  Nov.  19,  1638. 
Witness:   Humphry  Hammer.  Page  718. 

JOHN  MATROM,  Gent,  of  Va.  to 
NICHOLAS  BROOKS,  the  younger, 
Merchant,  of  Va.  his  plantation  in  Chas. 
Riv.  Co.  in  Capt.  Wormeley's  Cr.,  pur- 
chased of  Mr.  Jarnew.  All  buildings, 
etc.  except  one  howse  &  10  ft.  of  ground 
lett  to  Mr.  Harris,  Master  of  the  Shipp 


Honour,  for  7  yrs.  to  haile  up  his  boate. 
Consideration:  6  servants  &  a  bever,  to 
bee  delivered  at  the  next  yeares  ship- 
ping &  4  servants  more  the  yeare  after 
at  the  said  time  of  shipping.  April  12, 
1640,  p.  719.  Witnesses:  Robert  Hors- 
ley  &  Tho.  Gate. 

WILLIAM  ALLEN,  of  London,  Mer- 
chant, 600  acs.  in  Chas.  River  Co.,  May 
25,  1640.  P.  719.  Being  a  long  sandy 
point  about  2  mi.  N.  of  Queens  Cr., 
S.  W.  towards  a  cr.  named  Croshawes 
Desire,  &  adj.  land  of  Thomas  Savin. 
Assigned  by  Joseph  Croshaw.  To  be 
doubled,   etc. 

THOMAS  ILES,  225  acs.  Chas.  Riv. 
Co.,  2  Oct.  1640,  p.  720.  N.  upon  the 
back  Cr.,  E.  upon  land  of  John  Clark- 
son,  running  to  br.  of  Cheesemans  Cr. 
&c.  Due,  vizt:  75  acs.  &  50  acs.  by  2 
former  patents,  which  were  surrendered, 
&  100  acs.  by  assignment  from  Richard 
Roades  of  his  right  in  the  trans,  of 
himself,  his  wife  &  1  servt:  Wm. 
Lasling. 

RANDALL  CREW,  450  acs.  Up.  Co. 
New  Norf.,  Nov.  13,  1640,  p.  721. 
Upon  a  cr.  issuing  from  the  Southern 
br.  of  Nansamund  Riv.,  opposite  to 
Georges  feild,  behind  land  of  Thomas 
Dew,  bounded  on  W.  by  the  maine 
Poquoson,  etc.  To  be  doubled,  etc.  Due 
for  trans,  of  9  pers:  Ann  Westlock, 
William  Taylor,  Thomas  Taylor,  John 
Cooper,  John  Jeffers,  Ellis  Rippon,  Ann 
Rippon,  William  Bancroft,  Thomas 
Garrett. 

THOMAS  CAUSEY,  300  acs.  May 
10,  1638,  p.  721.  In  Appamattuck  Riv., 
E.  upon  Thomas  Bagwell.  W.  upon  the 
falls  &  S.  upon  the  river.  Trans,  of  6 
pers:  John  Pren,  William  Lucas, 
Nicholas  Wattson,  John  Billins,  Robert 
Whitcroft,  Richard  Brignall.  (By  Sir 
John  Harvey). 

STEPHEN  GILL,  300  acs.  Chas.  Riv. 
Co.,  July  3,  1640,  p.  722.  S.  S.  W. 
upon  Queens  Cr.,  &  adj.  Richard  Maior 
E.  N.  E.  Part  of  patent  formerly 
granted  unto  John  Batts  &  John  Deines, 
for  750  acs.  dated  2  Apr.  1639,  which 
300  acs.  assigned  by  said  Batts  to  sd. 
Gill. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


123 


JOHN  DAVIS,  450  acs.  Chas.  River 
Co.,  June  18,  1640,  p.  722.  To  be 
doubled  &c.  N.  W.  upon  head  of 
Queens  Cr.,  adj.  Capt.  Richard  Popeles. 
Being  part  of  750  acs.  granted  sd.  Davis 
&  John  Batts,  as  above. 

THOMAS  HARVEY,  950  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  July  3,  1640,  p.  723.  To  be 
doubled  &c.  Called  Harveyes  Necke, 
W.  upon  land  of  Bridges  Freeman  & 
Mr.  Francis  Fowler,  N.  upon  Georg 
Grace  unto  a  path  leading  to  James 
Cittie  from  Chickahominy.  For  his  per. 
adv.  &  for  trans,  of  18  pers:  Mary,  his 
wife,  John  Harvey  his  son,  Jane  Little, 
William  Treble,  Sr.,  William  Treble, 
Jr.,  Robert  Phillipps,  Owin  Madrin, 
Hen.  Willett,  Tho.  Buck,  Robert  Brad- 
shaw,  John  Ireland,  Tho.  Cole,  Peter 
Mudd,  Barthol.  Pelcock,  Tho.  Causey, 
(this  name  may  be  Jo.  Causey)  Jane  his 
wife,  Elizabeth  Edwards,  Robert  Flake. 

MR.  JOHN  FELGATE,  1,200  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  July  3,  1640,  p.  724. 
To  be  doubled  &c.  On  E.  side  of 
Chichahominy  Riv.,  part  conteyning  2 
Necks:  Checroes  Neck  and  Piney  point 
Neck.  Adj.  his  own  &  land  of  Edward 
Sanderson.  Due  by  order  of  court  Sept. 
23,    1635,  also  for  trans,  of  24  pers.* 

WILLIAM  JONES,  100  acs.  Acco- 
macke  Co.,  20  Apr.  1640,  p.  725.  In 
Hungers  Cr.,  being  a  little  Neck  be- 
tween Capt.  Stone  &  Richard  Smith. 
Trans,  of  2  pers:  Elizabeth,  his  wife, 
&  Margarett  Collett. 

FRANCIS  MARTIN,  250  acs.  Acco- 
macke  Co.,  Oct.  24,  1639,  p.  725.  On 
Hungars  Cr.,  adj.  Edward  Stockdale. 
Trans,  of  5  pers:  Edward  Kinse,  Sr., 
Edward  Kinse,  Jr.,  Elianor  Kinse,  Abi- 
gail Kinse,  Eliza.  Kinse. 

JOHN  HOLLOWAY,  550  acs.  Acco- 
macke  Co.,  p.  726  (date  not  given). 
On  Southermost  side  of  the  maine  br. 
of  Hungars  Cr.  For  his  per.  adv.  & 
trans,  of  10  pers:  Wm.  Corke,  Gabriell 
Searle,  John  Tylley,  Jon.  Halsey,  Rich. 
Savage,  Rich.  Clement,  James  Barnaby, 
Sarah  Barnaby,  Henry  Pacye,  Jon.  Ward. 

ROBERT  HOLT,  merchant,  700  acs. 
James  Cittie  Co.,  23  July  1640,  p.  727. 


On  E.  side  of  Chichahominy  Riv.  at  the 
head  of  Checroes  Cr.  &c,  E.  from  the 
bounds  of  land  of  Mr.  John  Felgate, 
crossing  the  Nly.  br.  of  sd.  creek  &c, 
N.  upon  land  of  Edward  Sanderson  &c. 
500  acs.  by  pattern  graunted  to  sd.  Holt 
&  Richard  Bell,  2  Mar.  1638  which  said 
Bell  hath  since  assigned  his  share  unto 
sd.  Holt,  reserving  his  owne  per.  adv. 
&  trans,  of  1  servt.  200  acs.  for  trans, 
of  4  pers.  The  following  names  appear: 
Robert  Holt,  John  Newhowse,  William 
Allen,  Stephen  Beane,  Antho.  Luco, 
Samll.  Lucas,  Robert  Phillipson,  Tho. 
Keyes,  Tho.  Bradford,  Ralph  Blakin, 
Richard  Burgis,  James  Davis,  John 
Budge. 

GRESHAM  COFFEILD,  200  acs.  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  July  18,  1640,  p.  728. 
Adj.  Epaphroditus  Lawson.  N.  W.  up- 
on Nansamund  River,  etc.  Due  by  as- 
signment from  Arthur  Hallington  of 
patent  dated  23  Dec.  1636. 

JOHN  RADFORD,  200  acs.  Lower 
Norf.  Co.,  Aug.  11,  1640,  p.  728.  On 
Western  br.  of  Eliz.  River,  adj.  patent 
lands  assigned  to  him  by  John  Slaughter 
&  Thomas  Browne.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
Tho.  Tross,  John  Gale,  John  William- 
son, Oliver  Gibbins.  Note:  Renewed  in 
the  name  of  Richard  Starnell,  24  Mar. 
1647  and  150  acs.  added. 

CAPT.  WILLIAM  PEIRCE  of  Mul- 
berry Island,  Va.  to  ROBERT  LAW- 
THEAT  of  Lawnes  Cr.,  Va.,  planter,  a 
neck  of  land  conteyning  50  acs.  in 
Lawnes  Cr.  towards  Hogg  Is.  Cr.,  adj. 
land  of  William  Spencer.  Mar.  1,  1635, 
p.  729.  Witnesses:  Georg  Lobb  & 
John  Hassord. 

GEORG  MINIFIE,  Esqr.,  80  poles  in 
James  Cittie,  Aug.  3,  1640,  p.  730.  "It 
was  enacted  at  a  grand  Assembly  holden 
the  20th  Feb.  1636,  that  all  undertakers 
to  build  upon  James  Island  should  be 
encouraged  by  a  graunt  of  a  convenient 
proportion  of  ground  for  howsing  &  a 
garden  plott,"  etc.  Between  land  of  Sir 
Francis  Wyatt  &  Capt.  Francis  Pott. 
Fee  Rent:  1  Capon  on  the  Feast  of  St. 
Thomas  the  Apostle  yearely.  "Provided 
that  if  the  sd.  Minifie  his  heirs  or  as- 
signs shall  not  build  upon  the  said  par- 


124 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


eel  of  land  within  the  time  or  terme  of 
6  months  after  the  date  of  these  presents 
that  then  it  shall  be  lawfull  for  any 
other  to  make  choice  of  the  same  land 
and  build  upon  the  same." 

JOHN  CORKER,  18  po.,  James  Is- 
land, Aug.  3,  1640,  p.  730.  Same  as 
above. 

PETER  RIGBYE,  (Rigby),  100  acs. 
Chas.  River  Co.,  Dec.  14,  1639,  p.  731. 
In  the  parish  of  New  Poquoson,  near 
Arthur  Seawell  &  Arthur  Meckworth, 
adj.  John  Jackson.  By  certificate  from  a 
court  held  at  Chas.  River.  Aug.  14, 
1638  it  appears  this  land  is  due  for 
trans,  of  Dorothy,  his  wife,  &  Richard 
Washington;  sd.  Washington  be- 
queathed the  right  of  his  per.  adv.  to 
John  Jackson,  who  gave  same  to  Rigbye. 

HENRY  PORTER  &  RAPHAELL 
JOYNER,  350  acs.  James  Citty  Co.,  10 
Aug.  1640,  p.  732.  In  Chichahominy 
Riv.  about  1^4  mi.  within  the  mouth 
of  Warricke  Cr.,  adj.  land  of  William 
Wigg  &  S.  upon  land  of  Edward  Travis. 
300  acs.  graunted  unto  sd.  Joyner  & 
Samuell  Triggs  17  Apr.  1639,  which  sd. 
Triggs  wholly  assigned  unto  said 
Joyner;  50  acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of 
said  Joyner.  The  following  names  ap- 
pear: Henry  Porter,  Samll.  Triggs, 
Elianor  his  wife,  William  Triggs, 
Raphaell  Joyner,  Dorothy  Rule,  Joane 
Graunt. 

STEPHEN  WEBB,  500  acs.  James 
Cittie  Co.,  6  Dec.  1639,  p.  733.  At  a 
place  called  the  Lower  Chippokes  neare 
the  head  of  the  run  of  the  sunken 
marsh,  E.  upon  land  of  William  New- 
son  &  Sly.  towards  land  of  William 
Carter.  150  acs.  by  pattern  dated  18 
Sept.  1636  &  250  acs.  by  pattern  dated 
2  Mar.  1638  &  100  acs.  for  trans,  of 
2  pers:  (The  following  names  appear 
under  this  record:)  Richard  Tarling, 
Georg  Toulson,  Walter  Rest,  Stephen 
Webb,  Clare  Webb,  Robert  Webb, 
William  Briggs,  Eliz.  Norris,  William 
Drummond,  Edward  Hutchinson.  Note: 
This  pattent  renewed. 

MR.  BRIDGES  FREEMAN,  100  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  Aug.  5,   1640,  p.  734. 


Lying  in  the  Woodyard,  adj.  S.  400 
acs.  in  possession  of  sd.  Freeman  & 
Francis  Fowler,  N.  upon  his  100  acs. 
in  the  Woodyard,  E.  upon  land  of  Mr. 
Georg  Grace,  W.  upon  Chichahominy 
Riv.  with  marsh  &  swamp.  Trans,  of 
2  servts:  Robert  Mosely  &  Richard 
Brewer. 

WILLIAM  CRANAGE,  700  acs.  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  Aug.  8,  1640,  p.  735. 
About  Pagan  Creek,  ad.  Joseph  Cobb 
&  his  own  iand.  300  acs.  part  of  former 
patent  dated  1  Oct.  1639  &  400  acs. 
for  his  per.  adv.  &  trans,  of  7  pers: 
Edmund  Sadler,  Sr.,  Eliz.  Sadler,  Sr., 
Edmund  Sadler,  Jr.,  Eliz.  Sadler,  Jr., 
Margt.  Sadler,  Mary  Sadler,  Peter 
Allerentia,  Richard  Garnum,  Annis 
Page,  David  Powell,  William  Godfrey, 
William  Atkins,  Robert  Parkin. 

ROBERT  BRASSEUR,  100  acs.  Co. 
of  Up.  Norfolk,  Oct.  6,  1640,  p.  736. 
Upon  Western  br.  of  Nansamund  Riv. 
opposite  400  acs.  of  Mr.  Lawrence 
Peters.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Peeter  Be- 
sairdier  &  Reene  Besairdier. 

EDWARD  GOLDBOURNE  & 
MARY,  his  wife,  to  ROBERT  MILES, 
100  acs.  of  land  with  all  the  howses, 
etc.  thereon,  lying  &  being  at  Archers 
Hope.  Oct.  9,  1640,  p.  736.  Witnesses: 
Hen.  Fenton  &  Tho.  Cooke. 

WILLIAM  ARMESTEAD,  of  Eliz. 
City  Co.  to  JOHN  BOWLES,  20  acs.  of 
land  in  sd.  county,  running  along  N. 
side  of  Bowles'  50  acs.  by  deed  of  guift 
from  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Southwell,  &  16 
acs.  more  lying  Southerly  upon  William 
Morgan. 

Consideration:  patent  of  100  acs. 
granted  unto  Thomas  Keeling,  Nov.  18, 
1635,  accrewing  due  unto  Thomas  Cas- 
son  in  right  of  his  wife  Elizabeth, 
formerly  wife  and  now  relict  of  William 
Laighton,  &  since  assigned  by  Casson 
unto  sd.  Bowles.  Also  certificate  of  40 
acs.  to  be  delivered  by  sd.  Bowles. 
June  11,  1641,  p.  737.  Witnesses: 
Samll.  Abbott  &  John  Mead. 

WILLIAM  LAIGHTON  &  HENRY 
SOUTHELL,  of  the  back  river,  to 
JOHN  BOWLES,  of  the  back  river,  all 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


125 


that  plantation  whereon  sd.  Laighton 
now  dwelleth,  containing  50  acs.,  E.  up- 
on the  river,  S.  upon  William  Morgan 
&  N.  upon  Henry  Southell.  Oct.  14, 
1636.  Page  738.  Witnesses:  Geo.  Ward, 
Isaac  Wongan,  Tho.  Heath  &  Tho. 
Milton. 

MICHAELL  WILCOX,  Planter,  of 
Up.  Norfolk,  to  GEORG  WHITE, 
Minister,  142  acs.  adj.  land  whereon  sd. 
Michael  liveth  and  land  of  John  Wil- 
liams; dated  Oct.  21,  1639.  By  order 
of  court  dated  Oct.  3,  1638,  some  dif- 
ference haveing  arisen  between  these 
parties,  the  land  was  equally  divided. 
(Note:  The  name  of  said  White  is 
also  written  Jon.) 

By  this  instrument  Wilcox  conveys 
all  his  interest,  except  a  tract  of  18  h. 
by  35  ft.  Witness:  Tho.  Sparrow  & 
Lawr.  Phillipps.    Page  739. 

GEORG  WHITE  to  JOHN  ASH- 
COMB,  of  the  county  within  mentioned, 
assignment  of  his  interest  in  the  above. 
Feb.  25,  1639.  Page  740.  Witnesses: 
William  Read  &  Jane  Perkins. 

WILLIAM  TAYLOR,  Gent,  of  Chi- 
kiake,  &  Elizabeth,  now  his  wife,  of  the 
one  part,  &  JOHN  JACKSON,  Gent, 
of  the  other  part.  Whereas  by  patent 
dated  Sept.  26,  1638  unto  sd.  Jackson 
&  sd.  Elizabeth  by  the  name  of  Kings- 
mill  then,  now  wife  of  sd.  Taylor,  600 
acs.  in  James  City  Co.,  being  a  parcel 
of  small  islands  lying  up  Chichahominy 
River  adj.  Bridges  Freeman,  John  Dansy 
&  John  Felgate.  For  divers  causes  & 
considerations  the  sd.  Taylor  &  Eliza- 
beth, his  wife,  grant  sd.  land  unto  sd. 
Jackson.  Apr.  4,  1642.  Witnesses: 
John  Clarke  &  William  Baulk,  Not. 
Public.    Page  740. 

WILLIAM      TAYLOR,      Gent,      of 

Chiskiake,  in  Va.,  to  AMBROSE  HAR- 
MOR  of  Va.,  Esqr.  &  Jane,  his  wife. 
Conveys  his  patent  of  1,200  acs.  in 
Chichahominy  Riv.,  James  Citty  Co., 
above  Warrany  Landing  Place.  Which 
land  was  due  said  Taylor  for  trans,  of 
20  pers.  Nov.  9,  1638.  Apr.  4,  1642, 
Page  742.  Witnesses:  Same  as  above. 
ROBERT  BEW,  150  acs.  granted  in 
1639.    P.  744.    (Record  incomplete.) 


JOHN  ROE,  150  acs.  Isle  of  Wight 
Co.  This  patent  purchased  by  Mr.  Ar- 
thur Smith  &  renewed  in  his  name  Mar. 
2,   1643.    (Incomplete).    P.  745. 

THOMAS  CAUSEY,  300  acs.  in 
Appamattuck  River,  Apr.  10th.  "All 
the  rest  lost."    P.  745. 

AMBROSE  BENNETT,  1,150  acs. 
Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  June  23,  1641,  P. 
746.  Upon  the  maine  head  of  the 
Lower  baye  Cr.  called  Cypress  Swamp. 
Trans,  of  23  servants:  Richard  Wil- 
liamson, Peter  Harwood,  Alice  New- 
man, Richard  Morrice,  Rich.  Death, 
Susan  Death,  Eliz.  Death,  Joane  Hodges, 
Nath.  White,  Henry  Nelsonn,  Fr. 
Nichols,  Wm.  Junior,  Peter  Watter, 
Willi.  Ellis,  Meredith  Morgan,  Watkin 
Howell,  Evan  David,  Antho.  Cole,  Wm. 
Wood,  Georg  Ashall,  Hester  Carter, 
David  Cone,  Eliz.  Avery,  Robert  Medley. 

THOMAS  MORREY,  300  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  Apr.  7,  1641,  p.  747.  Up- 
on a  br.  of  Seawards  Cr.,  sd.  br.  com- 
monly known  by  the  name  of  Ashen 
Swamp;  adj.  Richard  Jackson,  etc.  Due 
for  his  per.  adv.  &  the  first  and  second 
trans,  of  Elizabeth,  his  wite,  &  trans, 
of  3  pers:  Ann  Hale,  Willi.  Turbuck 
&  Ralph  Griffith. 

SAME.  300  acs.  Isle  of  Wight  Co., 
Apr.  20,  1641,  p.  747.  Beg.  nigh  per- 
simmond  swamp,  the  head  of  a  branch 
of  Seawards  Cr.  etc.  Adj.  Capt. 
Nathaniell  Bass,  Mr.  John  Newland, 
Samuel  Jackson,  Hugh  Winn  &  John 
Seaward  crossing  branches  of  Goose  Hill 
Cr.,  etc.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Henry 
Stratton,  Clemt.  Bade,  Rich.  Rutland, 
William  Bishopp,  Patrick  Bohonett, 
Daniell  Washborne. 

JAMES  HAWLEY,  300  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  Apr.  22,  1641,  p.  748.  Up- 
on the  head  of  the  Lower  Baye  Cr.,  adj. 
John  Rowe.  Due  for  the  per.  adv.  of 
himself,  Ann,  his  wife,  &  trans,  of  4 
pers:  Francis  Ann  &  Alice,  his  chil- 
dren, John  Foster  &  Richard  Darling. 
Patent  renewed  Sept.  27,  1643. 

TOBY  SMITH,  650  acs.  Warwick 
River  Co.,  Feb.  15,  1640,  p.  749.  Place 
called   Humberstone,   upon  head  of  the 


126 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


back  river  called  Smiths  ford,  adj.  Tho- 
mas Faulconer  &  Thomas  Boulding. 
For  his  per.  adv.  &  trans,  of  12  pers: 
Thomas  Best,  Mary  his  wife,  Thomas 
Best,  &  John  Best,  2  children;  William 
Cade,  Henry  Harvey,  Eliz.  Fisher,  Joyce 
Arnold,  Daniell  Hart,  Alice  King,  Jere- 
miah Run  &  Margery  Ceely.  Renewed 
Sept.  16,  1644. 

THOMAS  GRINWOOD,  150  acs. 
Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  July  28,  1641,  p. 
750.  Upon  a  br.  of  Seawards  Cr.,  adj. 
John  Seaward  &  Capt.  John  Upton.  Due 
for  his  per.  adv.  &  trans,  of  2  pers: 
Mary,  his  wife,  &  Dorothy  Grinwood. 

ROBERT  BURNETT,  200  acs.  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  Apr.  3,  1641,  p.  751. 
Upon  a  br.  of  Seawards  Cr.,  adj.  Nicho- 
las Smith.  For  his  per.  adv.  &  trans,  of 
3  pers:  Margarett  Arnold,  Alice  John- 
son &  Richard  Cooper.  Renewed  Sept. 
29,   1643. 

WILLIAM  HAMPTON,  550  acs. 
Eliz.  City  Co.,  11  Dec.  1640,  p.  752. 
Per  Adv.  of  himself  &  Joane,  his  wife, 
&  trans,  of  9  pers:  Willi.  Hampton, 
Grace  Hampton,  Eliza.  Hampton,  Alice 
Curtice,  Children,  Georg  Hankin,  Oliver 
Clifford,  Mandelin  Wosencroft,  James 
Francis,  Thomas  Smith,  Richard  Cary, 
Hugh  Bramley. 

WILLIAM  WIGG,  250  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  Nov.  26,  1640,  p.  753.  Upon 
S.  side  of  Tanckes  Pasbyhaies  Cr.,  op- 
posite William  Frye  &  John  Dancey, 
called  Claybancke.  Lying  between  land 
of  Bridges  Freeman,  gent.,  &  Thomas 
Rolfe.  Adjoining  to  the  high  land  upon 
Tanckes  Pasbyhaies  Cr.  Trans,  of  5 
pers:  James  Barnes,  Henry  Crawes, 
Roger  Anderson,  Anthony  Dickinson, 
Edward   Watts. 

SAME.  650  acs.  James  City  Co., 
Apr.  25,  1641.  P.  754.  In  Chicka- 
hominy  Riv.,  over  against  Pease  Hill. 
Adj.  John  Robins,  Bennett  Freeman, 
Henry  Porter  &  Raphaell  Joyner,  and 
upon  Warwick  Riv.  creek.  Confirmation 
of  2  former  patents. 

JOHN  SEAWARD,  1,300  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  Apr.  1,  1641,  p.  755.  Upon 
a  branch  of  the  lower  bay  called  Sea- 


wards Cr.,  adj.  William  Yarrat  &  upon 
Goose  Hill  Cr.,  etc.  Confirmation  of 
2  former  patents  for  trans,  of  12  pers. 
&  300  for  trans,  of  6  pers.  Memo,  at 
end  of  this  record:  "This  by  Assign- 
ment. Nicholas  Morrice,  his  wife  & 
one  child.  Peter  Eaton,  2  servants. 
This  order  at  James  Citty  Dec.  15th, 
1635." 

RICHARD  COLLINS,  150  acs.  in 
Pasbyehaies,  Dec.  3,  1641,  p.  756.  21 
yr.  lease  to  begin  at  the  Nativity  of  our 
Lord  1642.  Near  land  of  Edward 
Oliver.  Annuall  Rent:  6  Bbls.  of  Mer- 
chantable Indian  Corne  sheld  at  the 
State  Howse  in  James  Citty. 

HENRY  WYATT,  Esqr.,  eldest  son 
of  Sir  Francis  Wyatt,  50  acs.,  in  Pas- 
byehaies, James  City  Co.,  Dec.  16, 
1641,  p.  757.  21  yr.  lease.  Beg.  upon 
a  high  bancke  in  an  old  feild,  etc.,  adj. 
land  of  Capt.  Robert  Hutchinson,  etc., 
neare  howse  of  Mr.  John  White,  etc., 
to  the  mouth  of  the  Swampe,  etc.  But 
the  3  acs.  for  the  two  pathes,  one  lead- 
ing to  Powhetan  bridge  and  the  other 
to  Chickahominy  not  respecting  the 
variation.  Annuall  Rent  2  Bbls.  of 
Merchantable  Corne,  for  every  50  acs., 
etc. 

HATTILL  POTT,  700  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  Dec.  4,  1641,  p.  758.  In 
Chickahominy  Riv.,  adj.  Robert  Free- 
man. Due  by  virtue  of  patent  assigned 
to  him  by  Richard  Wilcox,  dated  Sept. 
11,  1638  &  confirmed  by  order  of  court 
June  9,  1641. 

RICHARD  WILCOX  assignment  to 
Hattill  Pott.  Witnesses:  Georg  Read 
&  Richard  Lee.  P.  759.  Record  incom- 
plete. 

ARGOLL  YEARDLEY,  Esqr.,  4000 
acs.  on  N.  side  of  Charles  Riv.,  called 
Tindalls  necke,  beg.  at  Tindalls  Cr., 
butting  upon  the  most  Wly.  br.  of 
same  &c.  &  Nly.  towards  certaine 
branches  of  Mockjack  bay.  12  Oct. 
1640,  p.  759.  Due  by  order  of  Court, 
12  Oct.  1640,  in  right  of  his  father  Sir 
Georg  Yeardley,  Kt.,  as  parte  of  his 
devident  in  right  of  his  adv.  with  the 
South  Hampton  hundred  Company. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


127 


THOMAS  OLDIS,  50  acs.  at  the 
Strawberry  banckes  whereon  he  now 
liveth,  for  the  terme  of  70  yrs.  with 
reservation  of  100  lbs.  of  Tobacco  for  a 
fine  &  annuall  rent  of  20  lbs.  of  tobacco 
to  bee  paid  the  next  Treasurer  &  his 
successors  &c.  27  Jan.  1641,  p.  760. 
Lease  in  Eliz.  Cittie  Co. 

THOMAS  BERNARD,  Gent.,  1,050 
acs.  Warwicke  River  Co.,  Dec.  16,  1641, 
p.  761.  At  the  mouth  of  the  back  creek, 
adj.  Capt.  Thomas  Flint  whereon  stands 
dwelling  howse  of  said  Bernard.  (Note: 
Record  incomplete.  Mention  is  made  of 
Zachariah  Cripp;  the  back  creek  devid- 
ing  the  land  of  Burdropp,  formerly 
called  Claybornes  Neck,  from  land  of 
said  Bernard.  Confirmation  of  former 
patent  for  500  acs.,  &  order  of  court 
for  200  acs.  Feb.  24,  1631.  350  acs. 
for  trans,  of  7  pers:  Patrick  Closse, 
William  Ware,  William  Hopkin,  John 
Gerrish,  Robert  Frere,  Alice  Havord, 
Tho.  Howgate. 

RICHARD  BROOKES,  189  acs.  in 
Pasbyhaies,  James  City  Co.,  Jan.  22, 
1641,  Page  762.  From  the  mouth  of  a 
little  swamp,  near  Mr.  Batt's  howse, 
running  along  Mr.  White's  land.  21 
yr.  lease.  Annual  rent:  lY\  bbls.  Mer. 
Indian  corn,  sheld  at  the  State  Howse, 
payment  to  begin  at  the  Nativity  of  our 
Lord  next  ensuing  the  date  hereof. 

JOHN  GEORGE,  1,200  acs.  Charles 
City  Co.,  Oct.  11,  1640,  Page  763.  Adj. 
Thomas  Bayley.  900  acs.  by  former 
patent  &  300  acs.  for  trans,  of  6  pers.: 
John  George,  John  Geabe,  Richard 
Searle,  William  Trueman,  Isaac  Ellis, 
Mercy  Lunmore. 

GARRETT  STEPHENS,  400  War- 
wick River  Co.,  Oct.  9,  1641,  Page  764. 
Beg.  at  the  path  leading  from  the  New 
Poquoson  to  Nutmeg  quarter.  200  acs. 
by  assignment  of  patent  from  John — 
(blank)  dated  5  May  1636  &  the  resi- 
due 200  acs.  for  trans,  of  4  servts: 
William  Chigain,  Thomas  Roberts, 
William  Sharpe,  Patience  Martyn. 

SAMUEL  FIRMENT,  500  acs.  Up. 
Norf.  Co.,  Jan.  8,  1640,  Page  765.  At 
the  head  of  Indian  Cr.  from  the  W.  br. 


of  Nansamund  Riv.  &  adj.  John  Layden. 
300  acs.  by  assignment  from  John  Gar- 
rett of  his  right  for  trans,  of  6  pers., 
&  200  acs.  by  assignment  from  Marke 
Gilla,  who  was  assignee  of  Christopher 
Biffeild  (or  Bisfeild)  for  his  right  for 
trans,  of  4  pers.  (The  following  names 
appear  under  this  patent):  Henry 
Powell,  Edward  Roberts,  Phillip  Jones, 
Thomas  Seymor,  Humphry  Cadwalla- 
der,  Nicholas  Barker,  Sarah  Biffeild, 
Ellen  Garner.  ("There  are  two  of  these 
names  for  which  noe  Land  taken  upp." 
George  Read.) 

JOHN  FLOYNE,  50  acs.  Charles 
River  Co.,  November  10,  1640.  Page 
766.  Upon  Cheesemans  Cr.  beg.  at  the 
fishing  pointe,  etc.  Due  for  the  per. 
adv.  of  his  wife  Joane  Floyne. 

THOMAS  PITT,  872^  acs.  Charles 
City  Co.,  Dec.  7,  1641,  Page  767.  At 
Appamattocks  River,  near  land  of  Ed- 
ward Skyrnes  (or  Kyrnes).  500  acs. 
by  assignment  from  Edward  Prince  at 
a  Court  held  for  Henrico  Co.,  1  Dec. 
1641,  &  372^  for  trans,  of  8  pers.: 
Thomas  Pitt,  Walter  Johnson,  Edwin 
Young,  Thomas  Browne,  Samuell  But- 
ler, William  Price,  William  Strange, 
Penelope  Laurell   (or  Lanvell). 

RICHARD  PRESTON,  500  acs.  Up. 
Norf.  Co.,  1641,  Page  767.  At  the 
miles  end  of  lands  of  Thomas  Jorden 
&  Richard  Young  on  New  Towne  haven 
River.  250  acs.  by  two  former  patents 
in  his  name,  &  250  for  trans,  of  5 
servts:  William  Becham,  Richard  Petti- 
bone,  Joane  Carraway,  Michaell  Mor- 
phew,  Edward  Ratcliffe. 

THOMAS  BABB,  100  acs.  Up.  Norf. 
Co.,  Oct.  12,  1641,  Page  769.  Upon 
W.  branch  of  Nansamund  River,  on  the 
S.  side,  about  2^4  mi.  up  the  br.  adj. 
Georg  Ludlow.  Due  for  his  per.  adv.  & 
trans,  of  1  servant:  Eliza.  Jones. 

CAPT.  JOHN  CHEESMAN,  300  acs. 
Charles  Riv.  Co.,  Dec.  4,  1641,  Page 
770.  Upon  Cheesman's  Cr.,  Wly.,  etc., 
until  it  meets  with  a  creek  of  Cheeso- 
pean  bay,  Sly.,  running  parallel  to  the 
mouth  of  the  New  Poquoson  Riv.  200 
acs.  by  assignment  from  John  Hollis  & 


128 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Richard  Bennett,  to  whom  it  had  been 
assigned  by  sd.  Cheesman,  &  100  for 
trans,  of  2  servts:  Judeth  Williams  (& 
1  per.  unnamed.) 


By  Sir  William  Berkeley,  Knight, 
Govr.  etc. 

HENRY  PERRY,  Gent.,  son  &  heire 
of  Capt.  William  Perry,  Esqr.,  late  of 
Va.,  deceased,  3,500  acs.  Charles  Citty 
Co.,  known  by  the  name  of  Buckland, 
May  10,  1642,  Page  771.  Being  a  neck 
of  land  bet.  the  old  mans  Cr.  &  Herring 
Cr.  rising  into  the  woods  as  farr  as 
said  Creeks  ebb  and  flowe,  as  alsoe  227 
acs.  of  Sunken  Marsh  and  Swampe. 
2,000  acs.  thereof  bequeathed  to  him 
by  his  father,  Aug.  5,  1637.  1,500  acs. 
by  assignment  from  Georg  Minifie  Esqr., 
of  his  right  for  trans,  of  30  pers:  Hugh 
Forshew,  John  Thomas,  Hugh  Seaver, 
John  Weaver,  Richard  Newman,  Tho. 
Lisle,  James  Smith,  Geo.  Abraham, 
Robert  Barwood,  Wm.  Cooke,  Patrick 
Cane  (or  Cave)  John  Garrett,  Richard 
Flood,  Ralph  Harrington,  William 
Hance,  John  Saltrea,  Richard  Williams, 
Richard  Owen.  12  Negroes  bought  of 
Sr.  John  Harvey,  Knt.,  Anno  1639- 
(Marginal  note:  These  in  the  Shipp 
Dove  of  London  Capt.  Bicking  Mr. 
(Master)   1638. 

CAPT.     ROBERT     HUTCHINSON, 

100  acs.  James  Cittie  Co.,  Sly.  upon  Sir 
Francis  Wyatts  lease,  W.  upon  a  swamp 
parting  the  upper  cleare  grounds  of 
Pasbyhaies,  Ely.  upon  Christian  Wil- 
liams and  John  Edwards  their  lease. 
May  20,  1642,  Page  772.  Lease.  An- 
nual Rent:   4  bbls.  Mer.  Indian  corn,  etc. 

RICHARD  JACKSON,  450  acs.  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  Mar.  13,  1641,  Page  772. 
Upon  Seawards  Cr.,  adj.  Thomas  Marcy, 
Pharoe  Flinton  &  Justinian  Cooper.  350 
acs.  by  assignment  from  Thomas  Stamp 
&  John  Sweete,  of  their  right  for  trans, 
of  7  pers.,  &  100  acs.  for  trans,  at  his 
own  costs  of  2  pers.  The  following 
names  apear — record  incomplete:  Rich- 
ard Jackson,  Nicholas  Kinford  (or  Kin- 
seed),  Roote,  Sweete,  

Ray,  Edmund  Prynn,  Mathew  Bletstowe, 
Thomas  Spaine,  Georg  Cockcroft. 


NATH.  TATUM,  500  acs.  Chas. 
Citty  Co.,  Dec.  4,  1641,  Page  773.  N. 
upon  Appamattock  River,  etc.,  Ely.  up- 
on a  creek  parting  his  from  land  of 
John  Baker.  Due  by  his  former  patent 
&  assignment  from  Thomas  Causey. 

JOHN  GARRETT,  400  acs.  Up. 
Norf.  Co.,  May  22,  1642,  Page  774. 
Upon  Indian  Cr.  issuing  from  the  W. 
br.  of  Nansamund  River,  below  land  of 
William    Hatfeild.    Due    for    trans,    of 

8   Pers.:    Mr.  John  Roger,   Tho.  , 

John ,  Richard ,  Allen  Hayhes, 

Richard  Eastwood,  Susan  Bird. 

FRANCES  MAULDIN,  100  acs.  Up. 
Norf.  Co.,  May  22,  1642,  Page  774. 
Upon  W.  br.  of  Nansamund  Riv.,  adj. 
Thomas  Emerson.  Trans,  of  2  servts: 
Thomas  Serridon  &  John  Carre. 

JEREMIAH  GREY,  150  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  May  22,  1642,  Page  775.  On 
the  S.  side  of  James  Riv.,  upon  the  head 
of  land  of  Mr.  Grindall  called  the  old 
forte  &  Grindalls  Hill,  &  lying  bet.  land 
of  John  Bishopp  &  Mr.  Ewin  called  the 
Colledge  land.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Rich- 
ard Harris,  Luke  Goodnought,  Joane 
Harding. 

PETER  JOHNSON,  200  acs.  New 
Norf.  Co.,  May  23,  1642,  Page  775. 
Upon  the  head  of  New  Towne  haven 
river.  Due  by  assignment  from  Peter 
Wrye  of  his  right  for  trans,  of  4  pers.: 
Susan  Chandler,  James  Edwin,  Thomas 
Edwin,  Jaques  Masgarke. 

RICHARD  GREGSON,  400  acs.  Eliz. 
Cittie  Co.,  Dec.  8,  1642,  Page  776. 
Beg.  at  the  path  leading  from  Nutmeg 
Quarter  unto  the  Poquoson,  adj.  lands 
of  Tobye  Smith  &  William  Hampton. 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  John  White,  Richard 
Long,  John  Rawlings,  Michaell  Clarke, 
Robert  Powell,  Edward  Cole,  Edward 
Williams. 

THOMAS  MATHEWS,  (Mathewes), 
470J/2  acs.  (county  not  given)  Oct.  10, 
1641,  Page  777.  Adj.  John  Chaplin. 
Trans,  of  10  pers.:  John  Harrison, 
Richard  Canny,  Alice  Assine  (or 
Assnie),  Anne  Wakeland,  William 
Chandler,  Rice  Harvy,   (?)   came  in  the 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


129 


Wm.  1638,  John  Jasper,  came  in  Mary 
of  Bristol  1634,  William  Garner,  came 
in  the  David  of  Bristol  1635.  Georg 
Lawrance,  came  in  the  Jonas,  Tho.  Tay- 
lor Mr.  (Master)   1637. 

WILLIAM  EYRES,  750  acs.  Up. 
Norf.  Co.,  May  23,  1642,  Page  777. 
Upon  an  arm  of  the  W.  br.  of  Nansa- 
mund  River.,  adj.  John  Garrett.  Trans, 
of  15  pers.:  Francis  Speight,  Thomas 
Bridwell,  Robert  Stany  Sarah  Sanner, 
(?)  John  Mondy,  Walter  Besley,  John 
Blackburne,  John  Bay,  William  Nichols, 
William  Fenn,  Jeremiah  Velayne,  Ed- 
ward Thownsend,  John  Ray,  Hugh  Rout, 
Hugh  Smithwicke. 

WILLIAM  EYRES,  100  acs.  Up. 
Norf.  Co.,  May  22,  1642,  Page  778. 
Upon  N.  side  of  the  W.  br.  of  Nansa- 
mund  Riv.,  adj.  John  Sculler.  Trans,  of 
2  pers.:  Gilbert  Brooke.  (1  name  miss- 
ing.)   Record  incomplete. 

PHILLIPP  CLARKE,  300  acs.  James 
Cittie,  upon  S.  side  of  James  River,  2 
miles  from  the  river  side,  Mar.  1,  1640, 
Page  779.  S.  upon  the  Colledge  land, 
W.  by  N.  from  same,  etc.,  N.  W.  up 
the  reedy  swamp  and  near  land  of  John 
Bishopp.  200  acs.  by  patent  10  Nov. 
1638  &  100  for  trans,  of  2  servts: 
Katherine  White  &  Anthony  Harris. 

ROBERT  EYRES,  200  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  May  22,  1642,  Page  780. 
About  8  mi.  up  a  Southern  br.  of  Eliza. 
River.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Robert  Eyres, 
Francis  Poythres,  William  Brown,  John 
Herring. 

THOMAS  TODD,  50  acs.  Low.  Norf. 
Co.,  Oct.  2,  1640,  Page  780.  Upon  S. 
side  of  the  Eastern  br.  of  Eliz.  River. 
Trans,  of:    Edward  Stone. 

RICHARD  WILLIAMS,  250  acs. 
Charles  Cittie  Co.,  Mar.  10,  1640, 
Page  781.  At  a  place  called  Chaplins 
land.  Trans.  5  pers:  John  Brooke, 
William  Bell,  Patrick  Jackson,  David 
Pullock,  David  Deweex  (?). 


Duewood,  along  the  broad  cr.  towards 
land  of  Garrett  Andrews.  Due  for  trans. 

of  himself,  wife &  2  pers:    Robert 

Salsbury  &  Symon  Smith. 

WILLIAM  STOREY,  600  acs.  Up. 
Norf.  Co.,  Nov.  17,  1641,  Page  782. 
Upon  an  arm  of  the  W.  br.  of  Nansa- 
mund  Riv.,  called  Indian  Cr.,  adj.  land 
of  John  Garrett.  Due  for  trans,  of  12 
servts:  Nich.  May,  Ann  Weslike,  Tho- 
mas Bagly,  Richard  Stinett  (or  Shuett), 
Sanders  Smith,  Ellis  Smith,  John  Griffin, 
Thomas  Bagly,  Richard  Momford,  Wil- 
liam Howard. 

STEPHEN  CHARLETON,  500  acs. 
Accomacke  Co.,  May  19,  1641,  Page 
783.  In  Nuswattocke  Cr.  Trans,  of  10 
pers.:  Robert  Berry,  John  Tixton,  Alice 
Delvis,  Elady  Lanstones,  Giles  Browne, 
James  Jones,  Michaell  Crawly,  Leonard 
Petick,  Eliza.  Petick,  Ralph  Stowell. 

BRYANT  SMITH,  100  acs.  Henrico 
Co.,  Oct.  10,  1641,  Page  783.  Bounded 
W.  upon  the  river,  E.  into  the  woods, 
S.  on  Capt.  Harris'  land  &  N.  on  An- 
thony Bodyes  land.  Trans,  of  2  pers: 
Nicholas    Perkins,    Gringall    Delayhaye. 

WILLIAM  STOREY,  250  acs.  Up. 
Norf.  Co.,  May  22*,  1643,  Page  784. 
Upon  W.  br.  of  Nansamund  Riv.  Trans, 
of  5  pers:  Oliver  White,  John  Skull, 
Karbery  Kigan,  Anthony  Fletcher,  Rich- 
ard Marbery. 

JOHN  GOOKIN,  Gent.,  640  acs., 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  Oct.  12,  1641,  Page 
785.  Adj.  Capt.  Thorogood's  land. 
Trans,  of  13  pers.:  John  Mason,  Rich- 
ard Bullock,  John  Covell,  William 
Granger,  Ann  Wrench  &  7  Negroes. 

GEORG  ADKINS  &  WILLIAM 
FOSTER,  250  acs.  (county  not  men- 
tioned) May  23,  1642,  Page  785.  Beg. 
on  the  reedy  sw.  which  divides  this  from 
land  of  Thomas  Woodhowse,  adj.  land 
of  John  Twy.  Trans,  of  5  pers: 
Mathias  King,  Tobias  Tanner,  John 
Ashe,  Ellis  Young,  William  Foster. 


JOHN    BROWNE,    200    acs.    Acco-  WILLIAM  BURDETT,  300  acs.  Ac- 

macke  Co.,  June  3,  1642,  Page  782.    At      comacke  Co.,  Oct.   3,    1641,   Page  786. 
Nuswattocks  Cr.,  beg.  at  land  of  Leving      Bounded  on  the  Northern  part  by  old 


130 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


plantation  cr.5  on  W.  &  S.  by  a  br.  of 
sd.  cr.  dividing  this  from  land  of  Mr. 
Charles  Harmer.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
William  Knapp,  Symon  Coldron,  Sarah 
Hickman,  William  Young,  Nehemiah 
Cunningham,  John  Gibbons. 

THOMAS  GREY,  100  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  June  7,  1642,  Page  787.  Up- 
on E.  side  of  Greys  Cr.,  adj.  his  own 
land.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Georg  Graves 
&  William  Browne. 

JOHN  GEORG,  144  acs.  Chas.  Citty 
Co.,  Aug.  11,  1642,  Page  787.  W.  up- 
on land  of  Capt.  Francis  Eppes,  N.  upon 
Wattkins  Cr.,  S.  upon  the  river  &  E. 
upon  land  of  Lady  Dale.  Trans,  of  2 
pers:  Richard  Webster,  Sanders  Black- 
haws,  Wm.  Haming. 

JOHN  BROACH,  1,000  acs.  Chas. 
River  Co.,  Aug.  18,  1642,  Page  788. 
Upon  Chas.  River  &  Ware  Cr.  Trans, 
of  20  pers.:  Sarah  Symons,  Edward 
Watkins,  Tho.  Griffin,  John  Hickes, 
Nicholas  Bannister,  John  Sheppard,  5 
Negroes,  &  Antho.  Packhurst  (or  Park- 
hurst)  3  times.  300  acs.  by  order  of 
June  5,  1640  assigned  unto  him  by 
Mr.  Rosier. 

JOHN  WOODLIFFE,  750  acs.,  Chas. 
City  Co.,  Aug.  18,  1642,  Page  788. 
530  acs.  Lyeing  at  a  place  called  Jor- 
dens,  bordering  W.  upon  land  of  Wil- 
Jarrett  (or  Garrett),  adj.  Samuell  Jor- 
den.  20  acs.  part  of  a  place  now  called 
Barmoodus  hundred,  bounding  E.  upon 
the  great  river  &  S.  upon  land  of 
Samuell  Jorden,  running  to  land  of 
William  Julian;  the  other  200  acs.  adj. 
the  above.  550  acs.  by  patent  to  sd. 
Woodliffe  dated  Dec.  10,  1620,  &  the 
remainder  by  patent  dated  July  25,  1638. 

THOMAS  EMERSON,  200  acs.,  up- 
on Western  Br.  of  Nansamund  River, 
adj.  land  of  William  Storey.  Aug.  20, 
1642,  Page  789.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
Edmund  Knight,  John  Ellis,  Nicholas 
Emerson,  John  Ellis. 

GEORG  SMITH,  100  acs.  Accomack 
Co.,  Aug.  20,  1642,  Page  789.  Beg.  at 
the  land  of  Georg  Traveller,  N.  N.  E. 
along  the  seaboard  side  &  W.  N.  W. 


into  the  woods.    Trans,  of  2  pers:  Peter 
Talbott  &  John  Collett. 

JOHN  HARLOW,  200  acs.  Accomack 
Co.,  Aug.  26,  1642,  Page  790.  At  the 
head  of  old  plantation  cr.,  adj.  his 
former  devident  &  land  of  Capt.  Wil- 
liam Roper.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Stephen 
Harlow,  Ann  Harlow,  Math.  Pett,  Wm. 
Car. 

JOSEPH  ROYALL,  600  acs.,  Aug. 
20,  1642,  Page  790.  Bounding  on  the 
land  of  Edward  Madden  above  Sherley 
hundred,  N.  &  by  E.  on  the  river  to 
Dockmans  Cr.,  adj.  Daniell  Lewellin  W. 
&  by  N.  Trans,  of  12  pers.:  Ralph 
Hexon,  Thomas  Sweft,  Henry  Smith, 
Katherine  his  wife,  John  Guilham, 
Martha  Jacob,  Nowell  Hurim,  Ann 
Cole,  Stafford  Barlow,  Thomas  Guilham. 

RICHARD  HYNES,  200  acs.  New 
Norf.  Co.,  Dec.  16,  1640,  Page  791. 
Upon  W.  branch  of  Nansamund  Riv., 
adj.  William  Storey.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
Marinus  Hynes,  Sarah  Hynes,  Georg 
Erwin,  William  Garrett. 

JOHN  TOWLSON,  450  acs.  Acco- 
macke  Co.,  Aug.  25,  1642,  Page  791. 
Beg.  at  land  of  Elias  Taylor.  Trans,  of 
9  pers.:  John  North,  John  Evans,  Peter 
Higginson,  Ann  Harbard,  Jeffery  Gaunt, 
Tho.  Keye,  Alice  Baker,  Margarett 
(blank)  Symon  Foscett. 

BARTHOLOMEW  KNIPE,  100  acs. 
Aug.  25,  1642,  Page  792.  W.  N.  W. 
upon  land  of  Thomas  Joanes,  N.  E. 
upon  land  of  Mr.  Wallis  called  Jouring 
point,  &  S.  W.  upon  James  River  and 
compassed  in  from  Danceing  point  with 
Epse  Bay.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  John 
Wade  &  Thomas  Hughes. 

ROBERT  LAWRANCE,  100  acs.  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  Aug.  25,  1642,  Page  793. 
In  Lawnes  Cr.,  adj.  his  own  and  land 
of  Mr.  Tooke.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  James 
Long  &  Margerie  Aldrige. 

ROBERT  LAWRANCE,  200  acs.  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  Aug.  25,  1642,  Page  793. 
W.  upon  Lawnes  Cr.,  adj.  Mr.  Harding 
&  the  Widdow  Bennett's  lands.    Trans. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


131 


of  4  pers:  Robert  Lawrence,  Eliza  his 
wife,  John  Backwell,  Edward  Ison. 

HENRY  BRADLEY,  450  acs.  Up. 
Norf.  Co.,  Aug.  25,  1642,  Page  794. 
Lying  S.  E.  upon  Newtowne  haven 
River,  near  John  Jarrett  (Garrett).  By 
virtue  of  2  former  patents.  (Record  in- 
complete). 

JOHN  WALTHAM,  Junr.,  300  acs. 
Accomack  Co.,  Aug.  25,  1642,  Page 
794.  At  Nuswattocks  Cr.,  adj.  Mr. 
Charleton,  James  Perrin  &  Elias  Harl- 
tree.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  John  Waltham, 
Senr.,  Thomas  Wyatt,  Richard  Powell, 
Thomas  Jones,  Henry  Evans,  William 
Atkins. 

WILLIAM  MORGAN,  alias  Brooke, 
(alias  Jones),    50  acs.   Eliz.  City  Co., 

Aug.,   1642,  Page  795.    Adj.  his 

first  devident,  near  John  Boules.  Trans, 
of  Arthur  Hormebrooke  (or  Honne- 
brooke). 

THOMAS  CURTIS,  400  acs.,  Aug. 
15,  1642,  Page  795.  Lying  in  Mock- 
jack  bay,  beg.  at  marked  trees  in  Ware 
River,  in  Brownes  bay  dividing  this 
from  land  of  John  Harris.  Trans,  of  8 
pers.:  John  Lether,  John  Roberts,  James 
(or  John)  Berry,  John  Dyas,  Tho. 
Peirce,  Ellen  Powell,  Edward  Marsam, 
John  Jarre. 

WILLIAM  WARREN,  650  acs.  on 
the  N.  side  of  Charles  River,  running 
to  Marsh  on  W.  side  of  Mock  Jack  Bay. 
Aug.  10,  1642.  Page  796.  Trans,  of 
13  pers.:  William  Richards,  Stephen 
Sandish,  Tho.  Paddison,  Richard  Powett, 

William    Hinde,    Lock,    Michaell 

Ellis,  John  Langly,  Amos  Warren,  Eliz. 
Hutchins,  Ellen  Fetherston,  Oliver  Gib- 
bons, Ann  Grimes. 

RICHARD  LEE,  Gent.,  1,000  acs.  10 
Aug.  1642,  on  the  N.  side  of  Charles 
River,  called  by  the  name  of  the  Indian 
Spring,  in  Poropotanck  Cr.,  along  Fran- 
cis Morgan's  land.  Due  for  his  own  per. 
adv.,  his  wife  Ann  &  John  Francis,  &  by 
assignment  from  Mr.  Thomas  Hill, 
Florentine  Paine  &  William  Freeman  of 
their  right  for  trans,  of  17  pers.    Note: 


In  addition  to  the  above  names,  the  fol- 
lowing appear  under  this  patent:  Joane 
Pickering  &  Thomas  Hackett  Florentine 
Paine,  twice.  150  acs.  for  the  3  first 
name  assigned  to  Mr.  Dixon.    Page  797. 

ARTHUR  PRICE,  1,000  acs.  10  July 
1642,  p.  798.  On  the  S.  side  of 
Peanckatancke  River,  adj.  William 
Hockaday,  crossing  mouth  of  Tankes 
Cheskeyock  Cr.  Trans,  of  20  pers., 
whose  names  are  not  given. 

WILLIAM  BARNARD,  Esqr.,  1,200 
acs.  Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  Aug.  10,  1642, 
Page  798.  At  the  head  of  Lawnes  Cr., 
along  land  of  Robert  Elye,  Mr.  Cooper 
and  Robert  Lawrance,  and  running  to 
Northermost  br.  of  the  Pagan  Cr.  Due 
for  his  owne  per.  adv.  4  times  &  trans, 
of  20  pers.:  John  Giles,  William 
Wittington,  Edward  Ricketts,  Eliza. 
Frowme,  John  Sutton,  William  Smar- 
lurt,  Eliz.  King,  John  ,  John  Law- 
rance, Robert  Lamb,  Thomas ,  Eliz. 

Davis,    Eliz.    ,    John    Hone     (or 

Howe),  John  Morris,  Tho.  Sanderby, 
John  Wesby,  Francis  Hickins,  Richard 
Harris.    (Record  incomplete). 

ABRAHAM  ENGLISH,  350  acs., 
"Beginning  at  a  point  of  land  right 
against  the  mouth  of  Milford  haven  up- 
on the  South  West  side  as  you  enter 
out  of  Chesipiacke  bay,"  to  a  small  cr. 
dividing  this  from  land  of  Richard 
Bennett,  etc.,  to  English  his  creek,  then 
down  Milford  haven  to  the  beg.  July 
10,  1642,  Page  799.  Due  for  trans,  of 
himself,  wife  &  5  pers.:  John  Temper- 
ance, Dennis  Cicann  (?),  James  Stanks, 
Wm.  Neesum  (?). 

JOHN  BAYLY  (also  written  Bayles) , 
700  acs.,  on  the  N.  side  of  Charles 
River,  beg.  at  Indian  Quarter  Cr.  Due 
sd.  Baylie  by  assignment  from  Mr.  Wil- 
liam Prior  of  his  right  to  said  land,  the 
claime  being  entered  by  him  18  Oct. 
1641,  for  trans,  of  14  pers.:  William 
Peirce,  Robert  Fossett,  Ann  Cock,  John 
Atter,  Roger  Arteine,  William  Hopton, 
Walter  Downes,  Richard  Adkins,  Bar: 
Barnes,  John  Buck,  Corn:  Swilliams, 
Ann  Powell,  Stephen  Sen:  Antho.  Guns- 
ton.    Page  800.    10  Aug.    1642. 


132 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


JOHN  LYLLEY,  350  acs.  on  the  S. 
W.  side  of  Milford  Haven,  June  20, 
1642,  Page  800.  Being  a  neck  of  land, 
near  land  of  Peter  Rigby  &  Edward 
Peircifull.    Trans,  of  himself,  wife,  &  5 

servts:    William  ,   Thomas   Stoole, 

(or   Steele)    John    Leake,    Eliza.    , 

Ellen  Browne. 

JOHN  CONNYDON  (or  Conng- 
don),  200  acs.  in  Pyankatanck  Bay,  July 
1,  1642,  Page  801.  Near  land  of  Wil- 
liam English,  down  the  bay  into  the 
narrow  or  head  of  Milford  Haven. 
Trans,  of  his  wife  &  3  pers.* 

WILLIAM  PRIOR,  Gent.,  1,300  acs. 
on  the  North  side  of  Charles  River, 
Aug.  10,  1642,  Page  802.  On  E.  side 
of  the  great  marsh  at  Hickmans  point 
near  land  of  John  Jones,  etc.,  down 
Priors  Creek,  etc.  Trans,  of  26  pers: 
himself,   twice,   his   wife,   John   Perrin, 

Grace  ,   5   Negroes,   Joane  Eartes, 

Richard  Errington,  Gregory  Bass, 
Michaell  Sanders,  Wm.  Thorneton,  Tho. 
Kingswell,  Alex.  Wike,  Tho.  Gumer  (or 
Gunner),  John  Rutter,  Wm.  James, 
John  Rutter,  Wm.  James,  John  Wood, 
Edward  Braydon,  Wm.  Johnson,  Henry 
Goodgaine,  Thomas  Jervis,  Robert 
Kingsbury. 

CAPT.  WILLIAM  LEIGH,  1,000  acs. 
North  side  of  Charles  River  in  Porepo- 

tanke  Cr.,  Aug.  ,  1642,  Page  802. 

Adj.  Capt.  Wormeleye.  Trans,  of  him- 
self, his  wife  Mary,  daughter  Mary  & 
17  pers.* 

JOHN  MATRUM,  Gent.,  1,900  acs., 
called  Matrums  Mount,  in  Pyankatanke 
River,  July  20,  1642,  Page  803.  Beg. 
at  Materums  Cr.,  towards  the  Gleab  Cr., 
including  a  small  island  in  a  great  bay 
on  the  N.  side  of  Pyanketanke.  Trans, 
of  38  pers.* 

THOMAS  MOORELAND,  100  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,  Aug.  10,  1642,  Page  803. 
Upon  Capt.  West's  Cr.,  adj.  William 
Sawyer.  Due  for  adv.  of  himself  & 
Christopher  Browne  to  Chiskiacke  the 
first  year. 

THOMAS  CURTIS,  700  acs.  in  Mob- 
jack    Bay,    Aug.    15,    1642,    Page    804. 


Beg.  at  the  head  of  a  br.  of  blackwater 
cr.,  near  Thomas  Sayes  land.  Trans,  of 
14  pers.* 

JOHN  CARTER,  1,300  acs.  in  Rap- 
pahannock River,  on  Cossatomen  Cr. 
now  Carters  Cr.,  Aug.  15,  1642,  Page 
804.  Due  by  assignment  from  Capt. 
Daniell  Gookins.    (Record  incomplete.) 

PERREGRIN  BLAND,  1,000  acs.  on 
the  N.  side  of  Pyanketancke  River,  in- 
cluding 2  small  islands  that  lye  before 
this  land  in  the  river.  Trans,  of  20 
pers.*  Aug.  10,  1642,  Page  805. 

ROBERT  VAUS,  Merchant,  1,200 
acs.  in  Poropotancke  Cr.,  alias  Fresh- 
water Cr.,  near  land  of  Capt.  Wormeley. 
Trans,  of  24  pers.*  Aug.  10,  1642, 
Page  806. 

HUGH  GWIN,  Gent.,  1,000  acs. 
Aug.  10,  1642,  Page  806.  Due  by  order 
of  Court  dated  Dec.  19,  1635,  for  trans, 
of  20  pers.*     (Record  incomplete). 

FRANCIS  MORGAN,  1,000  acres  in 
Freshwater  Cr.,  near  Morgans  Cr.,  Aug. 
10,  1642,  Page  807.  Trans,  of  20  pers.* 

THOMAS  TROTTER,  500  acs.  On 
N.  side  of  Pyanketanke  River.  Aug.  10, 
1642,  Page  807.    Trans,  of  10  pers.* 

THOMAS  SAY,  350  acs.  in  Mob- 
jecke  Bay  at  a  point  called  Sayes  Point 
that  faceth  Ely.  down  the  baye,  etc.  to 
Wrights  Cr.,  etc.  S.  E.  to  the  head  of 
Curtis  branch,  down  the  br.  on  Black- 
water  Cr.  to  the  beg.  Aug.  20,  1642, 
Page  808.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  Thomas 
Say,  Henry  Norman,  Mathew  Burras, 
Jon.  Bullard,  Charles  Bater;  100  acs.  by 
assignment  from  Rendall. 

JOHN  TERRY,  300  acs.  in  Ware 
River,  at  the  mouth  of  a  cr.  dividing 
this  from  land  of  William  Clarke.  Aug. 
20,  1642,  Page  808.  Trans,  of  6  servts: 
William  Oliver,  Mary  Oliver,  Thomas 
Hobbs,  Andrew  Huntington,  Lydia 
Huntington,  Phillipp  Heanes. 

JOHN  MEAKES,  200  acs.  in  Mob- 
jacke  Bay,  on  the  S.  side  of  the  south- 
ern br.  of  Severne,  Aug.  20,  1642,  Page 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


133 


809.  Trans,  of  himself,  and  3  servts: 
Richard  Carter,  Robert  Peircifull, 
Mathew  Chapman. 

EDWARD  WILLIAMS,  100  acs.  on 
the  N.  side  of  Charles  River,  beg.  on 
the  W.  bounds  of  John  Jones'  land  & 
parallel  to  Mr.  Priors  land,  etc.,  July 
20,  1642,  Page  809.  Trans,  of  himself 
&  1  servt.* 

JOHN  JONES,  150  acs.  on  N.  side 
of  Charles  River,  bet.  2  creeks.  July 
20,  1642,  Page  810.  Trans,  of  himself 
&  2  pers. 

JAMES  WHITE  &  JOHN  RICH- 
ERDSON  (Richeson),  200  acs,  in  Mob- 
jecke  Bay,  on  the  N.  side  of  the  north- 
ermost  br.  of  Severne  where  Stillwells 
land  ends,  running  N.  N.  W.  etc.,  Aug. 
15,  1642,  Page  810.    Trans,  of  4  pers.* 

PETER  RIGBY,  450  acs.  in  Milford 
Haven,  beg.  at  Rigby  Point,  running 
S.  S.  W.  parallel  to  Lilleys  Cr.  Aug.  16, 
1642,  Page  811.  Due  by  assignment 
from  John  Story  &  Thomas  Jolly  of 
their  right  of  land  for  trans,  of  9  pers.: 
John  Harper,  Tho.  &  Christopher  Ad- 
kinson,  Robert  Hopkins,  James  Winders, 
John  Pollard,  Geo.  Packman,  John 
Batho,  Eliz.  Starr. 

WILLIAM  HOCKADAY,  1,100  acs. 
on  the  S.  side  of  Pyanketancke  River, 
beg.  at  a  cr.  called  Hockadays  Harbour, 
running  the  creek  etc.  Aug.  11,  1642, 
Page  811.  350  acs.  due  by  assignment 
&  for  trans,   of  himself  &   11   servts.* 

WILLIAM  IRELAND  &  ROBERT 
WALLIS,  700  acs.  Yorke  Co.,  July  13, 
1642,  Page  812.  At  the  head  of  St. 
Andrews  Creek,  N.  E.  upon  Joseph 
Croshaw  &  Richard  Maior.  Trans,  of 
14  pers.:  Rebecca,  wife  of  Robert 
Wallis,  Emanuella  a  Negroe,  Thomas 
Acone,  James  Newsum,  John  Hopkins, 
Francis  Stee  (or  Slee),  Robert  James, 
Nicho.  Offley,  Thomas  Kichley  (or 
Kithley),  Richard  Robinson,  Thomas 
Dyos,  Barbara  Miles,  Robert  Miles,  Junr. 

GEORG  BRAITHWAITE  &  THO- 
MAS PYKE,  750  acs.  James  City  Co., 
last  of  August  1642,  Page  812.    On  the 


S.  side  of  Chichominy  River  S.  E.  and 
N.  W.  into  the  woods,  S.  W.  Sly., 
called  by  the  name  of  Mattahunke. 
Due  by  assignment  from  Edward  Oliver. 

JOHN  HARTWELL,  50  acs.  Yorke 
Co.,  Aug.  25,  1642,  Page  813.  On  the 
Bryery  Swamp,  adj.  Samuell  Watkins. 
Due  by  assignment  from  William  Chap- 
man,  of  a  patent  dated   20  July   1639. 

JOHN  DANCEY  (Dancy),  700  acs. 
Aug.  19,  1642,  Page  813.  Adj.  land  of 
Theodorett  Moyses.  Formerly  granted 
sd.  Dancy  &  Edmond  Morecroft  May  20, 
1638  and  now  due  sd.  Dancy  by  the 
death  of  sd.  Morecroft. 

THOMAS  RANSHA,  300  acs.  War- 
wick Co.,  Aug.  25,  1642,  Page  813. 
Being  a  neck  of  land  called  Harwoods 
Neck,  butting  upon  the  Deepe  Cr.,  near 
land  of  William  Coxe,  to  Stokes  Cr. 
dividing  this  from  land  of  Christopher 
Boyce.  150  acs.  due  by  purchase  of 
patent  from  John  Garrett,  &  the  other 
for  trans,  of  3  pers:  Richard  Puse, 
Georg  Sutton,  Michaell  Slowly. 

CAPT.  SAMUELL  MATHEWES, 
Esqr.,  3,000  acs.,  Aug.  20,  1642,  Page 
814.  Butting  upon  Warwick  River  W., 
somewhat  S.  Bounded  on  N.  with 
Pottash  quarter  Cr.,  adj.  Christopher 
Boyce.  Trans,  of  60  pers:  Robert  Wil- 
liams, Mathew  Jennings,  Rog.  Williams, 
Jon.  Jones,  Jon.  Lewis,  Jon.  Thomas, 
Hen.  Jones,  Wm.  Salsbury,  Wm.  Ed- 
wards, Nich.  Bushell,  Morris  Loyd, 
Sam.  Preston,  Aron  Conway,  Samll.  Ed- 
wards, William  Sutton,  Samll.  Davis, 
Robt.  Chappell,  Wm.  Parry,  Nich.  Dig- 
well,  Tho.  Evans,  Senr.,  Rich.  Hublard 
(or  Hubbard),  Howell  Jones,  Phillipp 
White,  Thomas  Shelley,  Richard  Pea- 
cock,   Corn.   Williams,    Robert   Wright, 

Eliza. ,    Richard    Williams,    John 

Hubberd,  Rich.  Thomas,  Nich.  Martin, 
Jon.  Westake,  Nich.  Lingford,  Gilbert 
Symons,  Wm.  Rood,  Georg  Jordan, 
Wm.  Browne,  Dorothy  Crafford,  Robert 

Wood,    Roger    ,    Wm.    Cleveden, 

Eliz.  Falston,  Wm.  Kingsley,  Eliz. 
Button,  Hen.  Semaster,  Wm.  King, 
Hugh  Orchard,  Thomas  Jones,  Walter 
Holberton,  John  Bamforth,  Hamlett, 
Haw,    Jon.    Hollis,   Tho.    Auer,    Robert 


134 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Okeley,  Wm.  Urwin,  Tho.  Cooper, 
Haveha  Beullitalby(?),  Jon.  Bersey, 
Hen.  Witcher,  Jon.  Reeves,  Allen  Morg- 
gon   (or  Maggon). 

CAPT.  SAMUELL  MATHEWES,  200 
acs.  Aug.  20,  1642,  Page  815.  Beg.  at 
Munie  Point,  near  land  of  Francis  Rice 
&  Robert  Draper.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
John  Mercer,  James  Rosse,  Jon.  Harris, 
Jon.  Holleffe. 

EDWARD  TUNSTALL,  Gent.,  150 
acs.  Henrico  Co.,  Aug.  10,  1642,  Page 
815.  Adj.  Mr.  Causeys  land,  bounded 
S.  upon  the  falls  of  Appamattucks  River, 
W.  upon  the  river  &  N.  into  the  woods 
including  a  meadow  by  the  river  side. 
Due  by  former  patent  dated  5  June 
1639.  Renewed  2  Aug.  1643  and  100 
acres  added. 

LIEUT.  FRANCIS  MASON,  1,250 
acs.  Last  of  August,  1642,  Page  816. 
Beg.  at  Hoggpen  Point,  near  land  of 
Capt.  Thomas  Willoughbye,  "near  the 
howse  of  Man-ace' '  &  adj.  land  of 
Downeman,  now  in  the  tenure  of  said 
Mason.  Trans,  of  25  pers:  Francis 
Mason,  Mary  Mason  his  wife,  Ann 
Mason,  Alice  Gany,  Margery  Gun,  Tho. 
Walters,  Merra  Willow,  Marke  Lineer, 
Antho.  Ribone,  Jon.  Johnson,  Marke 
Provose,  Jon.  Kingsbury,  Nich.  Knowles, 
James  Rabbish,  Elias  Harris,  Richd. 
Martin,  John  Midleton,  Alice  Jenkins, 
Richd.  Morris,  Woodham  Tuck,  Hen. 
Jackson,  Jon.  Shaw,  Edward  Wheeler, 
Jon.  Arris,  Robert  Hall. 

HENRY  BRADLEY,  250  acs.  Up. 
New  Norf.,  Sept.  2,  1642,  Page  816. 
Upon  New  Towne  haven  river,  above 
Georg  Salsbury,  adj.  his  own  patent 
land;  100  acs.  by  assignment  of  patent 
from  John  Wickcliffe,  &  the  other  150 
acs.  for  trans,  of  3  pers:  Henry  Brad- 
ley, William  Neale  (or  Noale)  John 
Felton. 

EDMUND  SCARBURGH,  350  acs. 
Accomacke  Co.,  Aug.  25,  1642,  page 
817.  100  acs.  being  part  of  survey 
called  the  long  point.  Adj.  his  own  & 
land  lately  belonging  to  John  Neale, 
bounded  on  E.  by  Smiths  Island,  etc. 
50    acs.    part    hereof   called    the    Sandy 


Island,  bounded  on  N.  by  Maggetye  Bay 
Cr.,  E.  by  Smiths  Island,  and  the  River 
on  the  S.  Due  for  trans,  of  7  pers: 
Jon.  Truitt,  Hugh  Standy,  Rich.  Enn- 
good,  Jon.  Dolby,  Jesper  Morte,  Jon. 
Crew,  Jon.  Booth. 

GEORG  CHOWNING,  600  acs.  Up. 
New  Norf.  Co.,  Aug.  28,  1642,  Page 
818.  Upon  the  W.  br.  of  Nansamund 
River,  along  land  of  Francis  Maulden 
&  Thomas  Brice.  500  acs.  by  assign- 
ment from  Georg  Ludlow  &  100  acs. 
for  trans,  of  2  pers:  William  Amy  & 
Maudlin  Bennett. 

JOHN  SMITH,  670  acs.  James  Citty 
Co.,  June  16,  1642,  Page  818.  Near 
the  Upper  Chippokes,  adj.  land  of 
Henry  White.  Trans,  of  13  pers:  John 
Smith  &  his  3  wives:  Eliza.,  Alice  & 
Sarah,  Anne  Lyke,  Rebecca  Francis, 
Georg  Luggett,  Wm.  Boone  (or  Borne), 
John  Price,  Wm.  Miles,  Jon.  Williams. 

STEPHEN  GILL,  1,000  acs.  "at  the 
head  of  Rosewell  Creeke  at  a  point 
called  peach  point  where  Mr.  Menifies 
land  ends,"  said  creek  &  runn  deviding 
this  from  land  of  Nicholas  Jornian  (or 
Jorniau  ?),  Apr.  24,  1642,  Page  819. 
Trans,  of  20  pers:  John  Dawson,  John 
Chambers,  Jon.  Mills,  Jon.  Hunter, 
Eliz.  Maior,  Edward  Fisher,  Jon.  Gruns- 
dich,  Thomas  Kembell,  Hen.  Shonelock, 
Jon.  Cartright,  Hen.  Huntley,  Jon. 
Benington,  Wm.  Cappell,  Rich.  Wade, 
Jon.  Herring,  William  Smithell,  Jon. 
Trollock,  Rich.  Burgeyny,  Jon.  Shutle- 
worth,  Hen.  Smithfeild. 

WILLIAM  LAWSON,  491  acs.  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  Aug.  25,  1642,  Page  820. 
Bounded  on  W.  with  Lawnes  Cr.,  E. 
&  N.  by  James  River  &  S.  by  land  of 
Mr.  Tooke.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Michaell 
Billin,  Jon.  Dix,  Jon.  Tomlin,  James 
Greene,  Jon.  Adams,  John  Parker,  Mary 

Smith,   Tho.   ,   Jon.   Damson,    (or 

Davison),   Peter   Greene. 

JOHN  STOCKER,  200  acs.,  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  June  19,  1642,  Page  820. 
Known  by  the  name  of  Hoggpen  Neck, 
adj.  Mr.  Hardinge  &  land  of  Widdow 
Bennett.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Francis 
Carpenter,  Hen.  Johnsons,  twice,  Mary 
Johnson. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


135 


TRISTRAM  NOSWORTHY,  150 
acs.  Up.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  9  Aug. 
1642,  p.  821.  Upon  N.  W.  side  of 
Nansamund  Riv.,  adj.  land  of  Mr. 
Daniell  Gookin.    Due  by  pattern  dated 

5  June  1639. 

SAME.  100  acs.,  same  Co.,  &  page; 
10  Aug.  1642.  Butting  E.  upon  land  of 
John  Smith,  W.  upon  land  of  John 
Seaward,  N.  upon  the  maine  river  &  S. 
into  the  woods.  Due  by  pattern  dated 
10  May  1638. 

SAME.  200  acs.,  same  Co.,  date  & 
page.  Lying  towards  the  head  of  a  bay 
behind  the  ragged  islands  &c,  towards 
land  called  the  poplar  Neck.  Due  by 
pattern  dated  5  June  1639. 

EPAPHRODITUS  LAWSON,  1,400 
acs.  Up.  Norf.  Co.,  Feb.  15,  1642,  Page 

822.  Upon  New  Towne  haven  River, 
running  N.  W.  by  a  bay  side  called 
Mount  Lawson,  adj.  More  Fontleroy 
etc.,  S.  S.  E.  by  the  side  of  a  Cr.  called 
Fant  Ford,  etc.,  N.  E.  by  New  Towne- 
haven  River.,  etc.  E.  by  the  side  of 
Baverly  Cr.,  etc.,  &  near  John  Lewin. 
450  acs.  by  assignment  from  Bartholo- 
mew Hoskins,  Admr.  of  John  Bridges, 
of  2  patterns,  300  acs.  by  2  former 
patterns,  &  650  acs.  for  trans,  of  13 
pers:  Epaphroditus  Lawson,  William 
Lawson,  Lettice  Lawson,  Jno.  Palmer, 
Abraham  Moone,  Robert  Arden,  Neale 
Fee,  Jon.  Cricklock,  Neale  Billahea, 
Rowland  Lawson,  Wm.  Harper,  Peter 
Taylor. 

JOHN  HOLLOWAY,  1,300  acs. 
Northampton   Co.,   Oct.   7,    1642,   Page 

823.  At  Hungars  Cr.,  beg.  at  the  old 
man's  neck,  separating  this  and  lands 
of  Capt.  William  Stone  &  William 
Jones.  350  acs.  by  assignment  from 
Nathaniell  Eaton,  Clerke,  due  sd.  Eaton 
by  right  of  intermarriage  with  the  wid- 
dowe  of  William  Cotton,  Clerke;  300 
acs.  by  assignment  from  Thomas  Smith 

6  100  acs.  by  assignment  from  Richard 
Smith.  The  remainder  due  by  a  former 
patent. 

HUMPHRY  TABB,  100  acs.  Eliz. 
Citty  Co.,  June  19,  1642,  Page  824. 
Upon  Harris'  Cr.  Due  for  his  per.  adv. 
&  trans,  of:  Andrew  Powlter,  a  servant. 


WILLIAM  ENGLISH,  100  acs.  in 
Peankatanck  Baye,  near  land  of  John 
Conden  &  Mr.  Barland.  Trans,  of  2 
pers:    Henry  Williams  &  Joane  English. 

HUMPHRY  TABB,  150  acs.  Eliz. 
Citty  Co.,  Jan.  6,  1642,  Page  825.  Adj. 
land  of  Dr.  Calvert,  bounding  on  Point 
Comfort  Cr.,  &  land  of  David  Poole. 
Trans,  of  3  pers:  Robert  Franke,  Eliza. 
Woodbridge,  Gyles  Sallett. 

NICHOLAS  STILLWELL,  202  acs. 
Charles  River  Co.,  Oct.  8,  1642,  Page 
826.  On  Frosbury  Cr.,  a  br.  of  Severne, 
near  Richard  Burtes  land,  2  acs.  of 
which  is  allowed  for  a  path.  Trans,  of 
4  pers.* 

WILLIAM  TYMAN,  100  acs.  Char- 
les River  Co.,  Oct.  8,  1642,  Page  826. 
Near  Richard  Bennett's  land  and  into 
the  second  Creek  from  the  mouth  of 
Milford  Haven.  Trans,  of  2  pers: 
William  Tyman  &  Sarah,  his  wife. 

JOHN  BEALE,  400  acs.  on  the  N. 
side  of  Charles  River.  Oct.  10,  1642, 
Page  827.  200  acs.  by  assignment  from 
Thomas  Jefferyes;  100  acres  from  Tho- 
mas Deacon,  50  acs.  from  Thomas 
Ramsey  &  50  from  Francis  Wheeler. 
As  also  by  the  names  of  the  severall 
people  mentioned:  Margarett  Robinson, 
John  Willshaw,  Tho.  JefTers,  Morgan 
Bryan,  John  Mason,  Jon.  Chapman, 
Eliza.  Ramsey,  Francis  Wheeler. 

BERTRAM  HOBERT,  650  acs.  upon 
the  N.  side  of  Charles  River,  in  Pean- 
petanke  Creek,  near  land  of  Mr.  Vaus, 
etc.  and  E.  into  the  great  creek  from 
the  Oystershell  banck.  Due  for  trans. 
of  13  pers:  Bertram  Hobert,  himself e 
twice,  Sarah  his  wife,  Francis  Pepper, 
Francis,  Negro,  Tho.  Austin,  his  wife 
&  2  children,  John  Tredescant,  Jon. 
Eyres,  Edward  Goldborne,  Tho.  Baw- 
cocke.    10  Oct.  1642,  p.  827. 

ABRAHAM  TURNER,  200  acs.  in 
Mock  Jack  Bay,  10  Oct.  1642,  p.  828. 
N.  E.  side  of  Ware  River,  adj.  William 
Debnam,  Richard  Creedle  &  Turners 
Cr.  100  acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of  him- 
self, twice,  and  100  acs.  for  trans,  of 
2  pers:    Robert  Carde  &  Thomas  Harte. 


136 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


WILLIAM  CANNHOE,  Clerke,  400 
acs.  Upon  N.  side  of  Charles  River,  in 
Peanckatancke  Cr.,  near  Mr.  Oberts 
land,  10  Oct.  1642,  p.  829.  Trans,  of 
8  pers:  Reynold  Jones,  William  Lock, 
John  Haddy,  Morgan  Floreday,  William 
Woodhowse,  Edward  Blew,  Capp  Han- 
na  a  Negro,  Christ.  Kickett. 

ELLIS  RICHARDSON,  150  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,  in  the  Parish  of  Hampton, 
Oct.  13,  1642,  Page  829.  Upon  a  br. 
of  Capt.  West's  Cr.,  Trans,  of  3  servts: 
William  Price,  Tho.  Burbage,  Tho. 
Griffin. 

RICHARD  BENNETT,  100  acs.,  13 
Oct.  1642,  p.  830.  Upon  the  second  cr. 
of  Milford  Haven,  adj.  Abraham  Eng- 
lish. Due  unto  him  the  said  Edward 
Maulson,  for  trans,  of  2  pers:  John 
Hales  &  John  Binsteed.  (Note:  This 
land  was  evidently  issigned  by  Edward 
Maulson.) 

THOMAS  SYMMONS,  350  acs.  at 
the  mouth  of  a  small  cr.  of  the  North 
river  in  Mock  jack  baye,  near  Georg 
Levett,  Oct.  10,  1642,  Page  830.  Due 
by  assignment  from  Thomas  Kerbye  & 
Joseph  Moore,  to  whom  it  was  due  for 
trans,  of  7  pers:  John  Edden,  Peter 
Baytes,  Ellin  Audry,  Gilbert  Reynolds, 
William  Richards,  Joseph  Moore,  Bar- 
bary  Chapman. 

DICTORIS  CHRISTMAS  &  FRAN- 
CIS FINCH,  300  acs.,  beg.  at  a  small 
cr.  called  Finches  Cr.,  which  issues  out 
of  St.  Michaells,  Oct.  10,  1642,  Page 
831.  Due  for  trans,  of  6  pers:  Dictoris 
Christmas  &  Izabell  his  wife,  William 
Thomson,  Carrington  Banton,  Francis 
Finch,  Joane  Glanfeild. 

ROGER  SYMMONS,  250  acs.  in  the 
first  river  of  Mock  jack  baye,  called 
Severne,  where  the  said  river  divides 
itself  into  twoe  branches,  including  this 
Neck  of  Land  called  the  Eagles  Nest. 
Oct.  19,  1642,  Page  831.  Trans,  of  5 
pers:  Thomas  Todd,  Richard  Cooper, 
James  Sherborne,  Robert  George,  Tho- 
mas Sadler. 

THOMAS  RAY,  300  acs.,  adj.  Roger 
Symmons,  on  a  br.  of  Severne.,  a  small 


branch  dividing  this  &  land  of  Thomas 
Williams,  Oct.  13,  1642,  Page  832. 
Trans,  of  himself,  wife,  &  4  pers: 
William  Scott,  John  Barnes,  Darby  Ray, 
John  May. 

JOHN  ROBINS,  2,000  acs.  in  Mock- 
jack  Baye,  extending  to  the  mouth  of 
Ware  River,  up  the  Severne  to  Lucas, 
his  Cr.  Oct.  12,  1642,  Page  833.  1,000 
acs.  by  assignment  from  Capt.  William 
Brocas,  to  whom  sd.  land  was  assigned 
by  Argoll  Yeardly,  &  1,000  acs.  for 
trans,  of:  William  Jones,  David  Rad- 
dish,  Thomas  Horner,  John  Ondale, 
James  Kenney,  Francis  Huett,  Peter 
Roberts,  Richard  Love,  Henry  Gilling- 
ham,  Jane  Harris,  Dyan  Holleney, 
Lyonell  Holley,  Willi.  Loftis,  Robert 
Davis,  Samll.  Creame,  Tho.  Jenkins, 
Abraham  Harmata,  Thomas  Civill  (?), 
Robert  Baskervile,  Georg  Brocas. 

ADAM  THORROGOOD,  Esqr.,  400 
acs.  at  the  head  of  Samuell  Bennetts 
Creek,  N.  upon  land  of  John  Langfeild, 
&  E.  upon  the  aforesd.  cr.  which  run- 
neth out  of  Chisopeiacke  alias  Lynn 
haven  river.  Oct.  19,  1642,  Page  833. 
Formerly  granted  unto  Capt.  Adam 
Thorrogood  June  8,  1639  &  now  due 
sd.  Thorrogood  his  son  by  descent. 

CAPT.  HUMPHRY  HIGGENSON, 
Esqr.,  320  acs.,  at  the  mouth  of  Tutties 
Neck.,  Oct.  18,  1642,  Page  834.  Trans, 
of  7  pers:  Anthony  Williamson,  Tho. 
Williams,  Benj.  Lawrance,  Richard 
Turfry,  Ann  Freeman,  Geo.  Waters, 
Andrew  Leake. 

HENRY  POOLE,  116  acs.  Eliz.  City 
Co.,  Oct.  17,  1642,  Page  834.  Bounded 
on  the  W.  by  Hampton  River,  S.  by  the 
Gleab  Land  &  N.  by  land  of  Henry 
Coleman.  Formerly  lease  land  but  by 
order  of  June  17,  1642  granted  to  be 
held  by  patent  &  due  sd.  Poole  for 
trans,  of  3  pers.* 

WILLIAM  HAYWARD,  780  acs., 
Oct.  16,  1642,  p.  835.  In  Appamat- 
tucke  River.  650  acs.  bordering  E.  up- 
on sd.  river,  W.  upon  the  main  land, 
S.  upon  Appamattucke  Towne  &  N. 
upon  Swift  Cr.  The  residue  being 
marsh  before  the  plantation  of  sd.  Hay- 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


137 


ward  &  commonly  called  the  Conjurers 
Feild,  beg.  where  land  of  Mr.  John 
Baugh  endeth.  Swift  Cr.  parts  this 
from  land  formerly  belonging  to  Samuell 
Sharp.  650  acs.  due  by  deed  of  sale 
from  Charles  Magnor,  Feb.  8,  1634,  to 
whom  it  was  granted  Dec.  1,  1620. 
100  acs.  for  the  per.  adv.  of  himself, 
wife  Ellin  &  trans,  of  1  servt.* 

HENRY  COLEMAN,  104  acs.  Eliz. 
City  Co.,  Oct.  17,  1642,  Page  836. 
Bounded  W.  upon  Hampton  River,  S. 
by  land  of  Mr.  Henry  Poole  &  N.  by 
land  of  Mr.  Robert  Speed.  Formerly 
lease  land.  Due  for  trans,  of  2  pers: 
Robert  Peltriman  &  William  Knight. 

THOMAS  OSBORNE,  400  acs., 
Henrico  Co.,  at  the  head  of  Coxendale, 
Aug.  20,  1642,  Page  836.  Bounded  W. 
N.  W.  upon  Christopher  Branch's  land, 
N.  N.  E.  upon  Mr.  Osborne's  land 
called  Fearing,  &  S.  S.  W.  into  the 
woods.  Being  200  po.  in  breadth  from 
the  head  of  Proctors  Cr.  towards  the 
land  called  Mount  my  Lady,  and  a  full 
mile  into  the  woods.  Trans,  of  8  pers: 
Rich.  Cock,  Wm.  Dixon,  Christ.  Pack, 
Jon.  Bagly,  Robt.  Stanton,  Tho.  Wal- 
drom,  Jon.  Rush,  Francis  Quash. 

CAPT.  JOSEPH  JOHNSON,  567^ 
acs.  Charles  City  Co.,  Sept.  14,  1642, 
Page  837.  Bounding  W.  on  land  of 
Bikers,  E.  on  the  Merchants  Land,  S. 
on  the  ponds  &  N.  on  the  River.  Its 
breadth  being  from  the  howse  of  Rich- 
ard Williams  unto  the  howse  of  Tho- 
mas East.  Due  sd.  Johnson  for  his 
fourth  part  of  the  Merchants  land  as  by 
order  dated  March  23,  1642. 

JOHN  BENTON,  1,250  acs.,  about 
15  mi.  up  the  Southward  side  of  Rappa- 
hannock River,  etc.,  running  to  the 
mouth  of  a  navigable  cr.  or  branch,  etc. 
Oct.  13,  1642,  Page  837.  400  acs.  by 
assignment  from  Samuell  Davis,  &  the 
residue  for  trans,  of  himself,  wife  and 
15  pers:  Saml.  Davis,  Sr.  &  Eliza,  his 
wife,  Saml.  Davis,  Junr.,  Jon.  Davis, 
David  Ellis,  David  Rice,  Jon.  Dreaton, 
Jon.  Cox,  Jon.  Benton,  Joane  his  wife, 
Jon.  Benton,  Isabell  Benton,  Alice 
Benton,  Rich.  Grey,  Robt.  Thomas, 
Wm.  Barnard,  Abraham  Coate,  Abigail 


Benton,  Geo.  Hargas,  Tho.  Craven,  Jon. 
Gerey,  Ralph  Tatum,  Tho.  Hughes, 
Georg  Gumer,  Jon.  Wells. 

JOHN  GRIVETT,  150  acs.,  Up. 
Norf.  Co.,  Oct.  10,  1642,  Page  838. 
Upon  the  S.  W.  side  of  the  N.  W.  br. 
of  Nanzamund  Riv.,  adj.  William  Story. 
Due  by  assignment  from  Thomas  Hill, 
to  whom  it  was  due  for  trans,  of  3 
pers.* 

ABRAHAM  WOOD,  700  acs.  Henri- 
co Co.,  Oct.  20,  1642,  Page  839.  E. 
upon  Sizemores  Cr.,  running  towards 
Henrico  river  Northerly  &  the  S.  side 
butting  upon  Appamattocke  River,  in- 
culding  all  swamps,  marshes  &  creeks 
conteyning  400  acs.  300  acs.  the  re- 
mainder lying  within  the  county  afore- 
said, W.  upon  land  of  John  Zouch, 
upon  the  N.  side  of  Appamattocke  river 
&  upon  the  great  rock  at  the  W.  end 
of  Kenecock  Swamp.  600  acs.  due  by 
2  former  patents  in  his  name  &  100 
acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Richard  Lide 
&  Thomas  Griffin. 

TYMOTHY  FENN,  300  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  Oct.  10,  1642,  Page  840. 
Beg.  at  a  cr.  on  Charles  Barcroft's  land. 
200  acs.  by  assignment  from  Symon 
Cammock,  to  whom  it  was  due  for  the 
per.  adv.  of  himself,  Mary  Camock  his 
daughter  &  2  pers.  The  other  100  acs. 
due  sd.  Fenn  for  trans,  of  2  pers.:  Ed- 
ward Dale,  Robert  Oran,  Bryan  Abbott, 
Wm.  Dracott. 

THOMAS  LOVEING,  700  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  in  Martins  Hundred,  Oct.  10, 
1642,  Page  840.  Beg.  at  the  Greene 
Sw.  near  Georg  Holmes'  land  &  Silvester 
Totman.  This  tract  contains  664  acs., 
of  which  150  belongs  to  Reynold  Jones; 
186  acs.  more  in  the  same  location.  Sd. 
land  due  for  trans,  of  14  pers:  Thomas 
Rosse,  William  Spencer,  Jon.  Reeves, 
Richard  Knott,  Arthur  Saylor  (or  Tay- 
lor) Robert  Alexander,  Clement  Canna- 
day,  Ann  Mike,  Jon.  Evans,  Arthur 
Bodely,  Rebecca  Palmer,  Robert  Poole, 
Michaell  Fletcher,  Thomas  Baulke. 

HENRY  BALLARD,  50  acs.  War- 
wicke  Co.,  Oct.  31,  1642,  Page  841. 
Parallel  to  Gerrance  Stephens  Land. 
Trans,  of  Georg.  Murcocke. 


138 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


JOHN  DAVIS,  200  acs.  Henrico  Co., 
last  of  Oct.  1642,  Page  842.  Adj.  his 
former  patent  called  the  Longfeild,  ex- 
tending N.  W.  towards  land  of  Corne- 
lius de  Hull.  Due  for  trans,  of  his  wife 
Mary  Davis,  and  3  servts:  Jon.  Devall, 
Jon.  Talbott,  Jon  Cox. 

CORNELIUS,  de  HULL,  Oct.  31, 
1642,  p.  842.  502  acs.  known  as  Lilley 
Valley,  beg.  next  to  Mrs.  Edlos  Swamp, 
near  his  own  land  &  S.  E.  upon  John 
Davis.    S.  W.  to  the  river,  ending  neare 

a  place  called  the  Seaven  .  250  acs. 

of  this  land  was  granted  to  William  Cox 
in  1637.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Thomas 
Blackston,  Richard  Bird,  Richard  Hewes, 
James  Dupen,  Mary  Howtree,  Jon. 
Dodd,  Robert  Hayes,  Samll.  Water- 
howse,  Walter  Jones,  Wm.  Thomas. 

FRANCIS  BARRETT,  600  acs.  in 
Chichahominy  River,  adj.  John  Robins, 
passing  through  a  runn  of  water  and 
certain  Indian  feilds  near  unto  Fowlers 
Shambles  alias  the  ridge,  near  land  of 
Robert  Freeman.  Due  by  former  patent. 
Oct.  29,   1642,  Page  843. 

THOMAS  PLUMMER,  207  acs.,  Oct. 
28,  1642,  Page  843.  Bounding  N.  N. 
E.  upon  land  of  Edward  Colles,  E.  S.  E. 
upon  Adam  Cookes  &  S.  S.  W.  upon 
land  of  Edward  Prince.  Trans,  of  4 
pers:  Elizabeth  Hatchett,  Henry  Bod- 
ney,  Humphry  Harwood,  Mary  Turner. 

RICHARD  MORGAN,  200  acs. 
Charles  Countie,  Oct.  28,  1642,  Page 
844.  N.  upon  land  of  Thomas  Wheeler 
at  the  head  of  Powells  Cr.,  Swd.  unto 
the  old  Towne,  Ewd.  the  upper  part  of 
Mr.  Boyce's  land  &  W.  on  the  head  of 
Samuell  Walkers  land.  Trans,  of  4 
pers:  John  Baker,  John  Paine,  Richard 
Morgan,  Elias  Barton. 

JOHN  RESBURY,  150  acs.  lying  in 
Wards  Cr.  near  the  Mill,  N.  N.  E.  on 
Cross  Cr.  dividing  same  from  land  of 
John  Freeman,  E.  S.  E.  on  the  cr.  over 
against  land  of  John  Reddish  &  S.  S. 
W.  on  Edward  Collynes  land.  Trans. 
of  3  pers:  William  Sawyer,  Lewis 
Mills,  Hen.  Bembridge.  Oct.  29,  1642, 
Page  844. 


DANIELL  LEWELLYN,  Gent.,  856 
acs.,  the  Northermost  part  beg.  above 
Mrs.  Heyman,  N.  on  upper  branches  of 
Turkey  Island  Cr.  &  S.  on  the  head  of 
Mr.  Astons  land.  The  Southermost  part 
extending  on  Mr.  Aston  &  W.  upon 
Joseph  Royall  bet.  Dockmans  Cr.  & 
Sherly  hundred.  Trans,  of  17  pers: 
Michaell  Peacock,  Charles  Edgar,  Tho. 
Morgan,  James  Foster,  Robert  Hopps, 
Tego  Frayle,  Hen.  Hitchcox,  Robert 
Ward,  Tho.  Richardson,  Tho.  Taylor, 
Marke  Cheton,  Mary  Davis,  John  Tal- 
bott, John  Devall,  Robert  Hallome, 
Frances  Hallome,  Eliza.  Jackson.  Page 
845.    Oct.  27,  1642. 

CAPT.  ROBERT  HUTCHINSON, 
475  acs.  James  City  Co.,  Nov.  2,  1642, 
Page  846.  Within  Chichahominy  Riv., 
adj.  Georg  Unwyn,  and  part  upon 
Checkroes  Cr.,  350  acs.  by  purchase 
from  Thomas  Paule  &  125  acs.  from  sd. 
George  Unwyn. 

ADAM  COOKE,  Gent.,  1,000  acs. 
Charles  Co.,  Nov.  5,  1642,  Page  846. 
At  the  head  of  Wards  Cr.,  adj.  William 
Havett.  Trans,  of  20  pers:  William 
Mosely,  Richard  Tye,  Jon.  Newman, 
Jon.  Drew,  Eliz.  Wilsonn,  Chrst.  Judd, 
Eliza.  Judd,  Wm.  Russe  (or  Ruffe), 
Tho.  Jones,  Charles  Adwell,  Barthol. 
Millen,  John  Haward,  Samll.  Smith, 
Edward  Braugh,  Tho.  Child,  Hen. 
Smith,  Richard  Maye,  Edmond  Wells, 
Robert  Maior,  Tho.  Peake. 

CAPT.   DANIELL  GOOKIN,    1,400 

acs.  upon  North  side  of  Rappahannock 
River,  Nov.  4,  1642,  Page  847.  Trans. 
of  28  pers. 

Assignment  by  sd.  Gookin,  late  of 
Va.,  of  the  above  to  Capt.  Thomas  Bur- 
bage,  Apr.  6,  1648.  Witnesses:  Jon. 
Stephens  &  Jon.  Browne. 

Memo.:  900  acs.  of  the  foregoing  is 
due  sd.  Gookins  by  assignment  from  sd. 
Burbage  for  the  servants  mentioned: 
William  Wildy,  Christ.  Vaughan,  Jon. 
Morgan,  Ferdinand  Heath,  Margarett 
Davis,  Tho.  Beede,  William  Paine, 
Roger  Wilcox,  Eliza.  Brooke,  Tho.  Rin- 
gall,  Robert  Mason,  Rich.  Browne,  Mar- 
sey  Lammore,  Robert  Broward,  William 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


139 


Webb,  James  Perkins,  Jon.  Maddison, 
Tho.  Perkins,  himself  (Daniell  Gookins), 
2  severall  times  into  the  colony,  Mrs. 
Mary  Gookins,  Samll.  Gookins,  Thomas 
Warren,  William  Shepperd,  Edward 
Cooke,  Mary  Codne,  John  Bright,  & 
Jacob  a  Negro. 

JOHN  VALLENTINE,  119  acs.  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  Nov.  7,  1642,  Page  848. 
Lying  before  the  ragged  Islands  com- 
monly known  by  the  name  of  the  Long 
ponds,  beg.  at  the  main  river  side,  adj 
John  Seaward  &  William  Eyres.  By  as- 
signment from  James  Arthurs  &  due  sd. 
Arthurs  for  trans,  of  3  pers:  James 
Arthurs,  Christ.  Arthurs,  Alice  Arthurs. 

SAME.  50  acs.  Isle  of  Wight  Co., 
in  an  island  called  the  long  ponds,  Nov. 
7,  1642,  Page  849-  By  assignment  from 
James  Arthurs,  who  trans.  John  Dayes, 
a  servt. 

RICHARD  BENNETT,  Esqr,  one  of 
the  Councell  of  State,  2,000  acs.  about 
35  mi.  up  the  S.  side  of  Rappahannock 
River.  Nov.  4,  1642,  Page  849.  Trans, 
of  40  pers.,  of  whom  the  following  are 
mentioned:    Phillipp   Hyde,    Hen.   Bur- 

chell,   William   Margarett   Robert  

(there  is  no  punctuation  to  indicate 
whether  these  last  three  names  refer  to 
two  or  three  individuals)  Richard  Clif- 
ton, Wm.  Maston,  Wm.  Archer,  

Utye,  Mary  Utye,  Richard  Rasall,  Leo- 
nard Bright. 

WILLIAM  DURANT,  800  acs.  in 
Rappa.  River,  about  35  mi.  up  the  S. 
side  thereof.  Nov.  4,  1642,  Page  850. 
Trans,  of  16  pers.:  William  Tilcock, 
Francis  Taverne,  Peter  Thunder,  Mich- 
aell  Wilcox,  Eliza.  Harris,  Eliza.  Tre- 
vell,  Ann  Playstow,  Senr.,  Ann  Play- 
stowe,  Elianor  Baxter,  Grace  Wilcox, 
Joane  Cullin,  James  Feild,  Jon.  Rich- 
ards, John  Corde,  Robert  Perkins,  Jon. 
Ramsden. 

JOHN  HARLOWE,  200  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  Nov.  10,  1642,  Page  851. 
Being  a  neck  of  land,  adj.  land  late  in 
the  possession  of  Rowland  Reyne,  N.  on 
land  of  Capt.  William  Roper  &  Wly. 
Old  Plantation  Cr.  Due  by  assignment 
from  John  Corker,  to  whom  it  was  due 


for  trans,  of  4  pers:  John  Plummer, 
Hen.  Carleton,  John  Hinton,  John 
Daniell. 

STEPHEN  WEBB,  500  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  Nov.  10,  1642,  Page  851.  At 
a  place  called  the  Lower  Chippokes,  E. 
upon  the  Rich  Neck,  &  N.  towards  land 
of  William  Carter.  400  acs.  by  2 
former  patent  &  100  for  trans,  of  2 
pers.* 

CHRISTOPHER  KIRKE,  400  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  late  called  Accomack 
Co.,  Nov.  11,  1642,  Page  852.  Beg.  on 
the  S.  side  of  Penninoe  Cr.  By  assign- 
ment from  Thomas  Savage,  to  whom  it 
was  assigned  by  Edmund  Scarburgh,  to 
whom  it  was  granted  by  patent  21  Feb. 
1638. 

JOHN  FITCHETT,  32  acs.  in  Pasby- 
hayes,  James  City  Co.,  Nov.  11,  1642, 
Page  853.  Adj.  land  of  Richard  Brookes 
&  Capt.  Robert  Hutchinson.  21  yr. 
lease.  Due  by  virtue  of  an  Act  of 
Court,  Feb.  7,  1638. 

JOHN  EWENS,  Junr.,  460  acs. 
Charles  City  Co.,  Nov.  10,  1642,  Page 
854.  In  Appamattocks  now  called  Bris- 
tal,  bounding  N.  N.  E.  upon  William 
Sanders,  W.  N.  W.  upon  the  river  over 
against  Thomas  Causey  &  S.  S.  W.  up 
on  Thomas  Pitt.  100  acs.  for  the  per. 
adv.  of  his  father  John  Ewens  &  Ann, 
his  wife,  &  trans.  7  pers:  John  Reeves, 
Christo.  Robinson,  Mannering  Raw- 
boord,  Georg  Cater,  Richard  Greene, 
Rachell  Evans,  Thomas  Strowd,  Richard 
Watts. 

JAMES  PEREENE,  400  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  Nov.  14,  1642,  Page  854. 
At  Naswattocks  Cr.,  beg.  at  the  E.  side 
of  the  land  of  John  Waltham,  adj.  Rich- 
ard Jacob.  Trans,  of  8  pers.,  of  whom 
but  2  are  mentioned:  Henry  Lilley,  and 
Richard  Buckley. 

STEPHEN  WEBB,  128  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  Nov.  14,  1642,  Page  855. 
Upon  Lower  Chippokes  Cr.,  called  by 
the  Indian  natives  Potoback,  &  adj.  land 
of  Georg  Powell.  Trans,  of  3  pers: 
Thomas  Glight,  Foulke  Jones,  Georg 
Donnings. 


140 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


JOHN  STYLES,  200  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  Nov.  17,  1642,  Page  855. 
In  Warresquicke,  adj.  Henry  Heardes. 
50  acs.  by  assignment  from  John  White 
«&  150  acs.  for  trans,  of  3  pers:  Thomas 
Badley,  Humphrey  West,  Thomas  Gar- 
diner. 

STEPHEN  HAMBLYN,  400  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,  Nov.  17,  1642,  Page  856. 
At  the  head  of  Queens  Cr.,  upon  the 
W.  side  of  the  Mill  Swamp,  parallel  to 
his  old  devident  &  land  of  Capt.  Pope- 
ley.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Richard  Oliver, 
Benj.  Pillard,  Ambrose  Bewly,  Jon. 
Harrison,  Tho.  Buller,  Tho.  Hynde, 
Sarah  Bennett,  Robert  Tarbooke. 

LUCE  WEBSTER,  daughter  &  heire 
of  Roger  Webster,  deed.,  250  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,  Nov.  19,  1642,  Page  857. 
In  the  parish  of  Hampton,  adj.  land 
formerly  taken  up  by  Mr.  David  Man- 
sell  for  use  of  the  sd.  Luce  Webster,  & 
adj.  land  of  Christopher  Abbott.  Trans, 
of  5  pers.  by  her  father:   Edward  Spach, 

Stephen    ,     Susan    Webster,    Tho. 

Webster. 

FRANCIS  ENGLAND,  746  acs.  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  June  20,  1642,  Page  857. 
Adj.  Capt.  Peirce.  Trans,  of  15  pers: 
Robert  Hill,  Mary  his  wife,  John  Powell, 
Eliza  Webb,  Sarah  England,  Jon.  Lip- 
pett,  Jon.  Sykes,  Robert  Davis,  Hugh 
Brent,  Edward  Palmer,  Jon.  Acton, 
Thomas  Coggin,  James  Piland,  Alexan- 
dra his  wife. 

JOHN  SWEETE,  650  acs.,  Nov.  11, 
1642,  Page  858,  Adj.  land  of  Mr. 
Cooper  and  Francis  England.  Trans,  of 
13  pers:  Alexandria  Piland,  Joane 
Piland,  John  Barrow,  William  White, 
Richard  Gisfry  (or  Giffry),  Israeli  An- 
drews, John  Marshall,  William  Henes 
(or  Haves),  himself e  and  his  wife, 
Charles  Deratt,  Randall  Clarke,  John 
Berry.  Renewed  16  Sept.  1643  and  890 
acs.  added. 

WALTER  CHILES,  613  acs.  Charles 
City  Co.,  Oct.  20,  1642,  Page  859.  At 
Appamattocke  River,  beg.  at  the  up- 
ward bounds  of  Mr.  Tunstalls  land  & 
adj.  William  Sanders.  Due  by  virtue 
of  a  former  patent  &  trans,  of  4  pers: 


William  Webb,  Stephen  Gerris,  Jon. 
Kimberlin,  Ann  Potery. 

GEORG  HARDING,  300  acs.  upon 
the  Eastermost  side  of  Lawnes  Creek, 
adj.  Mr.  Tuke  &  Alice  Bennett.  June 
10,  1642,  Page  859.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
Himselfe,  Thomas  Sabin,  Thomas 
Hardy,  Georg  Netlefeild,  James  Strong, 
Jon.  Laith. 

HENRY  HIRD,  350  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  (no  date)  Page  860.  Adj. 
Mr.  Flintons  land.  175  acs.  being  the 
Eastermost  parte  of  the  Alpes.  Trans, 
of  7  pers.*     (Record  incomplete.) 

JOHN  MOONE,  Gent.,  2,250  acs. 
Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  Nov.  20,  1642,  Page 

860.  Between  Pagan  Cr.  &  the  Back 
Bay  Cr.,  and  adj.  Virgoes  Cr.,  etc.,  near 
land  of  Thomas  Davis,  John  Spackman, 
&  Capt.  John  Uoton.  2,050  acs.  by 
several  former  patents  &  200  acs.  for 
trans,  of  4  pers:  Francis  Balding,  Evan 
Jones,  George  Tyson,  Clement  Lattimore. 

THOMAS  BAGWELL,  600  acs. 
Charles  City  Co.,  Nov.   11,   1642,  Page 

861.  W.  upon  land  of  Capt.  Harris,  E. 
upon  John  Freeme  towards  Wards  Cr., 
&  N.  on  Sergt.  Richard  Morgan  & 
branches  of  Powells  Cr.  Trans,  of  12 
pers.:  Katherine  Crosse,  Tho.  Richard- 
son, Rich.  Balistocke,  Tho.  Butler,  Benj. 
Wragg,  Phillipp  Silvester,  Charles 
Nimfe,  William  Butcher,  James  Arthur, 
Beves  Balver,  Henry  Tame,  John  Badge. 

JOHN  PRATT,  298  acs.  Henrico  Co., 
Nov.  10,  1642,  Page  862.  Adj.  N.  E. 
upon  Edward  Hill's  land  &  S.  W.  upon 
Christopher  Woodward.  Trans,  of  6 
pers:  John  Butler,  Richard  Hues,  Tho. 
Reymond,  John  Jolly,  Giles  Right,  Jon. 
Wellingworth. 

EDWARD  HARRISON,  550  acs.  in 
Rappahannock.  (Record  incomplete.) 
Page  862. 

JOHN  KING,  300  acs.  on  the  S.  side 
of  Charles  River,  upon  Putanak  Cr. 
Dec.  10,  1642,  Page  863.  The  follow- 
ing names  appear  under  this  record: 
Ann  his  wife,  Katherine  Kallaway,  Tho- 
mas Clary,  Phillipp  Wade,  Alice  Smith, 
Alice  Cooke. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


141 


GEORG  BUSSE,  400  acs.  at  the  head 
of  Lawnes  Cr.,  beg.  at  William  Tro- 
loders,  parallel  to  Mr.  John  Pauley  & 
William  Trolodore.  Dec.  23,  1642, 
Page  863.  The  following  names  appear 
under  this  record:  Lydia  his  wife,  2 
times,  Richard  Collett,  Robert  Rigby, 
John  Bell,  William  Mascall,  John 
Shaw,  John  Evans. 

THOMAS  GUYER,  son  &  heir  of 
Capt.  Robert  Guyer,  650  acs.  at  the 
mouth  of  Lawnes  Cr.,  near  John  Snel- 
letts  (Suellett)  howse.  Dec.  22,  1642, 
Page  863.  Due  by  order  of  court  dated 
27  Oct.  1635  as  alsoe  for  trans,  of  13 
pers:  William  Paine,  John  Willis, 
Elianor  Salle,  Kather.  King,  Wm.  Booth, 
Jon.     Ronston     (or    Rouston),     Robert 

Taylor,  Jon.  Clay,  Richard  ,  Catta- 

lina  a  Negro,  John  Loyd,  Alice  Sprouse. 

MR.  WILLIAM  TUCKER,  250  acs. 
Up.  Norf.  Co.,  Jan.  6,  1642,  Page  864. 
Upon  Wd.  side  of  the  Southern  br.  of 
Nansimund  Riv.,  adj.  Thomas  Hampton, 
Clerke. 

MR.  WILLIAM  BROOKES,  300  acs. 
Up.  Co.  New  Norf.,  Jan.  6,  1642,  Page 
865.  Upon  the  Wd.  side  of  the  South- 
ern br.  of  Nansamund  River,  beg.  op- 
posite land  of  Thomas  Dew  &  adj. 
Thomas  Hampton. 

HUGH  GWYN,  Gent.,  1,700  acs. 
near  the  mouth  of  Pyankatanke  River. 
200  acs.  of  marsh,  beg.  at  a  sandy  point 
upon  Chisopeiake  Bay,  extending  up 
Milford  Haven  Bay,  to  the  narrow, 
bounded  by  a  great  bay  called  Stengra- 
bay,  being  due  E.  from  the  mouth  of 
said  river,  etc.  parallel  to  Rappahan- 
nocke  Bay,  and  Sly.  parallel  to  Chiso- 
peiake Bay.  The  following  names  ap- 
pear: Christo.  Higginson,  twice,  Wil- 
liam Parker,  Francis  Chambers,  Rich. 
Bennett,  Mrs.  Ann  Gwyn,  Tho.  Taylor, 
Jon.  Knight,  twice,  Rich.  Ingram,  James 
Haire,  Jon.  Mills,  Jon.  Bradly,  Sarah 
Allison,  Tony  a  Negroe,  Nich.  Rey- 
nolds, Antho.  Carr,  David  Jenkin,  Ash- 
well  Bird,  Arundell  Parris,  Allen  Ludd- 
ington,  Nich.  Gibson,  Richard  Kirby, 
Wm.  Loyd,  Hugh  Gwyn,  Tho.  Dodd, 
Jon.  Averry,  Hen.  Thacker,  Nath. 
Webster,  Hen.  Crosby,  Howell  Powell, 
William  Deane,  Eliza.  Higginson,  Mar- 


garett  Bivins,  Isabell  Richerson,  Tho. 
Hartley,  Nicholas  Jones  alias  Bonds. 
Jan.  17,  1642,  Page  865. 

EDMOND  DAWBER,  2,400  acs.  beg. 
on  the  S.  side  of  a  creek  in  the  Norther- 
most  river  of  Mockjack  Bay,  which  cr. 
divides  this  from  land  of  Georg  Levitt. 
Nov.  28,  1642,  Page  866.  Part  of  devi- 
dent  allowed  him  by  order  dated  June 
15,  1640.    Renewed  March  18,  1649. 

SAMUELL  ABBOTT,  Gent.,  500  acs. 
in  Rappahannock  River  some  14  mi.  up 
the  river,  adj.  John  Benton.  Dec.  22, 
1642,  Page  867.  Trans,  of  10  pers: 
Tho.  Caslife,  Isaac  Southerwood,  Jon. 
Tucker,  Jon.  Barshall,  Georg  Dunnings, 
Jon.  Harrison,  Nich.  Bridges,  Hen. 
Preston,  Richard  Haynes,  Jon.  Davis. 

EDMOND  DAWBER,  1,600  acs.  up- 
on N.  side  of  Mockjack  Bay,  upon  Sea- 
sand  Cr.,  which  divides  same  from  land 
of  Thomas  Curtis.  Nov.  28,  1642,  Page 

867.  Part  of  divident  allowed  June  13, 
1640.  Note:  Renewed  in  his  name  18 
Mar.  1649. 

GEORG  RUTLAND  &  WILLIAM 
JACOB,  600  acs.  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  Nov. 
1,  1642,  Page  868.  Upon  the  second 
bay  that  runneth  Easterly  out  of  Lynn 
Haven,  adj.  John  Stratton.  Due  by  as- 
signment from  Richard  Hayes,  assignee 
or  Atty.  of  Robert  West.  300  acs.  with 
100  acs.  added  renewed  in  the  name  of 
William  Jacob  Oct.  19,  1643,  &  300 
acs.  renewed  in  the  name  of  Georg 
Rutland. 

THOMAS  SAVILL,  150  acs.  Charles 
River  Co.    (Record  incomplete.) 

THOMAS  WOMBWELL,  650  acs. 
James   City  Co.,   Dec.    25,    1642,    Page 

868.  Near  the  head  of  Checheroes  Cr. 
in  Chichahominy  River,  N.  upon  Rich- 
ard Bell,  haveing  a  landing  place  & 
passage  way  bet.  sd.  Bell  &  Georg  Un- 
wyn.  300  acs.  by  assignment  from  Tho- 
mas Stoute  of  a  patent  dated  Oct.  29, 
1639,  &  350  acs.  for  trans,  of  7  pers.: 
John  Mathews,  Jon.  Badnall,  John  Cas- 
cill,  John  White,  Hudson. 

RICHARD  WYATT,  250  acs.  in 
Mockjack  Bay,  butting  upon  the  narrow 
of  Ware  River,  bounded  on  the  W.  by 


142 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Cow  Cr.  Aug.  15,  1642,  Page  869. 
Due  for  his  own  per.  adv.  thrice  & 
trans,  of  2  pers:  Getrude  Bedell  & 
Ralph  Taylor. 

CHRISTOPHER  BOYCE,  2,000  acs. 
in  Peankatanke  River,  about  3  mi.  up 
the  S.  side  at  plumtree  point.  Dec.  21, 
1642,  Page  870.  The  following  names 
appear  under  this  record:  Jon  Crispe, 
Wm.  Venice,  Jon.  Johnson,  Christ. 
Boyce,  Mordecay  Cooke,  Jon.  Tiplad, 
Jon.  Fells,  Jas.  Greenwill,  Jon.  Barlow, 
Walter  Brace,  Kath.  Lewis,  Jon.  Wil- 
liams, Jon.  Withers,  Edmd.  Porter  & 
ux  (wife)  Edmd.  Porter,  Junr.,  Jon. 
Porter,  Junr.,  Jon.  Porter,  Senr.,  Mar- 
maduke  Atkinson,  Manassa  Porter,  Eliza. 
Flowerdew,  Thomas  Simpson,  Rich. 
Williams,  Robert  Fentrice,  Jon.  Carra- 
way,  Robert  Fentrice,  Georg  Harland, 
Jarman  Connaway,  Thomas  Blatt,  Rich. 
Wootton,  Anne  Marshall,  Tho.  Kemp, 
John  Oliver,  Tho.  Cooper,  Thomas  Pit- 
cherd,  Tho.  Correll  (or  Sorrell),  Joyce 
Stone,  John  Cannaday,  William  Jackson, 
John  Nemo. 

WILLIAM  PUDIVATT,  200  acs., 
Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  May  16,  1642,  Page 
871.  Facing  E.  on  Pagan  Cr.  or  New 
Towne  Haven,  near  land  of  Capt.  Basse 
called  Cedar  Island,  now  in  possession 
of  William  Pateford,  extending  S.  to- 
wards land  of  Hugh  Wynn  &  William 
Taylor.  Due  by  assignment  of  patent  of 
Samuell  Jackson,   dated  Oct.   10,   1639- 

SAME.  200  acs.  Isle  of  Wight  Co., 
April  10,  1642,  Page  871.  Upon  Pagan 
Cr.  Bay,  beg.  at  the  mouth  of  a  cr.  on 
the  N.  side  against  a  neck  of  land  called 
Shorne  brooke  hill,  near  Cedar  Island. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  William  Pudivatt, 
Jane  his  wife,  Geo.  Medland,  Nicholas 
Browne. 

RICHARD  BREWSTER,  Gent.,  500 
acs.  James  City  Co.,  no  date,  Page  872. 
Called  the  great  neck  alias  the  barren 
neck,  adj.  Tutties  Neck  a  br.  of  Archers 
Hope  Cr.,  parting  the  same  from  Jockeys 
Neck.  Due  by  purchase  from  Capt. 
Francis  Pott,  the  brother  &  heire  of 
Doct.  John  Pott,  dec'd.,  to  whom  it  was 
due  by  order  of  June  6,  1632,  &  con- 
firmed 13  June  1642. 


RICHARD  MAIOR,  350  acs.,  Charles 
River  Co.,  Jan.  17,  1642,  Page  872. 
Adj.  his  first  devident  &  land  of  Joseph 
Croshaw.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  Robt. 
Wherry,  Wm.  Sey,  Charles  Feild,  Penri- 
gin  Bland,  Tho.  Parker,  Tho.  Smith, 
Martin  Shute. 

AUGUSTINE  WARNER,  600  acs. 
lying  in  Severne  in  the  first  river  in 
Mockjack  Bay,  beg.  on  the  N.  side  of 
Severne  called  Austins  Desire,  N.  to- 
wards land  surveyed  for  John  Robins, 
thence  to  a  cr.  dividing  same  from  land 
of  Humph.  Hammore.  Due  for  trans, 
of  12  pers.,  of  whom  only  the  following 
are  mentioned:    Martin  Barnes,  William 

Reynolds  &  others.    day  of  

1642,  p.  873. 

STEPHEN  GILL,  2,500  acs.  York 
River  Co.,  Nev.  18,  1642,  Page  873. 
Lying  upon  the  N.  side  of  York  River, 
E.  S.  E.  with  Rosewell  Cr.,  S.  S.  W.  of 
Mr.  Minifie  &  W.  N.  W.  with  Burn- 
hams  Cr.  Trans,  of  30  pers.:  William 
Walters,  Stephen  Gill,  Rich.  Hanby  (or 
Hanly),    Hen.    Avery,    Ann    his    wife, 

Eliza. ,  Tho.  Rodgett,  Hen.  Tappin, 

Jon.  Wright,  Peter  Stinger,  Edward 
Plunknett,  Tho.  Watts,  Eliz.  Garrett, 
Mr.  Jon.  Sheppard,  &  Ann  his  wife, 
Sarah  Hanby   (or  Hanly),  Sarah  Bond, 

Cornelius    ,    Wm.    Jenkins,    Wm. 

Jackson,  Peter  Roberts,  Hen.  Line, 
Joseph  Barnett,  Jon.  May,  Maude  Rich- 
ard, Bedford  Francis,  Mary  Foster, 
Georg  Turner,  and  Gilbert . 

WILLIAM  SWEETE  (altered  to 
Smeete),  400  acs.  Yorke  Co.,  Feb.  4, 
1642,  Page  874.  Near  the  head  of  Tym- 
ber  Neck  Creek  on  the  N.  side  of 
Charles  River,  near  land  of  Mr.  Minifee. 
Trans,  of  8  pers.* 

JUSTINIAN  COOPER,  Gent.,  2,400 
acs.  Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  Mar.  16,  1642, 
Page  874.  100  acs.  due  for  per.  adv.  of 
Ann,  his  wife,  in  1618,  500  acs.  for 
her  adv.  of  50  Lbs.  Sterling,  &  200  acs. 
for  the  per.  adv.  of  Robert  OllifTe  unto 
whom  the  sd.  Anne  was  sister  &  heir, 
&  for  his  ad.  of  27  Lbs.  into  the  Colony 
300  acs.  more;  1,300  acs.  for  the  trans, 
of  26  pers.:  Justinian  Cooper,  4  times, 
Ann    his    wife,    Clement    Ewins,    Wm. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


143 


Bisley,  Hen.  Rownfifall  (?),  Georg 
Archer,  Wm.  Woodward,  Samll.  El- 
drege,  Mary  Veare,  Eliza.  Reades,  Jon. 
Davis,  Robert  Feasly,  James  Smith,  Wm. 
Cooke,  Henry  Bony,  Ursula  Waight, 
Wm.  West,  Wm.  Redman,  Robert 
Kenin,  Geo.  Stacie,  Wm.  Underwood, 
Nicholas  Mann,  Richard  Coursie. 

ADAM  THORROGOOD  (Thoro- 
good),  Gent.,  5,350  acs.  Low.  Norf. 
Co.,  June  10,  1643,  Page  875.  Beg.  at 
a  little  island  in  Lynn  haven  River,  W. 
over  Bennetts  Cr.,  down  sd.  river  along 
the  bay,  etc.  Due  as  son  &  heir  of 
Capt.  Adam  Thorrowgood,  dec'd.,  to 
whom  it  was  granted  by  patent  dated 
June  19,  1635. 

CAPT.  JOHN  UPTON,  3,289  acs. 
Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  July  10,  1643,  Page 
876.  Lying  upon  branches  of  Pagan 
Point  Cr.  &  New  Towne  Haven,  adj. 
Mr.  Sparkes,  Anthony  Jones,  Mr.  Nevill, 
Robert  Pitt,  Mr.  Seaward,  Ambrose  Ben- 
nett &  Mr.  Moone.  139  acs.  for  trans. 
of  3  pers.,*  the  remainder  by  several 
former  patents. 

RICHARD  KEMP,  Esqr.,  Secretarie 
&  one  of  his  Majesty's  Councell  of 
State,  4,332  acs.  James  City  Co.,  Apr. 
17,  1643,  Page  877.  Lying  at  the  head 
of  Archers  Hope  Cr.,  upon  the  Pallisa- 
does,  adj.  Georg  Lake's  land  upon  the 
horse  path.  N.  W.  by  N.  upon  Powhetan 
Sw.,  and  S.  upon  the  Secretarys  land. 
1,200  acs.  by  purchase  from  Georg 
Minifie,  Merchant,  which  was  not  truly 
bounded  as  appears  by  survey  made  by 
William  Wigg,  Surveyor  authorized  by 
the  Court  &  940  by  several  former 
patents.  2,192  acas.  for  trans,  of  44 
pers.:  His  own  2nd  adv.,  Mrs.  Eliza 
Littlewood,  Samll.  Abbott,  Richard 
Rouch,  Rich.  Clarke,  Tho.  Eager  (or 
Cager),  Jon.  Mead,  Wm.  Edwards, 
Tho.  Griffith,  John  More,  Sarah  Ellis, 
Ellin  Browne,  Edward  Smithnest,  Wm. 
Goods,  Wm.  Lawrence,  Jon.  Moulder, 
Tho.  Sutton,  Robert  Bateman,  Wm. 
Poulton,  Charles  Dowse,  Wm.  Bone, 
Benj.  Harkwood,  Richard  Norris,  Jon. 
Shepperd,  James  Crispe,  Jon.  Lewis, 
Lawrence  Herry,  Anth.  Rocks,  Jon. 
Chamberlane,  Leonard  Hawly,  Jon. 
Hall,  Jon.  Smart,  Wm.  Browne,  Anth. 


Dratt,  Jon.  Remington,  Wm.  Dollin, 
Lawr.  Batrum,  Jon.  Merry,  Samll. 
Ethirton,  Paule  Brewer,  Wm.  Gallard, 
Gilbert  Gerrard,  Rose  Poiden,  Corbett 
Peadle.  600  acs.  of  sd.  1200  acs. 
granted  to  Mr.  Thos.  Hill  &  the  rent  to 
be  paid  by  him;  50  acs.  granted  to  Capt. 
Francis  Pott,  by  order  of  June  13,  1642 
&  by  him  assigned  to  William  Davis. 

JOHN  WRIGHT,  250  acs.  Up  Norf. 
Co.,  July  ,  1643,  Page  878.  Up- 
on a  br.  of  the  S.  br.  of  Nansamund 
River,  opposite  Thomas  Adkinson.  150 
acs.  by  assignment  from  Richard  Ewin, 
&  100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers.  by 
William  Tucker:  Richard  Faire  & 
Mathew  Faire. 

CAPT.  WILLIAM  PEIRCE,  Esqr., 
360  acs.  called  Bakers  Neck  butting 
upon  James  River,  beg.  at  a  point  S.  of 
the  plantation  of  Mr.  Thomas  Harwood 
called  Queene  hive,  S.  upon  the  great 
river,  unto  Capt.  Peirce  his  Cr.  unto  a 
cedar  tree  somewhat  from  the  bridge, 
etc.,  down  Harwoods  Creek,  etc.  Due 
for  trans,  of  8  pers.:  William  Sheers, 
Elianor  Pooly,  Thomas  Colmer,  Marke 
Avery,  Jon.  Magson,  Jon.  Snellocke, 
Domnick  Lumbrey.  Note:  40  acs.  re- 
maining due. 

RANDALL  HOLT,  710  acs.  Aug.  1, 
1643,  Page  880.  Sonn  &  Lawfull  heire 
of  Mary  Bayley,  late  of  Hogg  Island, 
sole  daughter  and  heire  of  John  Bayly 
of  the  sd.  Island.  700  acs.  called  Hogg 
Is.  lying  over  against  Archers  Hope  on 
the  Tappahanna  side  of  the  river,  & 
10  acs.  in  James  Island  adj.  the  late 
dwelling  howse  of  Robert  Epers,  to- 
wards Goose  Hill,  N.  towards  land  late- 
ly belonging  to  William  Fairefax  &  W. 
upon  land  lately  belonging  to  Jenkin 
Andrewes.  490  acs.  being  expressly 
granted  to  the  sd.  Mary  Bayly  by  the 
name  of  Mary  Bayly  Orphant,  Feb.  20, 
1619,  with  the  special  clause  &  pro- 
visoe  that  if  upon  due  survey  hereafter 
to  be  made  the  sd.  island  doe  not 
amount  to  fower  hundred  and  nyntye 
acres  that  soe  much  as  it  wanteth  shall 
be  supplyed  to  the  said  Mary  Bayly  in 
some  other  place  and  if  the  said  Island 
doe  conteyne  above  fower  hundred  and 
nyntye  acres  that  then  the  said  Mary  doe 


144 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


purchase  the  Surplusage  from  the  Com- 
pany, etc.  The  surplus  being  210  acs. 
is  now  due  by  trans,  of  5  servts.  in  the 
Shipp  William  and  Thomas  Aug.  24, 
1618  by  John  Bayly:  Hugh  Price,  Wil- 
liam Done  (or  Dove),  Phillipp  Roper, 
Henry  Broughton,  Robert  Reddinge. 

CAPT.  SAMUELL  MATHEWES,  4,- 
000  acs.  a  neck  of  land  on  the  N.  side 
of  Rappahannock  River,  bounded  on  the 
W.  by  Cassatawoman  Cr.  which  runs 
E.  N.  E.  towards  head  of  Wiccokomoc- 
co  River,  on  the  N.  by  Wiccocomocco 
Riv.,  on  S.  by  Rappa.  Riv.  &  on  the  E. 
with  the  main  bay.  Aug.  1,  1643,  Page 
882.  Trans,  of  fowerscore  pers.:  John 
Loyd,  John  Davis,  Tho.  Chambers,  Edw. 
Clarke,  Hen.  Townson,  Robert  Graves, 
Joseph  Jolly,  Fr.  Dowling,  Henry  Cos- 
sen,  Fr.  Rosser,  Hopkin  Griffin,  Wm. 
Peake,  John  Drewett,  Jon.  Seager,  Jon. 
Carrow,  Jon.  Lewis,  Junr.,  Walter 
Powell,  John  Roch,  Robert  Walcoke, 
John  Knighton,  James  Kate,  Arthur 
Mackworth,  Jossy  (Jessy  (?)  Lasting, 
Silvester  Smith,  Henry  Sanders,  Jon. 
Bathropp  (or  Lathropp),  Walter  Jack- 
son, Jon.  Pooly,  Rich.  Vanson,  Wm. 
Thomas,  Richard  Bradshaw,  John  Tho- 
mas, Jr.,  John  Phillipps,  Walter  Lang- 
ford,  Andrew  Hallack,  Thomas  Clocke, 
John  Robins,  Kather.  Tresilian,  Richard 
Stephens,  Geor.  Dowson  (or  Dawson), 
Geo.  Browson,  Christ.  Chamberlin,  Geo. 
Austin,  Robert  Ives,  Tho.  Beedle, 
Mathew  Biscoe,  Richard  Christian, 
Richard  Woodruffe,  Walter  Bowman, 
Richard  Williams,  Robert  Parrey,  Tho. 
Methold,  Peter  Fletcher,  Georg  Evans, 
Tymothy  Ourton,  Georg  Harleston, 
James  Jones,  Christ.  Evans,  John  Tur- 
ner, Isaac  Hack,  Tho.  Evans,  Junr.,  Geo. 
Read,  Edward  Harrington,  Jon.  Moore, 
Georg  Austin,  Bernard  Gaying,  Jon. 
Figg,  Jon.  Smith,  Jon.  King,  Jon.  Wil- 
liams, Jon.  Williamson,  Thomas ,  &c. 

MR.  RICHARD  RICHARDS,  1,000 
acs.  Charles  Riv.  Co.,  Aug.  2,  1643, 
Page  883.  On  the  N.  side  of  Charles 
Riv.,  N.  W.  by  W.  upon  Tymber  Neck 
Cr.,  S.  W.  by  S.  upon  sd.  River.  Trans, 
of  20  pers.:  Mr.  Richard  Richards, 
Eliza.  Richards,  3  times,  Wm.  Dorrell, 
Richard  Harbott,  Edwd.  Butcher,  Tho. 
Butcher,  Hen.  Tompson,  Jon.  Mainson, 


Math.  Isum,  Jos.  Winkeford,  Ann 
Biker,  Francis  Moold,  Tho.  Hughes, 
Wm.  Watkins,  Tho.  Dadson,  Jane 
Evans,  Henry  Raye,  Tho.  Peeters. 

EDWARD  TONSTALL,  250  acs., 
Aug.  2,  1643,  Page  884.  County  not 
given.  150  acs.  by  patent  dated  Aug. 
10,  1642,  &  100  for  trans,  of  2  pers: 
John  Astin  (or  Aston)  &  Eliza.  Baker. 

ROWLAND  BURNHAM,  Gent.,  450 
acs.  Yorke  Co.,  Aug.  10,  1643,  Page 
884.  Upon  N.  side  of  Yorke  Riv., 
bounding  S.  E.  upon  Burnhams  Cr.,  N. 
W.  upon  John  Bayles,  &  N.  E.  upon 
Thomas  Wilkinson  &  Robert  Norrice. 
Due  by  order  of  Court  12  Oct.  1639 
and  for  trans,  of:  Rowland  Burnham, 
Tomasin  Knight,  James  Uteley  Martin 
Baker,  Walter  Wood,  Tho.  Wooldrige, 
Jon.  Mason,  Wm.  Heyward,  Wm.  Peach. 

JAMES  WHITING  (Whiteing),  250 
acs.  upon  N.  side  of  Charles  River, 
Aug.  10,  1643,  Page  885.  Upon  Tim- 
ber Neck  Cr.,  adj.  James  Besouth  & 
Thomas  Hughes.  Trans,  of  5  pers: 
Ann  his  wife,  Evan  Davis,  Mathew  King, 
Nehemiah  Causon,  Richard  Addams. 

JAMES  BESOUTH,  100  acs.  Yorke 
Co.,  Aug.  10,  1643,  Page  886.  Upon  N. 
side  of  Yorke  River,  near  the  head  of  Tim- 
ber Neck  Cr.,  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Samuell 
Besouth,  his  brother  &  his  own  per.  adv. 

WILLIAM  LAWRENCE,  300  acs. 
James   City  Co.,   Aug.   20,    1643,   Page 

886.  Lying  on  Hogg  Island  maine,  on 
the  S.  of  Mr.  Thomas  Stamp  &  N.  to- 
wards Chippokes  Cr.  on  E.  with  Mr. 
Butler.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  William  Law- 
rence, Joane  his  wife,  Nath.  Jennings, 
William  East,  John  Eaton,  Jon.  Gosling. 

WILLIAM  GAPINGE,  140  acs. 
James   City  Co.,   Aug.   22,    1643,  Page 

887.  From  Sunken  Marsh  near  Upper 
Chippokes.  W.  N.  W.  towards  Henry 
Neale  &  Henry  White.  Trans,  of  3 
pers:  Robert  Browne,  Phillipp  Haw- 
kins Henry  Moore. 

JOHN  WALL,  1,791  acs.  in  Chip- 
pokes  Cr.  between  John  Hacke  &  Wil- 
liam Pilkington.    Aug.   23,   1643,   Page 

888.  Upon    Wards    Cr.,    &    adj.    John 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


145 


Clay  &  John  Fr ernes  Land.  300  acs.  by 
patent  dated  20  Sept.  1629,  1,200  acres 
by  purchase  from  Rice  Hoe  &  291  acs. 
for  trans,  of  6  pers:  William  Pinion,  John 
Brashridge,  Richard  Durrington,  Eliza. 
Stacie,   Edward  Jenings,   Ellianor  Read. 

CAPT.  ROBERT  HUTCHINSON, 
200  acs.  James  City  Co.,  in  Pasbyhaies, 
Dec.  30,  1643,  Page  889.  Bounded  W. 
N.  W.  upon  Edward  Oliver,  N.  by  W. 
upon  land  of  Mr.  John  White,  E.  by 
N.  upon  Daniell  Lyle  &  S.  by  E.  upon 
Sir  Francis  Wyatt,  and  S.  W.  by  W. 
upon  the  river.  21  yr.  lease.  Annual 
Rent:  8  bbls.  Mer.  Indian  Corn  shelled 
at  the  State  House  in  James  City,  pay- 
ment to  begin  at  Michaelmas  1645. 

JOHN  WATTSON,  1  acre  James 
Cittie,  Sept.  20,  1643,  Page  889.  Near 
Brewers  point  along  the  side  of  Mr. 
Knight.  Due  by  Act  of  Assembly  "for 
the  building  and  peopling  of  James  Cit- 
tie."   Fee  Rent:     1  Capon  yearly. 

THOMAS  PAULE,  1  acre  in  James 
Cittie,  lying  near  the  Friggott  in  the 
Island.,  Sept.  20,  1643,  Page  890.  As 
above. 

MICHAELL  BATT,  1  acre  in  James 
Cittie  Island,  Sept.  20,  1643,  Page  890. 
As  above. 

ADAM  THORROGOOD,  sonn  & 
heire  of  Capt.  Adam  Thorrowgood, 
200  acs.,  Elizabeth  Cittie  Co.,  Feb.  10, 
1637,  Page  890.    Lying  upon  Hampton 

River,  commonly  called  Capps ,  adj. 

William  Parry,  land  of  Capt.  Wilcox 
now  in  tenture  of  John  Woodall.  Due 
"in  right  of  discent,"  having  been 
granted  unto  Capt.  Adam  Thorrowgood. 

ANTHONY  COLEMAN,  82^  acs. 
in  Pasbyhaies  in  James  City  Co.,  Sept. 
21,  1643,  Page  891.  By  order  of  Court, 
Dec.  3,  1639,  "For  the  better  strength- 
ening and  securing  of  James  Cittie,"  &c. 
Adj.  Sir  Francis  Wyatt,  Alexander 
Stoner,  his  own  land  &  Mr.  White's. 
21  yr.  lease  from  the  feast  of  St. 
Michaell  the  Arch  Angell  1649.  An- 
nuall  Rent:  3  bbls.  &  a  bushell  of  Mer. 
Indian  corne  sheld  at  the  State  Howse 
in  James  Citty.  Note:  Renewed  in  the 
name  of  Tho.  Ludwell,    11   July   1651. 


RICHARD  YOUNG,  450  acs.  Up. 
Norf.  Co.,  Aug.  24,  1643,  Page  892. 
Upon  New  towne  haven  river,  near  land 
of  Richard  Preston  &  Thomas  Jordan. 
Due  by  virtue  of  2  former  patents, 
dated  25  Nov.  1636  and  11  May  1638. 

THOMAS  WHEELER,  990  acs. 
Charles  City  Co.,  Aug.  23,  1643,  Page 
893.  At  the  head  of  Powells  Cr.,  S.  to- 
wards the  old  towne,  N.  upon  land  of 
Merchants  Hope  &  E.  upon  the  upper 
part  of  Cheyney  Boyce  his  land.  Due 
by  assignment  from  Richard  Milton,  and 
Richard  Tisdale  of  2  patents,  for  trans, 
of  8  pers:  Thomas  Smith,  Jane  Wright, 
Jon.  Markes,  Peter  Markes,  Jon.  Hooper, 
Richard  Carter,  (altered)  Ann  Colches- 
ter, Margarett  Cane. 

JAMES  BAGNALL,  200  acs.,  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  Aug.  26,  1643,  Page  894. 
Upon  the  head  br.  of  Clarks  Cr.,  be- 
longing to  the  W.  br.  of  Eliz.  River, 
adj.  land  of  Mr.  Georg  White  &  to- 
wards Mr.  Richard  Bennett.  For  trans, 
of  4  pers.,  assigned  to  him  by  Arthur 
Haslington,  vizt:  Richard  Leake,  John 
Butler,  Priscilla  Hasleton,  Thomas 
Bainham. 

ROBERT  PITT,  209  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  Aug.  28,  1643,  Page  895. 
Upon  the  Wwd.  side  of  a  br.  of  New 
towne  haven  Riv.,  called  Beverly  Cr., 
adj.  Capt.  John  Upton  &  John  Seaward. 
Trans,  of  5  pers.:  Stephen  Paule,  John 
Williams,  Thomas  Patrick,  William 
Powell,  Ewen  Roberts. 

THOMAS  HILL,  Gent,  3,000  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  Sept.  1,  1643,  Page 
896.  Near  the  head  of  Up.  Chippokes 
Cr.  from  the  division  of  the  maine 
middle  run  of  sd  creek,  etc.  Trans,  of 
threescore  pers.* 

JOHN  FREEME,  1,198  acs.  Charles 
Co.,  Sept.  1,  1643,  Page  896.  Near 
Flowerdy  Hundred  Cr.,  adj.  Cheney 
Boyce.  Trans.  of  24  pers.:  John 
Freeme,  Anne  his  wife,  Tho.  Feild, 
Ann  Feild,  Geo.  Dixon,  Ewin  Heily, 
Charles  Carter,  James  Pinner,  Cornelius 
Clements,  James  Melham,  Jon.  Markes, 
Wm.  Pearepoint,  Francis  Richett,  Jon. 
Roger,  Wm.  Elliott,  Daniell  Cormack, 
Rich.  Bonner,  Rich.  Aron,  Jon.  Gibson, 


146 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Wm.  Maior,  Samll.  Blear,  Samll.  Hide, 
Mary  Silver,  Wm.  Kicke. 

THOMAS  EVANS,  250  acs.  about 
22  mi.  up  the  Northward  side  of  Rappa- 
hannock River,  Aug.  31,  1643,  Page 
897.  Trans,  of  5  pers.,  assigned  to  him: 
Roger  Barly,  Edward  Smith,  Roger 
Harris,  Humphry  Wilkins,  Kather. 
Wygood. 

HENRY  NEALE,  850  acs.  James  City 
Co.,  Aug.  31,  1643,  Page  898.  At  the 
upper  Chippokes,  a  line  of  trees  devid- 
ing  this  and  land  of  Henry  White,  etc. 
Due  for  trans,  of  17  pers:  Henrry 
Neale,  Jon.  Neale,  Phillip  Bowen, 
Samuel  Bowen,  Samuel  Hall,  Wm. 
Best,  Tho.  Flewellin,  Ann  Flewellin, 
Henry  Maddin,  Edward  Miller,  Tho. 
Musgrove,  Ann  Dyer,  Wm.  Jones,  Tho. 
Adkins,  Ellin  Hawkes,  Mary  Hawkes, 
Andrew  Asse,  John  Scricher   (?). 

JOHN  NURTON  (Norton),  250  acs. 
James  Cittie  Co.,  30  Aug.  1643,  p.  898. 
Lying  upon  parte  of  the  Nly.  br.  of  the 
head  of  Checkeroes  Cr.,  S.  upon  land  of 
Richard  Bell  &c,  down  Sly.  to  sd.  Nly. 
br.  which  devides  it  from  land  of 
Richard  Holt.  Due  for  trans,  of  5  pers: 
Anne  the  wife  of  John  Nurton,  John 
Jackson,  John  Broadway,  Georg  Burford, 
John  Nurton. 

JOHN  CALVERT,  300  acs.  on  a 
small  br.  issuing  out  of  Point  Comfort 
Cr.,  a  swamp  dividing  this  from  land 
of  Nicholas  Roe,  commonly  called  Buck 
Rowe.  Sept.  2,  1643,  Page  899. 
Granted  by  order  of  court  dated  June 
18,  1642  as  brother  &  heir  of  Dr.  Georg 
Calvert,  deed.,  to  whom  it  was  due  for 
his  per.  adv.  of  5  pers.*  Renewed  in 
the  name  of  Anthony  Elliott,  July  24, 
1645. 

WILLIAM  BUTLER,  Gent.,  700  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  Aug.  29,  1643,  Page 
900.  Upon  S.  side  of  James  River  at 
the  head  of  Lawnes  Cr.,  adj.  Mr.  Wil- 
liam Lawrance,  Capt.  William  Peirce, 
Mr.  Reynolds  &  Mr.  Stampe.  Trans,  of 
14  pers.:  William  Butler,  Jon.  Butler, 
Eliza.  Butler,  Mary  Butler,  Ezekiell 
Perry,  Jon.  Leigh,  Tho.  Pembridge,  Jon. 
Ireland,    Lewis    Cooper,    Wm.    Hooke, 


Tho.  Dodsley,   Edward   Parramore,   Ed- 
ward Johnson,  Robert  Gringer. 

WILLIAM  BATT,  250  acs.  on  W. 
side  the  North  River  in  Mockjack  Bay, 
Sept.  1,  1643,  Page  901.  Trans,  of  5 
pers:  Christopher  Hooton,  Edward 
Spicer,  Richard  Cheesome,  Geo.  Wye, 
William  Smarte. 

JOSEPH  COBB,  400  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  Sept.  1,  1643,  Page  901. 
Upon  a  br.  of  Warwicksquicke  River 
bounded  N.  on  the  back  cr.  parting  this 
from  land  of  John  Vasler.  Due  by 
patent,  dated  4  Aug.   1637. 

FRANCES  RICE,  200  acs.  of  land  on 
the  forrest  of  Warwicke  River,  beg.  at 
his  old  devident,  Aug.  29,  1643,  Page 
902.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Francis  Hol- 
land, Alex.  Fuller,  James  Sherman, 
Robert  Maze. 

THOMAS  GLASCOCKE,  130  acs. 
Warwicke  River  Co.,  Aug.  30,  1643, 
Page  902.  Parallel  to  his  own  &  land 
of  John  Leydon  &  adj.  Thomas  Davis. 
Trans,  of  3  pers.:  Thomas  Trade  & 
Bestney  Brookes. 

SAME.  200  acs.  a  mile  and  a  half 
upon  the  S.  side  of  Peankatanke  River, 
adj.  Christopher  Boyce.  Aug.  30,  1643, 
Page  903.  Trans,  of  4  pers.:  Thomas 
Glascocke,  Jane  his  wife,  William 
Charles,  James  Allen. 

ROBERT  LAWRANCE,  150  acs. 
Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  Sept.  28,  1643,  Page 
904.  Near  the  mouth  of  Lawnes  Cr., 
adj.  John  Stocker,  Georg  Hardie  &  Tho- 
mas Gyer.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Thomas 
Merrick,  Wm.  Penny,  John  Pond. 

WILLIAM  EWINS,  1,100  acs.,  James 
City  Co.,  Sept.  30,  1643,  Page  904.  At 
the  head  of  Up.  Chippokes.  Trans,  of 
22  pers.:  John  Muxford,  Jon.  Coots, 
Adam  Morgrave,  Henry  Parsons,  John 
Williams,  Griffith  Georg,  Wm.  Mar- 
shall, Wm.  Barwick,  John  Lane,  Tho. 
Robinson,  Daniell  Bridgman,  Richard 
Bradley,  Morgan  Glover,  Samll.  Huby, 
Francis  Allen,  Maurice  Price,  Lawr. 
Carver,  Eliza,  his  wife,  Michaell  a 
Negroe,  Katherine  his  wife,  John  Gras- 
heare    a    Negroe,    Mathew    a    Negroe. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


147 


Note:    "I     William    Batt    Wm. 

Ewin,  Mercht.  surrender  upp  and  re- 
linquish the  same  to  make  good  the 
right  of  another  patent  to  bee  renewed 
of  fowerteene  hundred  acres."  18  July 
1648.    Signed:    William  Batt. 

GEORG  GILBERT,  50  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  Sept.  29,  1643,  Page  905. 
Running  from  Powhetan  bridge  along 
Walter  Coopers  marked  trees  to  the 
back  creek,  thence  to  sd.  bridge.  Trans, 
of:   William  Shaw. 

WILLIAM  FRYE,  500  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  Aug.  29,  1643,  Page  906.  Ly- 
ing upon  the  W.  side  of  Chichahominy 
River,  adj.  Humphry  England  &  Thomas 
Warden.  Trans,  of  5  pers.:  Richard 
Dobson,  Michaell  (altered)  Noble,  Ed- 
ward Grimes,  Isabell  Haies,  Robert 
Stiles. 

WILLIAM  NEWSUME  (Newsum), 
550  acs.  James  Cittie  Co.,  26  Aug. 
1643,  p.  906.  N.  towards  sunken 
marsh,  E.  upon  a  swamp,  S.  towards 
Lower  Chippokes  Cr.  &  W.  into  the 
maine  woods.  Due  by  vertue  of  pattern 
to  him  dated  3  May  1636. 

RICHARD  JACKSON,  110  acs.  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  Aug.  28,  1643,  Page  907. 
Near  the  head  of  Seawards  Cr.,  adj.  his 
own  &  land  of  Farrer  Flinton.  Trans, 
of  3  pers:  John  Champion,  Owen 
Whiting,  Henry  Pepper. 

THOMAS  HUGHES,  400  acs.  Charles 
River  Co.,  Sept.  28,  1643,  Page  907. 
Upon  Tymber  Neck  cr.  on  the  N.  side 
of  sd.  river  adj.  Mr.  Richard  Richards. 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  Georg  Burford,  Senr., 
Geo.  Burford,  Junr.,  William  Cox,  Mary 
Cox,  John  Shell,  Tho.  Tapp,  Wm.  Thorpe. 

ROBERT  HAIES,  750  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  Aug.  29,  1643,  Page  908. 
At  the  Little  Creek,  adj.  John  Gruns- 
ditch  (Grimsditch)  &  land  of  Capt. 
Adam  Thorrowgood,  dec'd.  Trans,  of 
15  pers.:  Richard  Fleming,  John  New- 
man, Nich.  Robinson,  Robt.  Gilbert, 
Jane  Wond,  Ann  Hayes  his  wife,  Ann 
Wortman,  Mary  Wortman,  Jon.  Wort- 
man,  Tho.  Wortman,  Alex.  Haies, 
Nath.  Haies,  Humphry  Castle,  Nich. 
Cross,  &  his  owne  trans. 


THOMAS  WILLIAMS,  450  acs.  in 
Mock  jack  Bay,  near  land  of  Thomas 
Ray,  running  N.  unto  the  Southern  br. 
of  Severne.  Aug.  31,  1643,  Page  909- 
Trans,  of  9  pers:  John  Charnocke,  Wm. 
Morris,  Tho.  Williams,  Wm.  Ediford, 
John  Harsnett,  Giles  Foster,  Christian 
Demacheto,  John  Compton,  Grace 
Warkeham. 

PHAROE  YOUNG,  100  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  Aug.  30,  1643,  Page  909. 
Butting  upon  Cherrystones,  near  land  of 
Capt.  John  How  &  Mr.  Drew.  Due  by 
descent  from  Richard  Young,  dec'd.,  to 
whom  same  was  granted,  27  Nov.  1637. 

SYMON  STURGES,  JOHN  SADLER 
&  RICHARD  QUINEY,  of  London, 
Merchants,  4,550  Acs.  Charles  City  Co., 
Aug.  5,  1643,  Page  910.  Commonly 
called  by  the  name  of  Martin  Brandon, 
lying  betwixt  Chippokes  Creek  &  Wards 
Cr.,  bounding  S.  E.  by  E.  upon  Chip- 
pokes  Cr.,  S.  W.  &  N.  W.  upon  the 
Gleab  Land,  W.  S.  W.  upon  lands  of 
Georg  Burcher,  John  Hacker  &  William 
Pilkinton.  Due  by  purchase  from  the 
heirs  of  Capt.  John  Martin,  late  of  Va., 
&  4,050  acs.  confirmed  to  the  sd.  pur- 
chasers by  order  of  the  Grand  Assembly 
in  March  1643  &  500  acs.  order  of 
court  June  9,  1643. 

JOHN  SWEETE,  1,540  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  Sept.  26,  1643,  Page  911. 
Lying  upon  the  E.  br.  of  Blackwater, 
adj.  Francis  England,  Mr.  Justinian 
Cooper  &  N.  towards  Capt.  Peirce. 
Part  by  virtue  of  a  former  patent  &  for 
trans,  of  18  pers.,  10  remaining  due 
upon  last  person  mentioned:  Joseph 
Medlecoe,  Robert  Davis  3  times,  Robert 
Sanin,  twice,  Andrew  Huckle,  Ann 
Farly,  Wm.  Robinson,  Ann  Casson,  Jon. 
Dorsett,  Robert  Trelawney,  Francis 
Shaw,  Robert  Short,  Thomas  Parker,  Rich- 
ard Haines,   twice,   Katherine  his  wife. 

CAPT.  JOHN  UPTON,  700  acs.  up- 
on the  Northermost  side  of  Warras- 
quiake  bay,  Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  31  Oct. 
1643,  p.  911.  300  acs.  being  marsh. 
S.  upon  the  bay,  N.  E.  upon  Hutchin- 
sons  Cr.,  W.  upon  Butchers  Island  Cr. 
&  N.  N.  W.  into  the  woods.  Trans,  of 
14  pers:   Richard  Bayly,  William  Peirce, 


148 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Sackford  Brewster,  Moses  Carse,  Tho- 
mas Kirke,  Francis  Barlee,  John  New- 
ton,   William    Thomas,    Tho.    Walsh, 

Eliza.  Peirce,  Jane  Heath,  Lasley, 

John  Sherlacke,  John  Greene. 

HENRY  WATTS,  157  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  Oct.  18,  1643,  Page  912. 
Being  the  plantation  he  lives  upon,  up- 
on Pagan  Point  Cr.  &  adj.  land  of  Mr. 
Peeter  Knight.  43  acs.  remaining  due. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  Robert  Long,  his 
wife,  Robert  and  John,  his  twoe  sons. 

JAMES  HAWLEY,  300  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  Sept.  28,  1643,  Page  913. 
Upon  the  head  of  the  lower  bay  cr., 
adj.  John  Row.  By  virtue  of  patent, 
dated  22  Apr.  1641. 

ROBERT  BURNETT,  200  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  Sept.  29,  1643,  Page  914. 
Upon  a  br.  of  Seawards  Cr.,  adj.  Nicho- 
las Smith.  Due  by  former  patent,  dated 
3  Apr.  1641. 

RICE  HOE,  Gent.,  1,969  acs.,  Oct. 
18,  1643,  Page  914.  Bounding  E.  upon 
Alice  Edloe,  N.  towards  David  Joanes. 
1,000  acs.  by  virtue  of  2  former  patents 
&  for  trans,  of  20  pers.:  Edward  May, 
Edward  Robinson,  Sarah  Goodwin, 
Robert  Cloud,  Wm.  Ferynes,  Georg 
Standish,  Tho.  Cann,  Alice  Apleton, 
Eliza.  Dam,  Wm.  Morris,  Evan  Roberts, 
Symon  Jennings,  Tho.  Archerday,  Fran- 
cis Baskett,  Wm.  Phillipps,  4  Negroes. 

MR.  JOHN  BISHOPP,  891  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  Oct.  16,  1643,  Page  915. 
Upon  the  head  of  David  Jones'  Cr., 
E.  N.  E.  from  Mr.  Hoes  uppermost 
plantation.  Trans,  of  18  pers.:  Phillipp 
Pendergast,  Robert  Andrew,  Tho.  Hans- 
come,  Eliza.  Sidney,  Symon  Hasleton, 
Joyce  Browne,  William  Andrews,  Ralph 
Lester,  Jeffery  Denchfeild,  Richard 
Smith,  Tho.  Warner,  Adrian  Foord, 
Robert  Taylor,  Symon  Symonds,  John  Bis- 
hopp  his  wife.  Note:  Renewed  in  the 
name  of  Capt.  Thos.  Swann,  8  Apr.  1650. 

SIR  FRANCIS  WYATT,  2,000  acs. 
about  25  mi.  up  the  S.  side  of  Rappa. 
River,  adj.  land  taken  up  and  surveyed 
for  the  use  of  Mr.  John  Gookin,  to 
Episkapanke  Cr.,  Sept.  29,  1643,  Page 
916.    Trans,  of  40  pers.:    John  Cooke, 


Tho.  Hooker,  Margarett  Spuer,  Susan 
Bradford,  Wm.  Johnson,  Roger  Carpen- 
ter, Ferdinando  Bishopp,  Sr.  Francis 
Wyatt,  Michaell  Lapworth,  Tho.  Forke, 
Jon.  Gates,  Christ.  Cooke,  Tho.  Goard- 
lad,  Wm.  Lupo,  Kath.  Spencer,  Edwin 
Wyatt,  Sarah  Stunnerson,  Kath.  Kayupp 
(?),    Robert   Mathews,    Nicho.    Colton, 

Jane  ,  Walter  Aston,  Tho.  Mabb, 

Hen.  Iden,  Edward  Davenport,  Robert 
Martin,  Tho.  Young,  Robert  Westwood, 
Robert  Edwards,  Richard  Morris,  Wm. 
Haywood,  Roger  Andrews,  Eliza.  Dent. 
Richard  Norwood,  Tho.  Bridges,  Robert 
Raynard,  Morris  Halmer,  Mathew  Grif- 
fin, Tho.  Prichard,  Senr. 

THOMAS  BRICE,  150  acs.  Up.  Norf. 
Co.,  Oct.  29,  1643,  Page  917.  Lying  on 
the  Ewd.  side  of  the  N.  W.  Br.  of 
Nansimund  River  against  Indian  Cr., 
adj.  Georg  Chowning  &  Francis  Maul- 
den.  100  acs.  by  former  patent  &  50 
acs.  for  trans,  of:  John  Fisher. 

LT.  WILLIAM  WORLEIDGE,  550 
acs.,  Oct.  16,  1643,  Page  918.  Beg.  at 
Chessnutt  Cr.,  running  S.  W.  to  Re- 
pulse Cr.  unto  mouth  of  Mockjack  Bay. 
Trans,  of  11  pers.:  Georg  Maior, 
Samll.  James,  Wm.  Humphrey,  Richard 
Gill,  Francis  Berry,  Eliza.  Curtis,  Tho- 
mas Rimmington,  John  Tucker,  Christ. 
Isaac,  Robert  Armeson,  Christ.  Keath 
(or  Keach),  Robert  Large. 

MR.  JOHN  HODDIN,  (Hodin)  150 
acs.,  Oct.  17,  1643,  Page  919.  On  a 
cr.  on  the  N.  W.  side  of  Mockjack  Bay. 
Trans,  of  3  pers.:  Thomas  Morrey, 
Charles  Sallett,  Sanders  Murrey. 

SAME.  950  acs.  at  the  head  of  the 
North  River  in  Mockjack  Bay,  Oct.  17, 
1643,  Page  920.  Trans,  of  19  pers.: 
Mary  Thomas,  John  Tompsom,  Hum- 
phry Gum,  Christian  his  wife,  his  owne 
adv.,  Martin  Skinner,  John  Barnes,  Tho. 
Poynter,  Tho.  Fletcher,  Jon.  Fletcher, 
Wm.  Blare,  James  Taylor,  Sanders 
Allen,  John  Burnham,  John  King,  Tho. 
Hopkins,  Tho.  Tompson,  Henry  Thomas. 

WILLIAM  JACOB,  400  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  Oct.  19,  1643,  Page  920. 
Lying  in  the  second  bay  issuing  into 
Lynhaven  River,  adj.  Georg  Keth.  By 
virtue  of  a  patent  for  600  acs.  granted 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


149 


unto  sd.  Jacob  &  Georg  Rutland,  & 
100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Thomas 
Baramus  &  John  White. 

THOMAS  CASSEN,  300  acs.,  Oct. 
17,  1643,  Page  921.  County  not  given. 
Beg.  at  certaine  trees  deviding  this  & 
land  of  Peter  Gaviott  (?)  etc.  Trans, 
of  6  pers:  Thomas  Cassen,  John  Moore, 
Jane  Gilbert,  John  Board,  Richard  Haw- 
ten,  Robert  Brintwell. 

SAME.  400  acs.  Lower  Norf .  Co.,  Oct. 
17,  1643,  Page  922.  Near  land  of  Georg 
Rutland.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Georg  Har- 
wood,  Fr.  Symons,  Henry  Gridwell,  John 
Morris,  Margett  Ralfe,  Tho.  Richards, 
Richard  Lee,  Clemt.  Theboult. 

GEORG  RUTLAND,  300  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  Oct.  19,  1643,  Page  923. 
At  the  head  of  the  second  bay  issuing 
into  Lynhaven  River  &  adj.  Georg  Keth. 
Due  by  virtue  of  a  share  of  a  patent  of 
600  acs.,  2  Mar.  1642,  granted  to  sd. 
Rutland  &  William  Jacob. 

THOMAS  TAYLOR,  Marriner,  350 
acs.  Warwick  River  Co.,  Oct.  23,  1643, 
Page  923.  Butting  S.  W.  upon  War- 
wick River,  bounded  S.  with  Pottash 
Quarter  Cr.  &  on  the  N.  with  Samuell 
Stephens'  land.  300  acs.  due  by  patent 
unto  John  Baynom,  deed.,  Dec.  1,  1624, 
which  sd.  patent  grew  due  unto  Rich- 
ard Tisdall  by  marriage  with  Mary  Bayn- 
ham,  daughter  &  heir  of  sd.  John,  &  by 
Tisdall  assigned  to  sd.  Taylor,  100  acs. 
of  which  300  acs.  was  measured  out  by 
Elizabeth  Lady  Harvye,  &  50  acs.  due  sd 
Taylor  for  trans,  of  Henry  Hitton. 

SAME.  Marriner,  250  acs.  War- 
wicke  Co.,  Oct.  23,  1643,  Page  924. 
Beg.  at  Mr.  Cripps'  land,  parallel  to 
Edward  Willis  &  Lady  Harvy.  Trans, 
of  5  pers:  John  Redicke,  Alice  Mor- 
gan, Arthur  Sergent,  Willi.  Tandy, 
Gabriell   Smith. 

MRS.  ELIZABETH  HULL,  Wid- 
dowe,  850  acs.  lying  on  the  Swd.  side 
of  Potomack  River,  running  S.  W. 
parallel  to  land  of  Christopher  Copeland 
&  S.  E.  unto  land  of  William  Batt. 
Oct.  21,  1643,  Page  925.  Trans,  of  17 
pers:  George  Hull,  per.  adv.,  Eliza,  his 
wife,   Edward   his   son,   David   his   son, 


Sabinia  Jenkins,  Mary  Low,  Jon.  Dae- 
man,  David  Holmes,  Edw.  Mitchell,  Nich. 
Fenman,  Robt.  Phillipps,  Evan  Morris, 
Anth.  Atkins,  Arthur  Donn,  Oliver 
Balfe,  Richard  Workman,  Robt.  Layne. 

WILLIAM  MORGAN,  816  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  Oct.  25,  1643,  Page 
926.  Upon  the  E.  side  of  Chichahominy 
River  upon  the  head  of  Morgans  Cr., 
bounded  by  land  of  Mr.  Filmer  &  Mr. 
William  Edwards.  600  acs.  due  by  virtue 
of  a  former  patent  20  May  1638  &  216 
acs.  for  trans,  of  5  pers.,  34  acs.  remain- 
ing due:  John  Simpson,  John  Wilkinson, 
Ciceley  Young,  Katherine  Jenkins. 

EDWARD  DOBSON,  300  acs.  lying 
on  the  Ewd.  side  of  Yeokomico  River, 
upon  a  branch  of  Mattapony  &  parallel 
to  land  of  Mr.  William  Warder.  Oct. 
19,  1643,  Page  926.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
Katherine  Minor,  Henry  Tane  (or 
Lane),  Tho.  Hunt,  John  Budge,  Bevis 
Belver,  James  Athor. 

CAPT.    WILLIAM    PEIRCE,    2,100 

acs.  beg.  at  the  mouth  of  a  cr.  near  the 
now  dwelling  howse  of  sd.  Peirce,  which 
cr.  divides  this  land  from  Bakers  Necke 
where  the  Church  now  standeth,  along 
James  River  unto  the  old  point,  from 
thence  to  the  water  side  unto  Scotes 
quarter  &  the  great  Marsh  which  divides 
this  land  from  Mulberry  Island,  into 
Meares  Neck  unto  a  certain  oak  marked 
by  Capt.  William  Clayborne  over  aginst 
the  Ewd.  of  Cedar  Island,  up  the  banke 
of  Warwicke  River  &  near  land  of  Capt. 
Thomas  Harwood  to  a  great  oak  marked 
by  Mr.  Hawley.  650  acs.  by  patent  to 
him  dated  31  Dec.  1619,  &  1,450  acs. 
due  for  the  adventure  of  29  pers.* 
Dec.  16,  1643,  Page  927. 

TRISTRAM  NOSWORTHY,  150  acs. 
Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  3  May  1643,  p.  928. 
On  Wwd.  side  of  a  great  marsh  behind 
an  island  called  the  long  ponds  &c. 
Due  for  trans,  of  3  pers:  William 
Webb,  Richard  Hooper,  Antho.  Branch. 

CAPT.   HENRY  BROWNE,   one  of 

his  Majesties  Councell  of  State,  2,450 
acs.  Nov.  2,  1643,  Page  929.  Beg.  at 
the  4  Mile  Tree,  ending  in  a  swamp  to 
the  Wwd.  of  Capt.  Fludds  howse,  then 
down    parallel    to    the    bank    of    James 


150 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


River  unto  the  sd.  tree.  2,000  acs.  due 
by  order  of  court  dated  Dec.  12,  1634 
&  450  acs.  by  purchase  in  1634  of  the 
Overseers  of  the  last  will  of  John  Smith, 
Planter,  deed.,  &  200  acs.  for  trans,  of 
4  pers.* 

GEORG  LEVITT,  1,000  acs.  near  the 
head  of  the  North  River  in  Mockjack 
Bay,  near  land  of  Richard  Bayly  &  John 
Hoddin.  Oct.  19,  1643,  Page  930. 
Trans,  of  20  pers:  Alice  his  wife,  John 
Jenings,  Robert  Tibaults,  Elias  Degaris, 
Tho.  Tabb,  Franc.  Cherry,  Jone  Hobbs, 
Daniell  Thorpe,  Willi.  Tompson,  Theo- 
dor  Moyses,  Jon.  Weeks,  Nath.  Wil- 
sonn,  Jon.  Jones,  Richard  Cooke,  Geo. 
Wharton,  Mary  Fowler,  Eliza,  his  wife, 
Robert  her  sonn,  His  (sd  Levitt)  owne 
per.  adv.  twice. 

v  WILLIAM  WARDER,  550  acs.  lying 
on  the  S.  E.  side  of  Yokomoco  River, 
beg.  upon  Potomack  River  side,  parallel 
to  land  of  Thomas  Picknar  (orTicknar). 
Oct.  19,  1643,  Page  931.  Trans,  of  11 
pers:  Katherine  Cross,  Thomas  Richard- 
son, Richard  Babister,  Tho.  Buller, 
Benj.  Rugg,  Charles  Minifie,  Phillipp 
Silvester,  Wm.  Butcher,  James  Porter, 
Tho.  Shirle,  Roger  Sillito. 

MR.  PHILLIPP  BENNETT,  515  acs. 
Up.  Norf.  Co.,  Dec.  20,  1643,  Page  932. 
Lying  on  the  E.  side  of  Bennetts  Cr., 
near  land  of  Richard  Bennett  &  Epa- 
phroditus  Lawson.  Trans,  of  11  pers: 
John  Hodges,  Silvester  Baker,  Tho. 
Harwood,  John  Boid,  William  Turner, 
William  Harris,  Jon.  Robinson,  Tho. 
Chaddworth,  Jon.  Symons,  Jon.  Rich- 
ards, James  Ahoshew  (?). 

JAMES  MERRYMAN,  100  acs. 
Charles  City  Co.,  Dec.  20,  1643,  Page 
933.  Called  by  the  name  of  Martin 
Brandon,  opposite  against  Weyanoake, 
N.  E.  upon  the  Gleab  land.  Trans,  of 
2  pers:  James  Merryman  &  Ann 
Merryman. 

JOHN  CARTER,  300  acs.  Up.  Norf. 
Co.,  Dec.  22,  1643,  Page  934.  Upon 
the  Wwd.  side  of  the  Southern  br.  of 
Nansamund  River  over  against  land  of 
Mr.  Thomas  Dew  &  near  land  of  Wil- 
liam Tucker.    Trans,   of  6  pers:    Mor- 


gan Williams,  Rich.  Parker,  Robert 
Peirce,  Thomas  Norrice,  Israeli  Harris, 
Hen.  Bartholmew. 

WILLIAM  FOSTER,  250  acs.,  Jan. 
6,  1643,  Page  934.  Near  land  of  Tho- 
mas Woodhowse  &  John  Troyes.  By 
virtue  of  a  joint  patent  dated  23  May 
1642  with  Georg  Adkins  who  assigned 
his  moyete  to  sd  Foster. 

PHILLIPP  TAYLOR,  1,000  acres  in 
Northampton  Co.,  Dec.  19,  1643,  Page 
935.  On  the  Seaboard  side,  running 
Northward  to  the  broad  creek.  500  acs. 
due  by  order  of  court  dated  14  Oct. 
1640  &  500  for  trans,  of  20  pers:  Hen. 
Robinson,  Lawrance  White,  William 
Dickens,  Phillipp  Taylor,  Senr.,  Jane 
Taylor,  James  Oldum,  Pearcy  his  wife, 
John  Allen,  Peeter  Cooper,  Francis 
Brice,  Eliz.  Oldum,  Wm.  Casteele,  Tho. 
Barfeild,  Tho.Colkbrand,  Rebecca  Bayly, 
Tho.  Smith,  Thomas  Willis,  Sarah 
Morris,  Jon.  Cakebread,  Eliza.  Sanders. 

CESAR  PUGGETT,  800  acs.  Low. 
Norf.   Co.,   Dec.    19,    1643,   Page  936. 

On  the  N.  side  of  Kirdy  branch.  Trans, 
of  16  pers:  John  Hatton,  Marke  Gina, 
Eliza.  Oliver,  Wm.  Polewheele,  Wm. 
Hadwell,  Jacob  Fybill,  Grace  Hardwin, 
John  Peirce,  Tho.  Price,  Susan  Shepard, 
Eliz.  Clewley,  Walter  Wells,  Rich. 
Jackson,  William  Cole,  Robert  Towne- 
send. 

SILVESTER  THACKER  &  AN- 
THONY FULLIAMB,  100  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  Oct.  22,  1643,  Page  937. 
Lying  upon  Pagan  Point  Bay,  E.  upon 
land  of  Mr.  Thomas  Davis  &  S.  upon 
Mr.  John  Mahoone.  Trans,  of  2  pers: 
John  Cockett  &  Sarah  Robinson. 

HENRY  BRADLEY,  450  acs.  of  land 
named  Rainworth,  Up.  Norf.  Co.,  Dec. 
21,  1643,  Page  938.  At  the  head  of  the 
main  br.  of  New  towne  haven  river,  adj. 
Humphry  Scowen  &  Peter  Ray.  350  acs. 
by  assignment  of  2  patents  from  sd. 
Scowen  to  whom  it  was  assigned  by 
John  Allen,  being  first  granted  to  Sarah 
Cloydon,  Widdow,  and  100  acs.  for 
trans,  of  2  pers:  William  Burton  & 
John  Bruton. 


Patent  Book  No.  1 — Part  II. 


151 


RICHARD  BELL,  560  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  Apr.  10,  1642,  Page  939.  Ly- 
ing near  the  head  of  Checkeroes  Cr., 
towards  land  of  Georg  Vinon  (or 
Union),  adj.  Mr.  Robert  Holt. 

ROBERT  HOLT  of  Chichahominy 
Parish  in  Va.,  Merchant,  to  RICHARD 
BELL,  Planter,  of  the  same  parish,  60 
acres  of  land  lying  at  the  head  of 
Checkeroes  Cr.  Deed  of  Guift.  Oct.  2, 
1640,  Page  940.  Witnesses:  Tho. 
Womb  well  &  John  Phipps. 

MR.  ZACHARIAH  CRIPPS,  17  acs., 
being  a  neck  of  land,  lying  at  the  mouth 
of  Warwick  River,  bounded  on  the  S.  E. 
side  with  James  River,  Jan.  10,  1643, 
Page  940.  33  acs.  remaining  due,  for 
trans,  of  John  Herricke  (Herick). 

EPHAPHRODITUS  LAWSON,  450 
acs.  Up.  Norf.  Co.,  Jan.  9,  1643,  Page 
941.  Lying  on  W.  side  of  Mount  Law- 
son  Bay  Cr.,  adj.  land  of  Moore  Fontle- 
roy  &  Tristram  Nosworthy.  Due  for 
trans,  of  9  pers.,  &  also  by  assignment 
from  John  Carter,  to  whom  it  was  as- 
signed by  Peeter  Mountegue:  Walter 
Bishopp,  Edward  Roberts,  Richard 
Mathews,  Peter  Freind,  Geo.  Seeker, 
John  Newby,  Richard  Webb,  Angell 
Lesting. 

THOMAS  DEW,  Gent.,  750  acs.  Up. 
Norf.  Co.,  Jan.  8,  1643,  Page  942.  Up- 
on the  Ewd.  side  of  the  Swd.  br.  of 
Nansamund  River,  beg.  at  the  mouth  of 
Craney  Cr.  opposite  to  2  small  islands 
called  Craney  &  New  haven  river,  & 
adj.  Mr.  Randall  Crew.  300  acs.  by 
former  patent  &  450  acs.  due  for  trans, 
of  9  pers.:  His  own  per.  adv.,  Georg 
Speevy,  William  Broughton,  Robert 
Fleming,  Samuell  JefTery,  Henry 
Browne,  John  Corne,  Elizabeth  Tock- 
wood. 

TOBY  SMITH,  650  acs.  of  land 
called  Humberston,  Warwick  River  Cr., 
Jan.  10,  1643,  Page  943.  Upon  the 
head  of  the  back  river  called  Smith's 
Foard,  adj.  Thomas  Faulkner  &  towards 
Thomas  Bouldings  land.  Due  by  former 
patent,  dated  14  Feb.  1640. 

MR.  HENRY  HAWLEY,  50  acs. 
Elizabeth    (City)    Co.,    Oct.    20,    1643, 


Page  944.  Bounded  on  the  N.  by  the 
Glybe  &  on  W.  by  Hampton  River.  Due 
for  trans,  of  Thomas  Hatchway. 

ROBERT  HAYES,  450  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  Sept.  28,  1643,  Page  944. 
Beg.  to  the  Wwd.  of  the  dwelling  howse 
of  Robert  Hayes,  opposite  Wm.  Samuel 
(?)  house,  and  running  to  a  Cr.  divid- 
ing this  and  land  of  Wm.  Saucer  (?). 
Trans,  of  9  pers.*  Memo  attached: 
"The  severall  names  I  cannot  reade  they 
are  soe  defaced." 

CAPT.  ROBERT  HUTCHINSON, 
V/i  acs.  James  City  Island,  Feb.  22, 
1643.  Page  944.  Said  land  anciently 
belonging  to  Samll.  Mole,  bounded  S. 
upon  the  river,  N.  towards  Pasby  Hayes, 
W.  upon  Jno.  Osborne  &  towards  the 
State  Howse.    Fee  Rent:    1  Capon. 

JNO.  BATT,  526  acs.  James  City 
Co.,  Nov.  7,  1643,  Page  944.  Lying  at 
the  head  of  the  Easternmost  br.  of  Back 
River  called  Drinking  Swamp  or  Otter- 
dam  Swamp,  N.  W.  upon  Walter 
Cooper,  N.  E.  upon  Mr.  Secretary  Kemp 
&  S.  E.  towards  Geo.  Malen.  Trans,  of 
11  pers.,  24  acs.  remaining  due:  Jno. 
Dawby,  Eliz.  Dawby,  Dorothy  Batt,  Jno. 
Smyth,  Marg.  or  Mary  Atkinson,  Jno. 
Gladston,  Humph.  Tree,  Rich,  ap  Rich., 
Rich.  Simson,  Garret  Bryan. 

ENSIGNE  THOMAS  KEELING,  200 
acs.  Low  Norf.  Co.,  alias  Lynhaven, 
Nov.  9,  1643,  Page  945.  Near  Fran. 
Land's  plantation.  Trans,  of  4  pers.* 
Note:  "The  severall  names  I  cannot 
reade  they  are  soe  defaced." 

LT.  FRANCIS  MASON,  200  acs. 
Low.  New  Norf.  Co.,  Sept.  29,  1643, 
Page  945.  (Record  partially  destroyed). 
Mentions  Jno.  Holmes  howse,  towards 
Gyles  Collings.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Tho. 
Ward,  Robert  Penn  (?),  Oliver  Craftt, 
Joyce  Wiser. 

SETH  WARD,  350  acs.  Henrico  Co., 
Nov.  22,  1643,  Page  946.  N.  N.  W. 
up  the  2  Mi.  Cr.,  S.  S.  W.  over  against 
Varina,  E.  S.  E.  upon  3  Myle  Swamp, 
extending  towards  4  Myle  Cr.  & 
bounded  at  the  end  with  a  running 
brook  called  roundabout.  150  acs.  by 
former  patent,  50  acs.  by  purchase  from 


152 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Jno.  Baker  &  150  acs.  for  trans,  of  3 
pers.:  Jno.  Wilkeson,  Robt.  Fleete,  Jno. 
Miller. 

JOSEPH  CROSHAWE,  350  acs.  on 
the  S.  end  of  the  Indian  Feild,  parallel 
with  his  own  land  until  it  meets  with 
the  land  of  Capt.  Jno.  West.  Due  sd. 
Crowshaw  for  trans,  of  7  pers.:  Jno. 
Pratt,  Mary  Green,  Richd.  Croshaw,  Jos. 
Mesell,  Wm,  Large.  (2  names  de- 
stroyed). Oct.  19,  1643,  P.  946.  (Re- 
cord partially  destroyed.) 

JOHN  FOSTER,  300  acs.  Northamp- 
ton Co.,  Oct.  23,  1643,  Page  947.  At 
the  seaboard  side,  bounded  on  the  S.  by 
Mountwrys  (or  Mountneys)  Cr.  Trans. 
of  6  pers.:  John  Foster,  Bridgett  his 
wife,  Geo.  Exton,  Francis  Spencer, 
Richard  Watkins,  Gyles  Hewet. 

MR.  OBEDIENCE  ROBINS,  2,000 
acs.  Accomac  Co.,  Nov.  2,  1643,  Page 
947.  Adj.  land  of  Mr.  Wilkins,  John 
Major,  Mr.  Taylor  &  his  own  land. 
Due  by  virtue  of  former  patent,  dated 
3  Dec.  1640. 

JOHN  MAJOR,  200  acs.,  Northampton 
Co.,  Nov.  10,  1643,  Page  947.  On  the 
N.  side  of  Nuswattocks  Cr.,  part  there- 
of entitled  the  Sandy  point.  Due  by 
former  patent,  dated  30  Jan.  1640. 

MR.  JOHN  WILKINS,  600  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  Page  948.  (No 
date).  On  the  Seaboard  side,  adj.  Mr. 
Robins,  Longborough  Branch  &  land  of 
John  Waltham.  By  virtue  of  former 
patent,  dated  8  Dec.  1640. 

WILLIAM  BERRYMAN,  800  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  Page  948.  Bounded 
on  the  N.  by  a  branch  of  Nuswattocks 
Cr.  &  land  of  Francis  Martyn,  on  the  S. 
by  John  Tolston  &  on  W.  by  Garrett 
Andrews.  Due  for  trans,  of  10  pers:  & 
by  assignment  of  300  acs.  by  Christo- 
pher Kirke,  dated  Oct.  20,  1640:  Jonah 
Jackson,  Robt.  Jackson,  Jane  Jackson, 
Tho.  Stanton,  Millecent  Cole,  Arthur 
Emerson,  Edmund  Prince,  Jno.  Free- 
horne,  Abraham  Kelly,  Wm.  Peirce. 

JOHN  MAJOR,  400  acs.  Northamp- 
ton Co.,  Sept.  4,   1643,  Page  948.    At 


Nuswattocks  Cr.    Due  by  former  patent, 
dated  10  Sept.  1640. 

MR.  THOMAS  SYMONDS,  800  acs., 
Oct.  18,  1643,  Page  949.  Beg.  at  the 
head  of  John  Terryes  &  Wm.  Larke's 
land  above  the  head  of  St.  Michaells 
Cr.,  parallel  to  Christmas  land,  N.  N.  E. 
to  George  Worldridge  before  Graves 
Creek,  E.  to  Snare  Cr.  By  virtue  of 
former  patent,  dated  8  Jan.  1639.  Note: 
The  following  names  appear  under  this 
record:  Dorothy  Castle,  James  Craven, 
Wm.  Meadwell,  Richd.  Hughes,  Geo. 
Smith,  Wm.  Batts,  Robt.  Coleman,  Tho. 
Warne,  Henry  Batts,  Robt.  Auley, 
Richd.  Drue,  Tho.  Andrews,  Wm. 
Blettsoe,  Walter  Warship,  Elinor  Deane, 
Anth.  Hayes. 

BENJAMIN  HARRYSON,  Gent., 
500  acs.  James  City  Co.,  March  21, 
1643,  Page  949.  On  the  S.  side  of 
James  River,  on  the  Southerly  side  of 
Round  Island  Swamp.  Due  for  trans,  of 
10  pers.:  Watkin  Downes,  John  Hely, 
Tho.  Brooks,  Mary  Burges,  Wm.  Smith, 
Tho.  Smith,  Sarah  Harding,  John  Davis, 
Jno.  Clay,  Peter  ,  Negro. 

SAMLL.  ABBOTT,  Gent.,  400  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  Apr.  10,  1644,  Page 
950.  Near  the  head  of  Grays  Cr.,  adj. 
land  of  Mr.  John  Corker,  S.  E.  upon 
Smiths  Fort  Cr.  Sd.  land  was  formerly 
granted  unto  Thomas  Gray  &  made  void 
by  not  planting  or  seating  the  same. 
Due  sd.  Abbott  for  trans,  of  8  pers: 
Hen.  Hawkins,  Wm.  Johnson,  John 
Johnson,  Wm.  Long,  Richd.  Philcock, 
Tho.  Harris,  James  White,  Eldred 
Thompson. 

PIERCE  LENNON,  200  acs.  Charles 
City  Co.,  Feb.  28,  1642,  Page  951. 
Between  2  creeks  of  Martin  Brandon, 
near  mouth  of  Wards  Cr.,  opposite 
against  Wayonoak  Marsh,  adj.  James 
Merryman.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Pierce 
Lennon,  Rebecca  his  wyfe,  Edmund 
Lennon,  Wm.  Russell. 

(Note:  On  the  last  page,  or  end 
sheet,  appears  the  following  inscrip- 
tion: ) 

This  Booke  was  Transcribed 
by       Edward  Harrison 
in  the  yeare   1683 


Patent  Book  No.  2. 


By  Sir  William  Berkeley,  Knight,  Governor,  &c. 


EDWD.  MURFREY  &  JOHN 
VAUGHAN,  1,200  acs.  upon  South- 
ward side  of  Potomack  River,  on  the 
Eastermost  side  of  Cedar  Island  Creek. 
24  Feb.  1643.  Page  1.  Trans,  of  24 
pers:    Thomas    Denham,    Eliz.    Taylor. 

Eliz.    ,    Win.    Sorwell,    Eliza,    his 

wife,    Fra.    Harrison,    John    Readwood, 
Wm.     Barrington,     Isaac    Jones,     Eliz. 

Wotter,  Robt.  ,  John  Povey,  Edw. 

Samuell,    Tho.    Anderson,    Ann    Frank- 

lind,  Ann  Franklaine,  Henry ,  Jone 

Reeves,  Tho.  Proper,  James  Sams,  Mary 
Griffin,  Crough. 

THOMAS  WOODHOUSE,  200  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  24  Mar.  1644,  Page  1. 
Upon  the  Southerly  side  of  James  River, 
about  2  mi.  from  the  river,  N.  E.  upon 
land  of  Henry  Short  (or  Hart).  Due 
by  virtue  of  former  patent,  dated  20 
Mar.  1640,  for  the  same  land. 

WILLIAM  MILLS,  450  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  Feb.  10,  1643,  Page  2.  Up- 
on the  maine  head  of  the  lower  bay 
creek.  Sd.  land  surveyed  &  proved  due 
by  Nathaniell  White,  dec'd.,  for  trans, 
of  9  persons,  &  due  sd.  Mills  by  inter- 
marrying with  the  relict  of  sd.  White. 
Pers.  trans,  by  White:  Richard  Davis, 
Edwd.  Walker,  Eliza.  Nitingale,  Danll. 
Jenkins,  Samll.  Burnett,  &  4  pers.  more 
from  the  County  Court  of  tlr*  Isle  of 
Wight    due    but    noe    name    expressed. 

JOHN  NEWMAN,  150  acs.,  James 
City  Co.,  1st  Apr.  1644,  Page  2.  Near 
the  head  of  Smiths  Fort  Cr.,  W.  upon 
Xpher.  Lawson,  E.  upon  John  Buckmas- 
ter.  Said  land  first  granted  unto  Stephen 
Thompson,  Dec.  16,  1637,  by  him  as- 
signed unto  John  Saind,  by  him  assigned 
unto  John  Rawlins,  by  him  unto  Rich- 
ard Harris,  by  him  unto  John  Esgrame, 
by  him  unto  said  Newman. 


STEPHEN  TAYLOR,  200  acs.  Hamp- 
ton Parish,  at  the  head  of  the  Norther- 
most  br.  of  St.  Andrews  Cr.,  10  Apr. 
1644,  Page  3.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Stephen 
Taylor,  wife  Margarett,  Edwd.  Rendrick 
(Kendrick  ?),  Wm.  Praise. 

THOMAS  STAINOE,  62  acs.  called 
the  Chestnutt  Neck,  adj.  Garrett  Ste- 
phens, parallel  to  land  of  Xpofer.  Bare. 
Trans,  of  2  persons:  John  Parkes,  Benja. 
Tenner.  Assigned  to  him  by  Ann  Moore, 
wife  and  attorney  of  Joseph  Moore.  13 
June  1642,  p.   3. 

JEREMIAH  CLEMENT,  200  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  Jan.  10,  1643,  Page  4. 
On  Swd.  side  of  James  River,  at  the 
upper  Chipoake,  E.  upon  his  former 
devident  &  W.  upon  land  of  Thomas 
Wixe.  Importation  of  4  pers:  Amey 
Clements,  Richard  Boore,  Ezekiel  Cle- 
ment, Richd.  . 

JOHN  HILL,  Gent.,  200  acs.  Upper 
Norfolke,  Apr.  1,  1644,  Page  4.  Upon 
Ewd.  side  of  N.  W.  br.  of  Nansimond 
River,  adj.  William  Eyres.  Due  by  as- 
signment from  Apha.  Lawson  for  trans, 
of  4  pers.:  his  own  per.  adv.,  Mr.  Wm. 
Hill  twice,  Robt.  Tows. 

JOHN  HILL,  Gent.,  400  acs.  Up. 
Norfolke,  Co.,  Apr.  2,  1644,  Page  5. 
On  W.  br.  of  Nansimond  Riv.,  about 
the  head  of  sd.  br.,  near  John  Stalls. 
Due  by  assignment  from  Epha.  Lawson 
&  for  trans,  of  8  pers.:  Edward  Allen, 
Ralph  Thamnes,  George  Turner,  Jno. 
Brook's,  Francis  Vaughan,  Edward 
Vaughan,  William  Rolles,  Robt.  Yenny. 

WILLIAM  BROOKE,  250  acs.  Up. 
Norf.  Co.,  Feb.  24,  1643,  Page  6.  Ewd. 
side  of  the  Swd.  or  mayne  br.  of  Nansi- 
mond Riv.  being  the  Indian  Town  beg. 
by  the  main  br.  side  in  an  Indian  feild, 


154 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


etc.    Trans,  of  5  pers:  his  wife,  2  chil- 
dren, James  Cicks,  Ann  Davis. 

MR.  MOORE  FANTLEROY,  1,400 
acs.  Up.  Norf.  Co.,  Feb.  20,  1643,  Page 
6.  On  the  N.  W.  side  of  Beverly  Cr., 
etc.,  to  Otterhole  Br.,  etc.,  running  E. 
by  S.  etc.  to  a  gutt  on  Mount  Lawsons 
Bay,  etc.,  S.  W.  through  Poplar  Neck 
Cr.,  etc.  Due  as  follows:  200  acs.  by 
patent  unto  John  Lewin,  deed.,  20  July 
1639,  assigned  by  Thos.  Lewin,  brother 
&  heir  to  sd.  John;  200  acs.  by  patent  to 
Tristrum  Noseworthy,  June  5,  1639,  by 
him  assigned  to  sd.  Fantleroye,  &  1,000 
acs.  for  trans,  of  20  pers:  George  Fantle- 
roy,  Richard  Lee,  John  Bayley,  Richard 
Ellit,  Richard  Mercer,  Joane  Ball,  John 
Lloyd,  Evan  Burgen,  Wm.  Freeland, 
Ann  Perry,  Martin,  Negro,  Francis 
Marsh,  Lewis  Marsh,  John  Marsh,  John 
King,  Richard  Andrew,  Joan  Stanny, 
Javis  Bell,  Edward  Gee,  Moore  Fantle- 
roy,  his  2nd.  trans. 

MOORE  FANTLEROY,  250  acs. 
called  Royes  rest,  Up.  Norf.  Co.,  Feb. 
20,  1643.  Page  8.  Upon  New  Town 
"have  been,"  commonly  called  Chuck- 
tuck,  beginning  at  the  mouth  of  a  cr.  or 
br.  called  Tentford,  adj.  Epha.  Lawson, 
etc.  200  acs.  due  by  appraisement  from 
Mareen  Delamde  (?)  of  a  patent  of 
Oct.  16,  1638,  &  50  acs.  for  trans,  of 
Moore  Fantleroy. 

CAPT.  HENRY  BROWN,  ESQR., 
900  acs.  James  City  Co.,  Feb.  25,  1643, 
Page  8.  Beginning  at  Journing  poynt 
Cr.,  somewhat  lower  than  plantation 
seated  by  Mr.  Francis  Fowler,  &  from 
the  mouth  of  same  to  land  of  Mathew 
Edlowe,  etc.  Due  by  the  will  of  Mrs. 
Antonia  Fowler,  the  late  relict  of  Mr. 
Francis  Fowler,  being  part  of  a  devdt. 
due  sd.  Fowler  by  patent  dated  Aug.  14, 
1639;  also  due  sd.  Brown  by  order  of 
court  dated  Nov.  21,  1643. 

WILLIAM  WILKINSON,  Minister 
of  the  word  of  God,  100  acs.  Eliza. 
City  Co.,  June  21,  1644,  Page  9.  In  or 
neare  Buckerowe,  adj.  land  lately  in 
possession  of  George  Chowinge,  now 
Capt.  Wm.  Claiborne's,  towards  land 
late  in  tenure  of  Doctor  Casvert  (Cal- 
vert ?)    now  in  possession  of  Anthony 


Elliot  and  Wm.  Leighe  (changed  to 
Leithe)  near  Point  Comfort  Cr.  Due 
for  trans,  of:  Henry  Herrick  &  Ann 
Herick,  his  wife,  by  certificate  from  the 
Court  of  Eliz.  City,  Sept.  23,  1642  & 
transferred  to  sd.  Wilkinson  under  the 
hand  of  sd.  Herick  Sept.  12,  1643. 

By  Richard  Kemp,  Esq. 

JOHN  WATSON,  1  acre,  James 
City,  23rd  (or  28)  August,  1644,  Page 
10.  Near  the  Brewere  poynt,  near  land 
of  Mr.  Thomas  Stegg  &  Isaac  Wattson. 
Due  by  virtue  of  an  Act  of  Assembly. 

MR.  JOHN  WHITE,  1  acre,  James 
City,  Aug.  28,  1644,  Page  10.  Bounded 
W.  upon  the  Church  Yard,  East  upon 
land  appertaining  to  the  State  House, 
North  towards  land  of  Mr.  Thomas 
Hampton  &  South  upon  James  River. 
Due  by  virtue  of  Act  of  Assembly  Mar. 
2,  1642.  Required  to  build  within  6 
months  after  the  date  hereof.  Fee  Rent: 
1  Capon. 

RICHARD  SANDERS,  1  acre,  James 
Citty,  Aug.  28,  1644,  Page  11.  Neare 
the  Blockhouse  bounded  W.  upon  the 
river,  E.  upon  the  marsh,  N.  upon  the 
blockhouse  land  &  S.  upon  land  of 
Edward    Challes.    Fee   Rent:    1    Capon. 

RICHARD  BROOKS,  1  acr.  in  James 
Citty,  Aug.  28,  1644,  Page  11.  Bounded 
N.  upon  the  Doctors  Swamp,  S.  upon 
the  Gallowes  Swamp  toward  the  back 
river  &  W.  towards  James  River.  Same 
as  above.    Fee  Rent:    1  Capon. 

RADULPH  SPRAGGON,  1  acr.  in 
James  Citty,  Aug.  18,  1644,  Page  11. 
S.  upon  land  of  Geo.  Gilbert,  E.  to- 
wards Mr.  Hampton,  etc.    As  above. 

EDWARD  CHALLIS,  1  acr.  James 
Citty,  Aug.  28,  1644,  Page  12.  W.  up- 
on the  river,  E.  upon  the  marsh,  N.  up- 
on the  blockhouse  land  &  S.  towards 
land   of  Radolph  Spraggon.    As   above. 

WALTER  ASTON,  Gent.,  250  acs. 
Chas.  Citty  Co.,  p.12.  (No  date.)  W. 
on  the  great  river,  E.  on  the  plantation 
of  Causeys  Care  (Cleare  ?),  S.  on  land 
of  Capt.  Epps  (in  the  Island)  &  N.  on 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


155 


land  of  Robert  Martyn.  Granted  by 
order  of  court  15  Oct.  1641  &  alsoe  due 
for  trans,  of  5  pers:  John  Baily,  John 
Bull,  Hen.  Bradshall,  Eliza.  Vaughan, 
Judith  Settle.    (By  Wm.  Berkley.) 

ROBERT  LAWRENCE,  200  acs.  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  Sept.  12,  1644.  Page  12. 
Upon  Eastermost  side  of  Lownes  Cr., 
adj.  Mr.  Hardings  land,  and  along  land 
of  Widdow  Bennett.  Due  by  patent 
dated  Aug.  25,  1642  for  trans,  of  4 
pers.* 

TOBY  SMYTH,  Gent.,  150  acs.  Up. 
Norf.  Co.,  Sept.  25,  1644.  Page  13. 
Upon  the  W.  side  of  Nansimond  Riv., 
35  acs.  called  Raming  Island,  the  rest 
being  marsh  &  adj.  the  island  opposite 
land  of  Francis  Maldin,  bounded  Ewd. 
with  Dumpling  Island  Cr.,  which  parts 
it  from  land  of  William  Parker.  Due 
for  trans,  of  3  persons,  2  of  whom  are 
mentioned:  Joane  Corraway  (or  Carra- 
way)  &  Thomas  Wilkins. 

TOBY  SMITH,  650  acs.  called  Hum- 
berton,  Warwick  Co.,  Sept.  10,  1644, 
Page  13.  Upon  the  head  of  the  back 
river  called  Smiths  foard  being  behind 
&  adj.  to  the  westward  devident  of  Tho- 
mas Faulkner,  and  adj.  Thomas  Bould- 
ing.  Due  sd.  Smith  by  patent  dated 
Feb.  15,  1640  for  his  per.  adv.  &  trans. 
of  12  pers.* 

THOMAS  FAWKNER  aged  43 
yeares  or  there  abouts  sworne  saith  that 
about  February  last  was  twelve  months 
to  Mr.  Smiths  p(ro)  cured  Thomas  Brise 
a  Surveyor  of  land  to  come  to  Nansi- 
mond quarter  for  to  survey  a  parcell  of 
land  there  neare  adjoyning  called  the 
name  of  Round  Pond  which  land  the 
said  Smith  then  claimed  to  be  rightly 
belonging  to  him,  and  this  depont.  be- 
ing in  company  with  the  said  Smith  and 
Brice  and  assisting  the  said  Brice  to 
survey  the  land,  one  Thomas  Stephens 
came  unto  them  about  such  time  as  the 
one  fourth  part  of  the  land  was  sur- 
veyed, and  p(ro)hibited  the  survey 
thereof  any  further  alleidging  that  the 
land  was  his  whereupon  the  said 
Smith  and  the  Surveyor  answered  and 
said  that  if  the  said  Stephens  had  any 
better  title  or  grant  then  Mr.  Smith  had 


then  the  land  should  be  his  and  fur- 
ther the  said  Smith  requested  Thomas 
Stephens  that  if  he  had  any  grant  there- 
of hee  wishing  him  to  show  it  p(ro)- 
mising  that  if  it  could  be  made  thereby 
to  appeare  that  he  had  any  right  to  the 
land  the  said  Smith  would  desist  and 
meddle  not  farther  therewith,  but  the 
said  Stephens  did  not  shew  him  any  at 
all,  only  he  alleidged  that  he  had  and 
order  of  Court  for  Land  but  did  not 
shew  it  neither  though  he  was  requested 
thereto  by  the  said  Smith  and  by  the 
said  Surveyor  and  more  saith  not.  30 
May,  1642.    Page  14. 

JOHN  SYDNEY,  Gent.,  200  acs. 
Lower  Norf.  Co.,  Sept.  16,  1644,  Page 

15.  Upon  Nwd.  side  of  E.  br.  of  Eliz. 
River.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  John  Curra- 
way,  John  Clarke,  Ann  Robinson,  Eliza. 
Flowerday. 

ELIZABETH  HARMER,  1,200  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  Sept.  17,  1644,  Page 

16.  Daughter  &  sole  heir  of  Mr. 
Charles  Harmer.  Beg.  at  the  S.  side  of 
a  br.  of  the  old  Plantation  Cr.,  bounded 
on  the  W.  by  the  mayne  bay,  S.  by 
Magetty  Bay  pond,  &  E.  by  land  of  Mr. 
Nathanll.  Littleton.  1,050  acs.  due  by 
patent  dated  June  4,  1635  unto  her 
father,  &  150  acs.  for  trans,  of  3  pers: 
Tho.  Cole,  John  Stonner,  Tho.  Symmons. 

EDWYN  CONAWAY,  Clarke, 
(Clerk),  500  acs.  Northampton  Co., 
Oct.  8,  1644,  Page  17.  At  Hungers  Cr., 
E.  upon  land  of  Richard  Smith.  Trans, 
of  10  pers:  Wm.  Burrell,  Elizabeth  his 
wife,  Fra.  Harison,  Richard  Fixmus,  Ja. 
Landwood,  John  Powell,  Eliza.  Potter, 
Edward  Daniell.  Note:  Mr.  Burrell 
have  assigned  his  write  to  Edwyn  Cona- 
way  this  8th  of  October  1644.  Thomas 
Knight,  Mary  Knight,  Richard  Lathberry. 
(This  patent  renewed  July  22,  1645  in 
the  name  of  John  Severne. 

EDWARD  MAJOR,  450  acs.  Up. 
Norf.  Co.,  Oct.  4,  1644,  Page  17.  Att 
Nansimond  River,  S.  W.  upon  Majors 
Cr.,  adj.  land  claimed  by  Olliver  Sprye. 
Due  by  patent  (but  misbounded)  dated 
18th  of  May,  1637,  for  trans,  of  9  pers.* 

RICHARD  LEE,  Gent.,  91  acs.  Yorke 
Co.,  Dec.  2,  1644,  Page  18.    Upon  the 


156 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


ridge  of  the  new  Poquoson  towards 
Yorke,  sideing  by  the  verry  corner  tree 
of  Capt.  Wormleys.    Trans,  of  2  pers.* 

JAMES  TAYLOR  &  LAWRENCE 
BAKER,  500  acs.  James  City  Co.,  Mar. 
6,  1644,  Page  18.  Called  Hogg  Island 
Mayne,  formerly  granted  to  Thomas 
Stamp  May  12,  1640.  Due  for  trans,  of 
10  pers.:  Richard  Colles,  Dilly  Young, 
Jo.  Humpries,  Jno.  Marshall,  John  Car- 
ter, Marry  Middleton,  Richard  Shepperd, 
Hester  Jones,  Mary  Yates,  John  Huck- 
ley. 

MR.  TRISTRAM  NOSWORTHY, 
670  acs.  Up.  Norf.  Co.,  Dec.  6,  1645, 
Page  19.  In  the  mayne  river  behind 
Rugged  Island  Cr.,  down  by  a  great 
marsh  on  Mount  Lawsons  Bay,  etc.,  to 
an  oyster  poynt  on  the  Rich  Island,  etc., 
along  the  New  Town  haven  river  Bay, 
crossing  Cannada  Island  Cr.  Said  land 
commonly  known  by  the  name  of  the 
Ragged  Islands.  100  acs.  hereof  former- 
ly granted  to  John  Smith,  Aug.  20, 
1633  &  purchased  of  sd.  Smith;  50  acs. 
by  patent  to  Nosworthy  dated  May  10, 
1638  &  the  residue  for  the  trans,  of 
9  pers.* 

THOMAS  SYMONS,  450  acs.  Charles 
River  Co.,  Nov.  25,  1637,  Page  20. 
Butting  upon  footeball  quarter  Cr.,  adj. 
his  own  plantation,  land  of  William 
Freeman  &  Andrew  Huntington.  And 
what  that  parcell  shall  want  of  450  acs. 
is  to  be  supplyed  between  the  plantation 
of  Gilbert  Symonds  and  the  sd.  Thomas 
Symons,  etc.  Trans,  of  9  pers.*  (By 
Sir  John  Harvey.) 

Assignment  of  the  above  unto  THO- 
MAS KIRBYE,  Planter,  Dec.  28,  1642, 
Page  21.  Witnesses:  Peter  Ransome 
&  Edward  Bereman. 

THOMAS  DAVIS,  300  acs.  Up. 
Norf.  Co.,  Aug.  10,  1644,  Page  21.  Up- 
on a  br.  of  Newtown  haven  river  called 
Beverley  Cr.,  adj.  patent  land  of  Mr. 
Thomas  Jordens,  dec'd.,  &  Thomas 
Poole.  100  acs.  by  patent  dated  Nov. 
27,  1637  &  200  acs.  for  trans,  of  4  pers: 
Attwell    Bestwicke,    Richd.    Goffe    (or 

Gosse),    Michael   James   &  Jno.   . 

Marginal   note:    This   patent  was   fake 


in  the  old  records  and  entered  true  in 
the  56th  page  of  the  said  Booke. 

ROBERT  LAWRENCE  &  ELLIS 
BROWN,  400  acs.  Lower  Norf.  Co., 
Aug.  20,  1644,  Page  22.  Upon  Nwd. 
side  of  the  E.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  adj. 
John  Sidney  &  Richard  Woster.  300 
acs.  due  by  assignment  of  a  patent  dated 
May  22,  1637  from  Thomas  Sawyer,  & 
the  residue  for  trans,  of  2  servants.* 

WILLIAM  COCK,  100  acs.  Eliz. 
Citty  Co.,  June  5,  1645,  Page  23.  Said 
land  late  in  the  tenure  of  John  Roberts, 
dec'd.,  abutting  Westerly  on  the  land 
late  of  Lieut.  Albiano  Lupo  now  in  the 
occupation  of  John  Chandler,  E.  upon  a 
cr.  parting  same  from  land  late  of  Tho- 
mas Spilman,  now  in  occupation  of 
Daniell  Tanner.  Trans,  of  2  pers.,  as- 
signed by  William  Perry:  John  Saysill 
&  Richard  Diggs  ( or  Riggs ) . 

JOHN  SHEPARD  (Sheppard),  179 
acs.  York  Co.,  June  5,  1645,  Page  23. 
Betwixt  land  now  in  possession  of  Tho. 
Hudson  on  the  E.  &  on  W.  bounded 
with  land  of  Henry  Bullard.  Due  sd. 
Sheppard  for  trans,  of  7  pers:  Richd. 
Haines,  George  Haynes,  Hugh  Aden, 
Charles  Hill. 

JOHN  BAKER,  175  acs.  Eliz.  Citty 
Co.,  June  5,  1645,  Page  24.  Adj.  land 
formerly  granted  to  Walter  Hely,  ex- 
tending towards  Southampton  Riv.,  50 
acs.  formerly  leased  to  Nicholas  Brown, 
&  by  him  assigned  to  sd.  Baker.  As 
alsoe  100  acs.  formerly  leased  unto 
Christopher  Windmill  &  by  him  as- 
signed unto  William  Lethermore  &  by 
him  assigned  unto  sd.  Baker,  bounding 
W.  upon  Hampton  Riv.,  &  land  in  the 
possession  of  John  Plaice;  25  acs.  the 
residue  bounding  W.  upon  Hampton 
Riv.,  S.  upon  Nicholas  Brown.  Due  for 
trans,  of  4  pers:  Tho.  Lethermore  & 
Elinor  his  wife,  Robert  Dutch,  Wm. 
Dickinson,  Tho.  Hatcher. 

By  Sir  William  Berkeley 

JOHN  RODE,  1,000  acs.  Warwick 
Co.,  July  27,  1645,  Page  25.  At  the 
head  of  the  deep  Creeke,  adj.  Christo- 
pher Boyce.  Due  by  purchase  of  sur- 
vey and  rights  from  William  Edwards, 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


157 


who  first  bought  the  same  of  sd.  Boyce, 
&  due  Boice  for  trans,  of  20  pers: 
Jeffery  Medcalfe,  Thomas  Symson, 
Katherin  Lewis,  Robert  Stiderick,  Ro. 
Fentrice,  John  Fells,  Chr.  Rythe,  Jno. 
Elwood,  Tho.  Adkinson,  Willm.  Hewe, 
Wm.  Ollaver,  Jno.  Atkin,  Anne  Powell, 
Matt.  Adkinson,  Jno.  Moor,  Margery 
Underwood,  Chr.  Boyce,  Jno.  Chrisippe, 
Jno.  Typladye,  Willm.  Evand. 

MICHAEL  MASTERT,  413  acs.  Hen- 
rico County,  in  Bermodo  Hundred,  July 
24,  1645.  Page  26.  390  acs.  bounded 
E.  S.  E.  upon  James  Riv.,  S.  W.  upon 
Pates  Sw.  &  Court  Sw.,  S.  upon  Lieut. 
Craddock,  N.  upon  Thomas  Sheppye, 
Mr.  Baugh,  James  Usher  &  Robert  Elam, 
S.  by  W.  &  E.  by  S.  upon  Capt.  Wood- 
liffe,  &  S.  by  W.,  E.  by  S.  &  N.  by  E. 
upon  Mr.  Samuell  Jordin.  12  acs.  in 
Bermodo  Hundred  neck,  formerly  known 
as  Capt.  Martin  land,  N.  W.  upon  James 
River,  N.  E.  upon  Mr.  Samll.  Jordin, 
S.  W.  upon  Mr.  Edward  Gurgunye. 
Due  sd  Masters  for  trans,  of  9  pers: 
Henry  Lownee,  James  King,  Tho.  Page 
(?)  George  Wells,  Thomas  Wallis, 
Jane  Price,  John  Manchest,  James  Mor- 
rice,  Peter  Maydley. 

JOHN  BAUGH,  Gent.,  100  acs. 
Henrico  Co.,  July  24,  1645,  Page  27. 
Lyeing  in  Bermodo  Hundred,  bounded 
E.  N.  E.  by  land  formerly  belonging  to 
John  Arrundell,  S.  E.  upon  the  Bay  of 
Appomatock,  W.  S.  W.  upon  Powell 
Cr.  &  N.  W.  upon  Connecocke  path; 
4  acs.  bounded  N.  N.  E.  upon  James 
River,  S.  E.  upon  land  of  James  Usher, 
S.  S.  W.  upon  Michaell  Maystert  &  W. 
N.  W.  upon  William  Sharp.  The  other 
16  acs.  lying  in  Bermodo  Hundred 
Neck,  S.  upon  land  of  Joseph  Royall  & 
N.  W.  upon  Michaell  Maystert.  Due 
for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Michaell  Woolfe, 
Elizabeth  Cowell. 


MARKE  JOHNSON,  198  acs.  in 
Eliz.  Citty  Co.,  July  31,  1645,  Page  27. 
Beginning  at  a  br.  dividing  this  from 
land  of  Thomas  Watts,  etc.,  to  the 
broad  cr.  Due  by  assignment  of  the 
right  of  4  pers.  trans,  by  Robert  New- 
man: Nicholas  Rogers,  Nicho.  Hayle, 
Tho.  Brooke,  John  Baker. 


ANTHONY  ELLYOTT,  Gent.,  300 
acs.,  24  July  1645,  Page  28.  Beg.  at  a 
sw.  or  small  branch  issuing  out  of  Poynt 
Comfort  Cr.,  dividing  this  &  land  of 
Nicho.  Roe,  sd.  land  commonly  called 
Buck  Roe,  running  N.  etc.  Due  by  pur- 
chase of  a  patent  of  Richard  Kemp  (be- 
ing the  Atty.  of  John  Calvert)  Sept.  2, 
1643,  due  sd.  Calvert  by  order  of  court 
dated  June  18,  1642,  as  brother  &  next 
heir  of  George  Calvert,  Phisition  (Phy- 
sician), dec'd.  for  his  per.  adv.  &  trans, 
of  5  pers.* 

WILLIAM  JONES,  450  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  July  22,  1645,  Page  29. 
At  Hungars  Cr.,  bounded  on  the  N.  by 
land  of  Richard  Smith,  S.  by  Capt. 
William  Stone,  &  on  W.  N.  W.  by  a 
br.  of  sd.  cr.  Due  by  assignment  of 
rights  for  trans,  of  9  pers.  from  Comely. 
Lloyd:  Thomas  Turner,  Richard  Chap- 
man, Pascoe  Chapman,  Matt.  Holt, 
Fickler  Windeth,  Henry  Gutt,  Weston 
Brow,  Tho.  Evans,  Step.  Collowes. 

JOHN  GODFREY,  300  acs.  Lower 
Norf.  Co.,  July  22,  1645,  Page  29.  On 
the  S.  side  of  the  Ewd.  br.  of  Elizabeth 
River,  adj.  land  of  Richard  White,  and 
Henry  Nicholas.  Due  as  followeth: 
250  acs.  granted  to  John  Yates,  June  6, 
1637,  &  by  him  sold  to  John  Moores 
(or  Meeres)  &  purchased  by  sd.  God- 
frey of  Nicholas  Scuefeild,  Atty.  of  sd. 
Moores,  &  50  acs.  for  trans,  of:  John 
Farrarhoe. 

NICHOLAS  SCUEFEILD  to  JOHN 
YATES  of  Eliz.  Citty,  the  sd.  250  acs. 
Bond  for  4,000  Lbs.  Tobacco,  Nov.  4, 
1645.  Page  30.  Witness:  Thomas 
Harrison. 

JOHN  SEVERNE,  500  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  July  22,  1645,  Page  30. 
At  Hungars  Cr.,  adj.  Richard  Smith. 
Formerly  granted  to  Mr.  Edwin  Conna- 
way  Oct.  8,    1644  &  assigned  by  him. 

EDWYN  CONNAWAY,  of  North- 
ampton, Clarke,  unto  Mrs.  Bridgett 
Charleton  for  the  use  of  her  child  John 
Severne,  to  be  seated  and  possession  to 
be  delivered  unto  him  the  sd.  John 
Severne  when  he  shall  come  to  the  age 


158 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


of  18  yeares.    Oct.  26,  1644,  Page  31. 
Witnesses:  Reynald  Hawis  &  John  Ellis. 

MR.  JOHN  NUTHALL,  300  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  July  27,  1645,  Page 
31.  At  the  head  of  Hungars  Cr.,  adj. 
land  formerly  belonging  to  John  Halla- 
waye,  runing  Ely.  etc.  For  trans,  of  6 
pers:  John  Nuthall,  twice,  Eliza,  his 
wife,  John  Towson,  Andrew  Ditch, 
John  Evere  (?). 

JAMES  JACKSON,  100  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  July  27,  1645,  Page  32. 
Bounded  on  the  W.  by  the  mayne  bay, 
N.  by  Matthew  Lett,  S.  by  the  Gleab 
land  &  E.  by  the  woods.  Trans,  of  2 
pers:    James  Jackson  &  Thomas  Gilbert. 

JUSTINIAN  COOPER,  Gent.,  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  Sept.  10,  1645,  Page  32. 
2  devidents,  the  former  containing  1,120 
acs.  &  the  latter  1,330  acs.  Both  near 
the  head  of  Seawards  Cr.  Adj.  his  own 
land,  Mr.  Davis,  Capt.  Upton  &  Tho- 
mas Luther.  Due  as  follows:  1,050  acs. 
&  850  acs.  by  two  former  patents,  & 
550  acs.  for  trans,  of  11  pers:  Sarah 
Fisher,  Cor.  Corhoon,  Wm.  Banister, 
Richd.  Smith,  Rati.  (Rachel  ?)  Powell, 
John  Parker,  Mingo  a  Negro,  France 
a  Negro. 

ZACHARY  CRIPPS,  Gent.,  1,050  acs. 
Warwick  Co.,  Sept.  10,  1645,  Page  33. 
Beg.  near  the  nowe  dwelling  house  of 
John  Williams,  unto  the  Mill  land,  S. 
&  Wly.  to  Thomas  Taylors.  200  acs. 
by  patent  dated  Oct.  25,  1637,  &  850 
acs.  for  Trans,  of  17  pers:  John  Smith, 
Robert  Rede,  Danll.  Stubbs,  Tho.  Mor- 
gin,  Xtopr.  Taylor,  Judeth  Session, 
Hester  Smith,  John  Richards,  Eliza. 
Bridges,  Andrew  Westerin  (?),  Joyce 
Vessell,  Wm.  Morgan,  Anthony,  Robert, 
Jo.  Solloman,  Domingo,  Scourgoa, 
Negroes. 

THOMAS  DAVIS,  475  acs.  War- 
wick Co.,  Sept.  10,  1645,  Page  34.  Up- 
on Waters  Cr.,  S.  W.  upon  James  River, 
W.  upon  Richard  Domellaws,  &  N.  E. 
upon  land  of  Mr.  William  Whitby.  50 
acs.  granted  unto  Percivall  Elletson, 
Mar.  6,  1620,  &  by  authority  granted 
by  him  unto  Edward  Waters  &  sould 
unto  William  Worleich  &  by  him  unto 


sd.  Davis.  100  acs.  granted  sd.  Waters 
Aug.  20,  1624,  by  him  sould  to  Wor- 
leich &  by  him  to  sd.  Davis.  150  acs. 
granted  sd.  Worleich  May  7,  1637  sold 
unto  sd.  Davis,  all  of  which  remayned 
upon  record  under  his  patent.  175  acs. 
the  residue  due  for  trans,  of  4  pers: 
Thomas  Davis,  Richard  Parker,  Walt. 
Belcher,  Thomas  Trevannion. 

JOHN  HACKER,  150  acs.  Chas. 
Citty  Co.,  Sept.  27,  1645,  Page  35.  On 
W.  side  of  Chipoake  neere  Martin 
Brandon,  near  land  of  William  Pilkin- 
ton,  and  George  Bercher.  Due  by  patent 
dated  July  25,  1638  for  his  per.  adv. 
&  trans,  of  2  pers.* 

THOMAS  WATTS,  132  acs.  Eliz. 
Citty  Co.,  Aug.  2,  1645,  Page  35.  Beg. 
at  a  br.  of  the  broad  cr.  dividing  this 
from  land  of  Mr.  Johnson.  50  acs.  by 
patent  dated  May  5,  1636,  &  82  acs. 
for  trans,  of  2  pers.* 

ROBERT  ROCKWELL,  250  acs.  Up. 
Norf.  Co.,  Sept.  14,  1645,  Page  36. 
Upon  N.  side  of  Nansimond  Riv.,  beg. 
at  Majors  Cr.  Due  by  patent  dated  Nov. 
16,  1638  for  per.  adv.  of  his  brother 
Rockwell  &  trans,  of  4  pers.* 

MR.  DAVID  MANSELL,  72  acs. 
York  Co.,  in  Kiskeake  Parish,  Sept.  8, 
1645,  Page  37.  Adj.  Christopher  Ab- 
bott &  his  own  land.  Due  by  right  of 
trans,  of  2  pers.* 

WILLIAM  SMITH,  700  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  Sept.  29,  1645,  Page  38. 
Lying  near  Pagan  Poynt,  adj.  Anthony 
Jones,  Tristrum  Norsworthy,  Nicholas 
Smith  called  Pagan  Poynt  &  Capt.  John 
Upton,  S.  W.  upon  Hutchinsons  Cr. 
deviding  the  marsh  from  the  marsh  of 
Capt.  John  Upton,  which  said  marsh  is 
a  perfect  Isle.  Also  225  acs.  of  marsh 
land.  500  acs.  due  for  trans,  of  10 
pers.  by  his  late  father,  William  Smith, 
&  425  acs.  by  assignment  of  rights  for 
trans,  of  9  pers.  unto  him  by  Anthony 
Jones,  25  acs.  still  due  upon  one  name 
in  the  certificate.    Names  not  given. 

JOHN  WILLIAMS,  250  acs.  War- 
wick Co.,  Sept.  29,  1645,  Page  38. 
Bounded  on  W.  by  land  of  Mr.  Tol- 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


159 


bott,  S.  by  George  Cookes,  N.  by  Chris- 
topher Boyce.  100  acs.  due  by  assign- 
ment of  rights  from  John  Phillips  & 
150  acs.  for  trans,  of  3  pers.* 

CAPT.  JOHN  FLOWER,  Marinor 
500  acs.  Chas.  Citty  Co.,  Sept.  30,  1645, 
Page  39.  Lyeing  opposite  to  Swann  Bay 
in  Upper  Chipoakes  Cr.,  S.  W.  upon 
George  Sherbutt,  N.  E.  upon  land 
formerly  in  the  houlding  of  Samuell  Ed- 
munds. 200  acs.  part  of  a  patent 
granted  unto  Thomas  Plumer  &  Samuell 
Edmunds,  Sept.  7,  1638,  &  by  Plumer 
assigned  to  Jeremiah  Dickeson  Oct.  14, 
1639  &  by  sd  Dickinson  conveyed  to 
Capt.    Flower    by    deed    dated    Mar.    1, 

1640,  &  300  acs.  for  trans,  of  6  pers.* 

CAPT.  THOMAS  PETUS  (Pettus) 
one  of  his  Majesty's  Councill  of  State, 
886  acs.  James  City  Co.,  Apr.  7,  1643, 
Page  40.  Neere  Jockeys  Neck,  E.  & 
N.  upon  the  Secretary's  land,  E.  N.  E. 
&  N.  N.  E.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Secretary 
Kemp,  N.  W.  upon  Mr.  George  Mal- 
lam,  S.  W.  upon  the  Gleab  land  Cr.,  S. 
upon  the  Gleab  land  &  S.  E.  upon  a  br. 
of  Archers  Hope  Cr.  250  acs.  due  by 
intermarriage  with  the  relict  &  Execu- 
trix of  Richard  Durant,  Deed.,  who  had 
a  patent  dated  24  Aug.  1635;  &  350 
acs.  by  purchase  of  a  patent  to  Alexan- 
der Stoner,  &  286  acs.  for  trans,  of  6 
pers.*  14  acs.  still  due  upon  the  last 
person  nominated. 

JEREMY  DICKINSON  to  JOHN 
FLOWERS,  Marrinor,  assignment  of  200 
acs.  Mar.  5,  1640.  Page  40.  Witnesses: 
Benjamin  Harrison,  Bartha.  Knipe,  Tho- 
mas Convirs.  This  act  and  deed  ack- 
nowledged in  court  holden  before  Capt. 
Humphrey  Higginson  &  the  rest  of  his 
Majesties     Commissioners      12th     Apr. 

1641.  Test:  Joshua  Knight.  Being  part 
of  a  patent  granted  unto  Thomas  Plumer 
&  Samuell  Edmunds  &  assigned  to  sd. 
Dickinson;  lying  on  the  Sly.  side  of 
land  in  the  tenure  of  Robert  Newton,  etc. 

JOHN  INGRAME,  150  acs.  Eliz. 
Citty  Co.,  Sept.  24,  1645,  Page  42. 
Butting  upon  Poynt  Comfort  Cr.,  beg. 
at  the  Indian  Spring,  to  a  br.  of  Harris 
Cr.  dividing  this  &  land  now  in  posses- 
sion of   Humphrey  Tabb.    100   acs.   by 


assignment  from  Ellinor  Phillips,  &  50 
acs.  for  trans,  of  1  pers.* 

JOHN  ROBINS,  2,000  acs.  in  Mock- 
jack  bay,  at  mouth  of  Sedgey  Cr.,  Sept. 
24,  1645,  Page  43.  Due  by  former 
patent  &  assignment  from  Capt.  William 
Brocus. 

MR.  EDWARD  MAJOR,  300  acs. 
Warwick  Co.,  Sept.  24,  1645,  Page  43. 
W.  upon  land  of  John  Salford,  now  in 
occupation  of  Thomas  Falkener,  adj. 
Thomas  Godby.  Due  for  trans,  of  6 
pers.  Sd.  land  formerly  granted  to 
Severall  pers:  Pharoah  Flinton,  150 
acs.,  Giles  Allington,  100  acs.,  &  Wil- 
liam Bentley,  50  acs.  (individually)  & 
by  them  deserted. 

CAPT.  THOMAS  BERNARD,  300 
acs.  on  the  Southerly  side  of  Warwick 
River,  Sept.  24,  1645,  Page  44.  Abut- 
ting E.  upon  Lt.  Gilbert  Peppett,  etc., 
towards  the  church  there  arrected  & 
built,  &  bet.  Colstones  Is.  &  Cedar  Is. 
Due  for  trans,  of  6  pers.*  Formerly 
granted  to  Robert  Poole  but  being  de- 
serted is  now  granted  unted  sd.  Bernard 
according  to  the  custom  of  the  country. 

MR.  PETER  WALKER,  150  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  Page  44.  (Not 
dated).  S.  upon  old  plantation  Cr., 
along  the  back  of  the  mayne  bay.  Trans, 
of  3  pers.*  140  acs.  formerly  granted 
unto  John  Blore,  deed.  &  by  him  de- 
serted. 

RADULPH  HUNT,  300  acs.  War- 
wick Co.,  Nov.  28,  1645,  Page  45.  Beg. 
at  the  Myles  End  of  a  place  called  the 
Common  Garden  house,  S.  E.  towards 
land  of  Mr.  Wetheasbye  &  N.  upon  land 
commonly  called  Thomas  Watts  his 
plantation.    Trans,  of  6  pers.* 

RALPH  BARLOWE,  Merchant,  150 
acs.  Eliz.  Citty  Co.,  Mar.  18,  1645,  Page 
45.  E.  upon  Richard  Bolton,  W.  upon 
great  swamp  parting  same  from  land  of 
John  Powell.  Due  by  purchase  from 
the  lawfull  Atty.  of  Capt.  William 
Tucker  to  whom  it  was  granted  Sept. 
20,  1624. 

THOMAS  HILL,  Gent.,  600  acs. 
James  Citty  Co.,  Oct.  10,  1645,  Page  46. 


160 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Lyeing  at  the  Rich  Neck,  in  two  par- 
cells;  part  of  same  adj.  Francis  Peale 
&  the  Palisadoes.  Due  by  purchase  from 
Richard  Kemp,  being  part  of  a  1,200  acr. 
patent  purchased  by  Kemp  of  George 
Menefie. 

MR.  WILLIAM  DAYNES,  400  acs. 
Lower  Norf.  Co.,  Apr.  26,  1646,  Page 
46.  Upon  Ewd.  side  the  mouth  of 
Bullock  Cr.,  down  the  Ewd.  side  of 
Sandy  Point  Creek,  etc.,  running  near 
the  main  river.  Due  for  trans,  of  8 
pers:  William  Deynes,  Phillis  his  wife, 
Richard  Clerke,  Joane  Russell,  Michael 
Webb,  Abdala  Moore,  Hamurt  Amore, 
John  Branch. 

WILLIAM  STOREY,  200  acs.  Up. 
Norf.  Co.,  Nov.  20,  1645,  Page  47. 
Upon  Ewd.  side  of  the  N.  W.  br.  of 
Nansimond  Riv.  about  4  mi.  up  the  br., 
bet.  Thomas  Emarson  &  Francis  Maul- 
den.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Tho.  Bayley, 
Wm.  Story,  John  Scull,  Harbor  Kogan. 

RICHARD  CLARKE,  V/2  acs.  in 
James  Island,  near  the  frigget,  June  5, 
1646.  Page  47.  The  }4  acr.  formerly 
granted  to  William  Chapman  &  pur- 
chased by  Clarke;  the  other  acre  a 
younger  grant  to  sd.  Clarke  and  adj. 
Wly.  upon  the  halfe  acre,  which  in- 
cludes the  Cow  penn. 

RICHARD  BARTLETT,  200  acs.  Up. 
Norf.  Co.,  Sept.  27,  1645,  Page  48. 
Lyeing  at  the  head  of  Chuckatucke,  adj. 
Humphrey  Scowen,  &  Peter  Rey. 
Formerly  granted  to  said  Bartlett  & 
Henry  Bradley  by  order  of  Court  at 
James  Citty  dated  Oct.  5,  1643,  with 
this  proviser:  that  it  be  not  to  the 
prejudice  of  any  former  grant  and  that 
they  build  a  mill  upon  same.  Bradley 
surrendered  his  moiety  to  sd.  Bartlett, 
to  whom  it  is  due  for  his  per.  adv.  & 
trans,  of  3  pers.* 

Whereas  there  was  this  fifth  day  of 
June  produced  to  the  Board  a  Survey 
under  the  hand  of  James  Cockett  and 
John  Senior,  Surveyors,  sworne,  of  the 
land  belonging  to  the  place  of  Gover- 
nour,  being  3000  acres,  as  alsoe  of  1090 
acs.  belonging  to  Sir  William  Berkeley, 
Km.,  the  present  Governour,  etc.    Lease 


of  70  acs.  for  21  yrs.  &  confirmation  of 
former  patent  for  1,090  acs.  unto  Sir 
William  Berkeley,  Govr.,  in  right  of 
trans,  of  22  pers.  Sd.  1,090  acs.  adj. 
Robert  Wetherell  &  William  Edwards, 
E.  upon  Powehetan,  S.  S.  E.  upon  land 
belonging  to  the  place  of  Governour, 
W.  towards  Capt.  Freeman,  W.  S.  W. 
upon  Chickahominie  path,  etc.  Correc- 
ted survey  made  by  James  Cockett  & 
John  Senier.  Grant  signed  by:  John 
West,  Richard  Kemp,  Samll.  Matthews, 
W.  Brocas,  Tho.  Pettid,  Henry  Brown, 
Hum.  Higginson,  Richard  Townstend, 
Members  of  Councill.  The  names  of  the 
persons  upon  which  the  within  men- 
tioned land  containing  1,090  acs.,  is  due 
was  procured  in  court  the  6th  day  of 
June,  1646,  &  are  all  hereunder  written, 
there  remayning  due  unto  sd.  Berkeley 
13  pers.  to  take  up  land  &  10  acs.  of  the 
last  name  to  make  good  this  right: 
Richard  Polden,  Thomas  Bristow,  John 
Williams,  Robert  Winscill,  Robert 
Haines,  Thomas  Yealke,  William  Jack- 
son, Robert  Jones,  Roger  Lynard,  John 
Gullis,  Bryan  Burton,  Edmd.  Higbie, 
John  Ashbifoote,  Tho.  Ethell,  Richard 
Westbery,  Eliza.  Asselbie,  Thomas  Bas- 
sett,  Tho.  Griffith,  Wm.  Lamb,  Jane 
Stockell,  Robert  Buxton,  Geo.  Hughes, 
Wm.  Fowke,  Tho.  Mason,  Leo.  Patrick, 
Stephen  Johnson,  John  Allingsworth 
(Attingsworth  ?)  Nicho.  Dawbee,  Alice 
Vynall,  Mary  Pearson,  John  Cole,  Rich- 
ard Purdie,  John  Dasvie,  Tho.  Mallard, 
Richard  Swann,  35  psons. 

EDWARD  BLAND,  of  London, 
Merchant,  2,000  acs.  Lawnes  Creeke, 
July  7,  1646,  Page  50.  S.  upon  land  of 
Alice  Delke,  widdow,  N.  upon  William 
Spencer,  E.  upon  sd.  cr.,  &  W.  towards 
Chipoake  Cr.  Due  by  purchase  from 
Capt.  William  Peirce  &  assignment  of  a 
patent  dated  June  22,  1635. 

MR.  WILLIAM  DAVIS,  500  acs. 
James  Citty  Co.,  June  2,  1646,  Page  51. 
Lyeing  betwixt  the  horse  path  &  the 
head  of  Archers  Hope  Cr.,  S.  S.  W. 
upon  an  older  devident  purchased  of 
Capt.  Pott,  N.  N.  W.  upon  George 
Lake  &  George  Wyatt.  Due  by  surren- 
der of  patent,  dated  28  June  1639,  the 
rights  being  taken  out  of  the  same  to 
make  good  this  patent. 


~;j»? 


l-~~J&:ML.m./#. 


&z 


WU     ...4*...*     Ur 


>,.'//„ 


n.„* 


!<.,-  ,.<..■      /A.,./,....,..    A...S*,,*    «y*<     /\^..»  //;/,,..,»   ty,ir)    .,>, 

'  .,/s  ,*-*  .... .  /,//../.>.  ,.,.',;..,  *.  *.,  -.:;/>»  ,../.  *<< 


< 


fc£* 


;  4^  -^^:4;;fe::;::?^:;:::r^ 


e\7 


►/rr. 


£,-. 


/■■^r-/"^-: 


.,»-...•...  4?JM1 


^r:;..^ .  a**?*-^* -  -.-  vr*s 


These  two  facing  illustrations  show  pages  of  the  Nicholas  Martiau  Patent,  proving 
the  importation  of  Martiau,  his  wife  and  daughter,  etc.,  to  the  colony.    Martiau  was 


,j/  •».  //  /.,  .        ,        ,.»^,.».  •/•<""'  /Jf*3^     *%/*•*♦*  •"**  ' 


*f    fii,' 


<f/*£~ *A,~.+>^». 


\  • 


7"7 
'7' 


.*';t 


/ //' "J  r--r'- 


^  ... 


I 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


161 


GEORGE  LUDLOWE,  Esqr.,  1927 
acs.,  Yorke  Co.,  July  26,  1646,  Page  51. 
Beg.  at  Wormeleys  Cr.  on  the  S.  side  of 
Charles  Riv.,  etc.,  adj.  Mill  land  belong- 
ing to  Warwick  River,  and  to  land  of 
Hugh  Allen.  Several  tracts  aggregating 
475  acs.  lately  in  the  possession  of: 
Henry  Brook,  Richard  Kinsey,  Richard 
Smith,  Thomas  Jolly,  deed.,  &  Jo.  Mat- 
teram.  600  acs.  part  formerly  granted 
unto  Martin  Boke,  Apr.  24,  1637  &  due 
Ludlowe  by  order  of  court;  750  acs. 
more  called  Yorke  Plantation  by  pur- 
chase from  George  Menefye,  to  whom 
the  same  was  morgaged  by  Sir  John 
Harvey,  as  appeareth  by  deed. 

LUCY  WEBSTER,  JUDITH  WEB- 
STER &  JANE  WEBSTER,  500  acs., 
commonly  known  by  the  name  of  Ar- 
chers Hope,  in  James  Citty  Co.,  July 
20,  1646,  Page  53.  Bounding  N.  upon 
Archers  Hope,  S.  upon  maine  river,  W. 
upon  Gleab  Land  Cr.  &  E.  towards  Far- 
lows  Necke.  300  acs.  part  formerly 
granted  unto  William  Spence  &  John 
Fowler,  Jan.  20,  1619,  &  assigned  by 
Thomas  &  Sarah  Brice  unto  Roger  Web- 
ster, father  of  sd.  Lucy,  Judith  &  Jane, 
&  200  acs.  residue  for  trans,  by  Roger 
Webster    of   4   pers:    Elizabeth   Clarke, 

Stephen    ,    Edward    Spatch,    Susan 

Webster. 

LUCIE  WEBSTER,  200  acs.  Yorke 
Co.,  Apr.  20,  1646,  Page  53.  Daughter 
&  heire  of  Roger  Webster,  deed.  With- 
in the  Parish  of  Hampton,  beg.  at  500 
acs.  formerly  taken  up  by  Mr.  David 
Mansell  for  the  use  of  the  said  Lucie 
Webster,  adj.  Christopher  Abbott.  Sd. 
250  acs.  formerly  granted  her  Nov.  19, 
1642,  due  for  trans,  of  5  pers.*  by  her 
father. 

GEORGE  WIATT  (Wyatt),  250  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  Oct.  4,  1645,  Page  54. 
At  the  Middle  Plantation,  N.  by  E. 
along  the  Palisadoes  &  land  of  George 
Lake,  S.  by  W.  towards  head  of  Archers 
Hope  Cr.  Due  sd.  Wyatt  as  followeth: 
100  acs.  purchased  by  Thomas  Lucas  & 
Tho.  Gregorie  of  Capt.  Popeley  Feb.  1, 
1641,  by  them  sold  to  Thomas  Heath, 
by  him  assigned  to  sd.  Wyatt  &  George 
Lake,  &  400  acs.  purchased  by  sd.  Wiatt 
&  Lake  of  Capt.  Popley  Apr.  12,  1642, 


then  equally  divided  between  them,  and 
the  sd.  250  also  due  for  trans,  of  5 
pers.* 

NICHOLAS  WATTKINS,  130  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  Oct.  5,  1645,  Page  55. 
Lyeing  upon  the  head  of  Archers  Hope 
Cr.,  adj.  George  Wyatt  &  land  formerly 
belonging  to  Capt.  Francis  Potts.  100 
acs.  purchased  from  Capt.  Richard  Pop- 
ley  July  13,  1642  &  30  acs.  for  trans, 
of  1  per.* 

CAPT.  RICHARD  POPELEY  to 
NICHOLAS  WATTKINS,  100  acs.  up- 
on the  Middle  Plantation.  Considera- 
tion: 875  Lbs.  Tobacco.  Page  55.  Wit- 
ness:   Thomas  Heath. 

GEORGE  LAKE,  250  acs.  York  Co., 
Oct.  4,  1645,  Page  56.  At  the  Middle 
Plantation,  along  the  Pallisadoes,  adj. 
land  formerly  belonging  to  Capt.  Rich- 
ard Popeley,  S.  by  W.  towards  Archers 
Hope  Cr.    (Same  as  Wiatt  above). 

THOMAS  CRAFTON,  670  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  Aug.  6,  1646,  Page  57. 
At  the  head  of  the  Sunken  Marsh  near 
the  Up.  Chipoake,  adj.  Henry  White. 
Due  by  assignment  of  patent  for  the 
same  by  John  Smith,  dated  16  June 
1642,  to  whom  it  was  due  for  trans, 
of  13  pers.* 

CAPT.  RICHARD  POPELEY,  of  Va., 
Gent.,  to  THOMAS  GREGORY  & 
THO.  LUCAS,  Planters,  of  Va.,  one 
plantation  called  by  the  name  of  the 
Middle  House.  Feb.  1,  1641.  Page  58. 
Witness:    John  Shepard. 

THOMAS  GREGORY  &  THOMAS 
LUCAS  assignment  to  THOMAS 
HEATH  of  the  above  bill  of  sale.  Aug. 
19,   1642.    Page  59. 

THOMAS  HEATH  assignment  unto 
GEORGE  LAKE  &  GEORGE  WYATT, 
Jan.  29,  1643.  Witness:  Richard  Pope- 
ley.    Page  59. 

CAPT.  RICHARD  POPELEY  of  Va., 
Gent.,  sale  to  GEORGE  LAKE  & 
GEORGE  WYATT,  of  Va.,  Coopers, 
400  acs.  Yorke  Co.,  adj.  the  Midle 
House,  (above)  W.  upon  Richard  Wat- 


162 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


kins,  &  W.  upon  the  Pallisadoes,  etc. 
Apr.  12,  1642,  Page  59.  Witnesses: 
Thomas  Heath  &  John  Earle. 

PHILLIP  BENNETT,  Gent.,  200  acs. 
Nansimond  Co.,  Nov.  5,  1648,  Page  60. 
On  head  branches  of  Robert  Bennets  Cr., 
adj.  Antho.  Weeles.  Due  by  virtue  of 
the  rights  of  a  grant  made  unto  Robert 
Bennet,  Feb.  18,  1638,  &  by  sd.  Phillip 
Bennet,  Administrator  of  sd.  Robert,  re- 
signed into  the  office. 

THOMAS  DAVIES,  600  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  Apr.  9,  1648,  Page  60.  On 
black  water  branch,  etc.,  and  adj.  land 
of  Mr.  John  Seaward.  Due  sd.  Davis 
as  part  of  a  former  patent  &  500  for 
trans,  of  10  pers:  Thomas  Shipcot,  Ed- 
mund Walter,  Andrew  Dickinson,  Wal- 
ter Dale,  Gilbert  Fabian,  Thomas  Davis, 
John  Edgcomb,  Francis  Howard,  David 
Jerman,  William  May. 

JOHN  LANDMAN,  300  acs.  Nansi- 
mond Co.,  Apr.  9,  1648,  Page  61.  On 
E.  side  of  the  N.  W.  br.  of  Nansimond 
Riv.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Dorothy  Cole, 
Edward  Spencer,  Richard  Jones,  Jno. 
Walton,    Matt.    Wallice,    Tho.    Brewer. 

JOHN  LANDMAN,  250  acs.  Nansi- 
mond Co.,  Apr.  9,  1648,  Page  61.  Adj. 
James  Arthur  &  Peter  Ells.  Trans,  of 
5  pers:  Edward  Williams,  Tho.  Rich- 
ard, Patience  Marken,  John  Read. 

THOMAS  HINSON,  209  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  Aug.  29,  1646,  Page  62. 
Upon  W.  side  of  Beverley  Cr.  of  New- 
town haven  river,  adj.  Capt.  John  Up- 
ton.   Due  for  trans,  of  5  pers.* 

RICHARD  LEE,  Gent.,  "1,250  acs. 
of  land  being  about  six  or  seven  miles 
up  the  narrows  in  Charles  river  alias 
York  or  Pomunkey  river  being  a  neck 
of  land  bounded  between  two  branches 
or  creek  where  the  foot  Company  met 
with  the  Boats  when  they  went  pom- 
munkey  March  under  the  Command  of 
Capt.  William  Claiborne,"  etc.,  upon 
the  S.  side  of  sd.  river,  extending  itself 
towards  Warranye  Town.  Due  by  as- 
signment from  William  Freeman  of  his 
right  for  trans,  of  25  pers.*  Aug.  20, 
1646,     Page    62.    Note:    This     pattern 


surrendered  &  the  names  inserted  under 
a  patent  for  1250  acres  granted  to  said 
Lee  21  Dec.  1648. 

RICHARD  PRESTON,  Gent.,  500 
acs.,  Up.  Norf.  Co.,  Dec.  18,  1646, 
Page  63.  Being  upon  the  miles  end  of 
land  of  Thomas  Jordan  &  Richard 
Young,  on  New  Town  haven  River. 
250  acs.  by  2  former  patents,  &  250  by 
Caveat  entered  May  31,  1641,  &  con- 
firmed by  order  of  a  full  Council  Table, 
etc.,  for  the  trans,  of  5  pers.* 

RICHARD  GRIGSON,  400  acs.  Eliz. 
Citty  Co.,  Apr.  10,  1646,  Page  64.  Beg. 
at  a  ridge  of  land  at  a  path  leading 
from  Nutmegg  quarter  to  the  poquoson, 
adj.  Toby  Smith  &  William  Hampton. 
Due  for  trans,  of  8  pers.* 

CAPT.  THOMAS  PETTUS,  one  of 
his  Majesties  Councill  of  State,  886  acs., 
James  City  Co.,  Apr.  11,  1643,  Page  65. 
Lyeing  near  Jockeys  Neck,  bounded  E. 
&  N.  upon  Secretary's  land,  E.  N.  E.  & 
N.  N.  E.  upon  Mr.  Secretary  Kemp, 
N.  N.  W.  upon  Geo.  Mallen,  S.  W.  up- 
on Gleab  land  Cr.,  S.  upon  the  Gleab 
land  &  S.  E.  upon  a  br.  of  Archers  Hope 
Cr.  250  acs.  by  intermarriage  with  the 
relict  &  Exix.  of  Richard  Durrant,  & 
350  acs.  by  purchase  of  patent  from 
Alexander  Stoner,  &  286  acs.  for  trans, 
of  6  pers.,*  and  14  acs.  remaining  due. 

LANCASTER  LEVILT,  (or  Levitt), 
300  acs.  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  Oct.  1,  1646, 
Page  66.  Beg.  at  an  island  to  the  West- 
ward of  John  Martin's  house  where 
Bennets  Cr.  divides  itself  into  3  branches 
in  Low.  Norf.  Co.  the  island  being  bet. 
the  S.  and  W.  branch,  etc.  The  follow- 
ing names  are  mentioned  under  this 
patent:  Thomas  Thompson,  George 
Smith,  James  Foster,  Thomas  Lorymore, 
James  Allen,  John  Traviell. 

SAMUELL  STOUGHTON,  800  acs. 
Nansimond  Co.,  Mar.  10,  1645,  Page 
66.  Upon  the  second  creek  on  the  E. 
side  of  Nansimond  Riv.,  adj.  James 
Knott  on  the  W.,  &  by  the  head  of  Mr. 
George  White.  Part  of  a  patent  granted 
unto  John  Wilkins,  by  him  sold  unto 
Michael  Willcoxe,  dec'd.,  who  be- 
queathed same  unto  Ellinor,  relict  of  sd. 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


163 


Wilcox,  and  since  conveyed  by  the  sd. 
Ellinor  unto  Stoughton,  with  whom  he 
hath  since  intermarried,  and  due  to 
him  for  his  per.  adv.  and  trans,  of 
25  pers.* 

JOHN  BROWN,  200  acs.  Northamp- 
ton Co.,  Oct.  26,  1646,  Page  67.  Lye- 
ing  at  Nutsawattocke  Cr.,  N.  \v.  upon 
Levinge  Denwood.  For  trans,  of  4 
pers:  John  Brown,  Ursula  his  wife, 
Robert  Salisbury,  Symon  Smith. 

WILLIAM  SHRIMPTON,  Gent., 
(one  of  the  Exors.  of  Dame  Elizabeth 
Dale,  Relict  &  sole  Exix.  of  Sir  Thomas 
Dale,)  1,000  acs.,  Northampton  Co., 
Nov.  26,  1645.  Page  68.  Bounded  E. 
on  the  Seaboard  side  on  the  land  of  the 
Old  Plantation  Cr.  &  S.  by  Edward 
Dowglass.  Due  as  surviving  &  sole 
Exix.  of  Dame  Elizabeth  Dale  &  due 
Sir  Thomas  Dale  by  bill  of  adventure. 

The  Right  Worshipfull  SIR  THO- 
MAS DALE,  Knt.,  Marshall  of  Va.  (be- 
ing the  first  man  of  his  Rank  &  Degree 
that  hath  undertaken  that  charge  & 
place)  hath  not  only  adventured  his  per- 
son in  that  service  in  time  of  greatest 
difficulty  but  alsoe  being  at  a  great 
charge  both  in  futhering  the  action  & 
furnishing  himselfe,  the  Councill  of  Va. 
at  there  meeting  on  the  18th  of  this 
Instant  (upon  special  trust  &  confidence 
that  as  he  hath  begun  soe  he  will  pro- 
ceed &  continue  in  advancing  soe  Xpian 
&  noble  an  action  have  with  uniforme 
consent  thought  fit  that  verry  Exterodi- 
nary  consideration  be  now  had  of  him 
and  such  as  in  futer  times  shall  be  no 
means  be  drawn  unto  president  upon 
any  occasion  whatsoever  they  therefore 
agree  that  his  person  should  be  rated 
at  the  Summe  of  Seven  hundred  pounds 
and  that  he  the  said  Sr  Thomas  Dale 
his  heires  Exors.  &  Admrs.  or  assignes 
shall  have  ratablv  according  to  the  said 
Summe  his  &  their  full  part  of  all  such 
Lands  Tenements  and  hereditaments  as 
shall  from  time  to  time  be  their  re- 
covered planted  and  inhabited  and  of 
such  mines  &  mineralls  of  gould  and 
silver  and  other  mettalls  or  treasur 
pearles  precious  stones  or  any  kind  of 
wares  or  merchandize,  commodities  or 
profits  whatsoever  wch.  shall  be  obtained 


or  gotten  in  the  said  Voyage  in  as  am- 
ple manner  as  any  other  Adventurer 
therein  shall  peaceably  receive  for  the 
like  summe.  Written  this  25th  of  Feb- 
ruary Anno  Domini  1610.  Signed  Ed- 
ward Mayer. 

Note:  This  copia  agreeth  with  the 
originall  under  the  Seale  of  the  Vir- 
ginia Company  Examined  this  12th  day 
of  October  1643,  by  us  under  written. 
Signed  Solo.  Sebright  Francis  Mosse  No. 
pub.    Page  68. 

THOMAS  JOHNSON,  Gent.,  600 
acs.  Northampton  Co.,  June  4,  1646, 
Page  69.  At  Naswattock  Cr.,  bounded 
on  S.  W.  by  a  cr.  separating  same  from 
James  Bruse  on  the  N.  W.  by  the  maine 
Cr.  etc.    Trans,  of   12  pers.* 

MR.  JOHN  ROSYER,  200  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  neare  Kings  Cr.,  July 
10,  1646,  Page  69.  Bounded  on  N.  by 
part  of  an  ancient  grant  made  to  Capt. 
Epps,  on  W.  by  the  main  bay,  &  on  S. 
by  land  formerly  belonging  to  Matthew 
Petts.  100  acs.  hereof  formerly  granted 
unto  William  Andrews,  Mar.  14,  1628, 
by  him  sold  to  Ellias  Taylor  July  6, 
1640,  &  purchased  by  said  Rosyer  of 
Ann  Taylor  relict  &  Admx.  of  Ellias  by 
deed  dated  19  July  1641 ;  50  acs.  pur- 
chased by  sd.  Taylor  of  Capt.  William 
Stone,  the  lawfull  Atty.  of  Capt.  Wil- 
liam Epps,  3  June  1640,  &  50  acs.  for 
trans,  of  1  per.* 

THOMAS  DAVIS,  300  acs.  Nansi- 
mond  Co.,  Aug.  10,  1644,  Page  70.  On 
Beverley  Cr.  a  br.  of  Newtown  haven 
Riv.,  adj.  patent  land  of  Mr.  Thomas 
Jordan,  deed.  &  Thomas  Poole,  etc. 
100  acs.  by  former  patent  dated  23  Nov. 
1637,  &  200  acs.  for  trans,  of  4  pers.* 

THOMAS  DAVIS,  200  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  Nov.  12,  1646,  Page  71. 
About  2  mi.  up  a  cr.  formerly  called 
Warrasquiack.  Due  by  purchase  of  a 
patent  dated  7  July  1635  from  Benja- 
min Harrison,  &  ack.  in  court  for  James 
City  Co.    June  8,  1646. 

JOHN  GARRETT,  400  acs.,  Up. 
Norf.  Co.,  July  25,  1646,  Page  71.  Up- 
on Indian  Cr.  issuing  from  W.  br.  of 


164 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Nansimum  Riv.,  adj.  William  Hatfeild. 
Formerly  granted  unto  him  by  patent 
dated  22  May  1642  for  trans,  of  8  pers.* 

WILLIAM  JACOB,  232  acs.,  Up. 
Norf.  Co.,  Feb.  10,  1645,  Page  72.  Up- 
on S.  side  of  Newtown  haven  river,  adj. 
John  Garret  &  Henry  Bradley.  Trans, 
of  5  pers.:  Robert  Thrickmorton,  Rich- 
ard Flint,  Robert  Caps,  Ann  Bridges, 
Henry  Welchurch. 

ELIZA.  AMBROSE,  Widdow,  100 
acs.  Eliz.  City  Co.,  Aug.  6,  1646,  Page 
73.  On  the  main  river  side,  adj.  lands 
of  George  Keth,  Ralph  Hunt  &  Bartho- 
lomew Wethersby.    Trans,  of  2  pers.* 

PETER  MOUNTAGUE,  150  acs.  Up. 
Norf.  Co.,  Dec.  18,  1645.  Page  73. 
Upon  Ewd.  side  of  the  main  head  of 
New  Town  haven  river,  at  miles  end 
of  land  of  Humphrey  Scowen.  Trans. 
of  3  pers.* 

GEORGE  LUDLOWE,  Esqr.,  1,452 
acs.  York  Co.,  21  July  1646,  Page  74. 
Beg.  at  the  mouth  of  a  cr.  on  the  S. 
side  of  Charles  River  called  Wormeleys 
Cr.,  adj.  the  mill  land  belonging  to 
Warrick  Riv.  &  Hugh  Allen's  land, 
parallel  to  land  of  the  late  Capt. 
Wormeley,etc.  600  acs.  part  thereof 
formerly  granted  unto  Martin  Vaker 
(Baker  ?),  750  acs.  called  Yorke  Plan- 
tation by  purchase  from  George  Menefie 
Esqr.,  to  whom  same  was  mortgaged  by 
Sir  John  Harvey;  &  102  acs.  for  trans. 
of  2  pers.,  &  750  acs.  for  trans,  of  15 
pers.:  Phillip  Bowden,  John  Nerve, 
Henry  Davis,  John  Bemberry,  Nicho. 
lego,  Bassett  Sax,  Richard  Oxon,  Tho- 
mas Bacock,  Mary  Fitch,  Jno.  Fleet,  Jno. 
Mission  (?),  Sarah  Spittlewood,  Rich- 
ard Collins,  Tho.  Lewis,  John  Gerford, 
William  Berton,  Robert  Caldwell. 

JEREMY  BLACKMAN,  Marinor, 
1,400  acs.  Henrico  Co.,  Mar.  14,  1646, 
Page  75.  S.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Christo- 
pher Branch,  E.  on  the  river,  W.  into 
the  woods  &  N.  with  a  falling  creek. 
Due  by  purchase  of  patent  from  Howard 
Horsey,  dated  12  Feb.  1638,  to  whom 
it  was  granted  for  trans,  of  28  pers.* 

JOHN  BROWN,  100  acs.  Northamp- 
ton  Co.,    Oct.    1,    1646,    Page    75.    At 


Naswattocke  Cr.,  adj.  his  former  devi- 
dent,  land  of  Lenning  Denwood  &  land 
of  Garrett  Andrews.  Trans,  of  2  pers: 
Wm.  Heath,  &  Ann  his  wife. 

MICHAELL  WILLIAMS,  250  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  Oct.  11,  1646,  Page 
75.  At  Naswattock  Cr.,  adj.  James 
Bruse  &  land  formerly  belonging  to 
Henry  Wede  (or  Neede).  Trans,  of  5 
pers:  Lewis  White,  Thomas  Willson, 
Francis  Stafford,  Mary  Pedenden,  Sarah 
Williams. 

THOMAS  JOHNSON,  Gent.,  1,000 
acs.  Northampton  Co.,  Apr.  9,  1647, 
Page  76.  At  Occohannock  Cr.,  beg.  at 
the  western  part  of  Mattasip  Neck.  Due 
by  assignment  of  William  Waters  Gent., 
for  trans,  of  20  pers:  Edward  Waters, 
Anthony  Bruster,  Pershiphall  Bateman, 
Wm.  Arnold,  Jacob  Ingleton,  Wm. 
Rider,  Henry  (or  Henryett)  Barke, 
Samuell  Nicholls,  Wm.  Cowley,  Ed- 
ward Bryan,  Wm.  Warren,  John  Miles, 
Jno.  Dyer,  Catherine  Middleton,  Robert 
Todd,  Richard  Dickson,  Christian  Dick- 
son, Robert  Hobson,  Wm.  Loftis,  Wm. 
Wywell   (or  Wynell). 

LAWRENCE  WARD  &  JOHN 
KING,  100  acs.,  Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  21 
Nov.  1645,  Page  76.  Near  head  of  a 
br.  of  New  town  haven  river.,  adj.  Mr. 
Seward  &  Capt.  John  Upton.  Trans,  of 
2  pers:    John  Archer,  Richard  Markes. 

JAMES  BRUSE,  500  acs.  Northamp- 
ton Co.,  21  Mar.  1645,  Page  77.  At 
Nasawattockes  Cr.,  adj.  Christopher 
Johnson.  Trans,  of  10  pers.:  James 
Bruse,  Wm.  Wells,  Katherin  Parsons, 
Marke  Bromfeild,  Richard  Buckland, 
Thomas  Church,  Jane  Williams,  David 
Wheatley,  Henry  King,  Richard  Mich- 
aell. 

ROGER  TOHNS,  250  acs.  Northamp- 
ton Co.,  Nov.  28,  1645,  Page  77.  At 
Naswattock  Cr.,  adj.  John  Towlson. 
Trans,  of  5  pers:  Roger  Johns,  Richard 
Johns,  Jacob  Johns,  John  Adams,  Mich. 
Curret. 

RICHARD  JACOB,  300  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  Nov.  28,  1645,  Page  77. 
At  Naswattock  Cr.,  bounded  on  the  N. 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


165 


by  the  broad  creek,  adj.  Marke  Hamon 
&  James  Perin.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Hun. 
Corbin,  Sam.  Ward,  Sam.  Gilbert,  Sith 
Swayne,  Tho.  Cracker  (or  Crocker), 
Nazar.  Attocke. 

WALTER  ASTON,  Gent.,  1,040  acs. 
Charles  City  Co.,  Aug.  12,  1646,  Page 
78.  200  acs.  near  Sherley  Hundred,  S. 
upon  a  cr.  formerly  called  Wattkins  Cr., 
E.  upon  Hugh  Coxe,  dec'd.  &  W.  upon 
land  where  sd.  Aston  now  lives.  500 
acs.  upon  Wattkins  Cr.,  W.  upon  Sher- 
lye  Hundred  &  E.  upon  land  formerly 
belonging  to  Natha.  Causesey,  but  now 
in  possession  of  sd.  Aston;  250  acs.  on 
the  great  river,  E.  on  Causeys  planta- 
tion, S.  upon  Capt.  Epps'  land  in  the 
island  &  N.  on  land  of  Robert  Partin. 
200  acs.  by  patent  dated  Dec.  10,  1620 
unto  Natha.  Cassey  &  due  Aston  by 
purchase  from  John  Cassey  by  bill  of 
sale  Feb.  7,  1634;  590  acs.  by  patent 
for  the  per.  adv.  of  himself  &  his  wife 
Warbowe  &  trans,  of  10  pers.*  250 
acs.  the  residue  for  trans,  of  5  pers.* 

JOHN  CAWSEY,  Planter,  of  Chas. 
City  in  Va.,  unto  Walter  Auston,  Gent, 
of  Causes  Cleare,  by  estimation  200  acs. 
neare  Sherley  hundred,  S.  upon  Henry 
Watkins  Cr.,  N.  upon  the  main  land, 
E.  upon  the  Company  land  &  W.  upon 
land  of  Robert  Brown.  Consideration: 
1,000  wt.  of  Tobacco  &  1  cowe  already 
to  him  delivered.  Feb.  7,  1634,  Page 
78.  Signed:  John  Cawsey.  Witnesses: 
Richard  Milton,  Daniell  LLuellin. 

THOMAS  SEAWELL,  300  acs.  lying 
in  the  old  poquoson  forrest,  near  the 
head  of  a  back  river,  adj.  William 
Hampton,  William  Armestead,  the  land 
of  Mr.  Purifie  now  in  the  possession  of 
sd.  Seawell.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Tho. 
Rankins,  Susan  Holt,  Wm.  Palmer,  Sam. 
Davis,  Tho.  Poole,  Ailce  Wilson.  Sept. 
30,  1646,  Page  80. 

COL.  HENRY  BISSHOP  (Bishop), 
1,200  acs.  James  City  Co.,  Oct.  20, 
1646,  Page  81.  On  the  S.  side  of  James 
River  commonly  called  by  the  name  of 
Lower  Chipoak.  Adj.  lands  of  William 
Carter  &  William  Nusum.  Due  sd. 
Bishop  as  followeth:  600  acs.  part  of  a 
patent  granted  to  Capt.  William  Powell, 


which  land  descended  to  George  Powell, 
son  &  heir  to  sd.  Capt.  Powell,  since 
deceased  &  afterwards  for  want  of  an 
heir  was  escheated,  then  granted  to  Sir 
William  Berkeley,  by  whom  it  was  as- 
signed with  the  rights  thereunto  belong- 
ing to  Col.  Bishop,  &  600  acs.  for  trans, 
of  12  pers:  Col.  Henry  Bishop,  Willm. 
Martin,  William  Mason,  Margaret 
Thompson,  Nicholas  Chilman,  Robert 
Arey,  Wm.  Wheatley,  Grace  Aldersey, 
Tho.  Spincke,  Tho.  Ludwell,  Jno. 
Soaper,  Tho.  Price. 

ELIZABETH  CLAIBORNE,  wife  of 
Capt.  Wm.  Claiborne,  his  Majesty's 
Treasurer  of  this  Colony  of  Va.,  700 
acs.  in  the  Corporation  of  Eliz.  City, 
Nov.  26,  1647,  Page  82.  On  the  E.  side 
of  land  commonly  called  the  Strawberry 
Land,  partly  on  the  land  of  Buck  Roe, 
adj.  William  Wilkinson,  Clarke,  Point 
Comfort  Cr.,  &  land  in  the  possession 
of  heirs  of  Thomas  Oldis,  &  the  Gleab 
Land.  Due  for  trans,  of  14  pers.,*  made 
over  and  granted  to  her  by  her  husband 
in  nature  and  lieu  of  a  jointure,  accord- 
ing to  a  former  order  of  Ct.,  11  June 
1644. 

THOMAS  BABE,  300  acs.  Up.  Norf. 
Co.,  Oct.  6,  1646,  Page  82.  On  S.  side 
of  Indian  Cr.,  a  br.  of  the  Wwd.  br.  of 
Nansimum  Riv.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
Lawrence  Peeters,  William  Poyter,  Giles 
Webb,  Ann  Barnes,  Richard  Bernes, 
Tobias  Stephens. 

THOMAS  BABE,  150  acs.  Up.  Norf. 
Co.,  Oct.  6,  1646,  Page  82.  Adj.  Tho- 
mas Hampton  &  his  own  land.  Trans, 
of  3  pers:  Henry  Marriott,  John  Davys, 
Nicholas  Dixson. 

JOHN  ASHCOMB,  829  acs.,  Up. 
Norf.  Co.,  Oct.  7,  1646,  Page  83.  Beg. 
at  miles  end  of  Michael  Wilcox,  adj. 
land  of  George  White,  E.  to  a  place 
called  Newgate,  to  Laughleys  Cr.  be- 
longing to  the  Wwd.  br.  of  Elizabeth 
River.  250  acres  due  by  virtue  of  the 
rights  of  a  patent  granted  sd.  Ashcomb 
Mar.  6,  1638,  which  patent  is  surren- 
dered, &  600  acres  for  trans,  of  12  pers: 
John  Ashcomb,  Winifrid  Ashcomb, 
John  Ashcomb,  Junr.,  Wm.  Lasher, 
Richard     Galloway,     James     Goodcross, 


166 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Madelew  (or  Madelene)  Powell,  Henry 
Jones,  Edward  Wood,  Martha  Lylls, 
Elizabeth  Coram,  John  Moore,  Winifrid 
Jones,  Tho.  Salsberry,  Gilbert  Lake,  Ed- 
ward Prince,  Mary  Gallaway. 

THOMAS  WRIGHT,  460  acs.  Lower 
Norf.  Co.,  Apr.  26,  1647,  Page  84.  Up- 
on the  Northward  side  of  the  W.  br.  of 
Eliz.  Riv.,  beg.  on  an  island,  near  mouth 
of  Wrights  Cr.,  to  the  Swd.  side  of 
Cowards  Cr.  &  adj.  John  Ridford.  Part 
due  by  patent  to  him  dated  14  July, 
1635  &  assignment  of  310  acs.  from 
Cornelius  Loyd  of  6  pers.  imported: 
Robert  Smythwood,  Thomas  Lustcomb, 
Thomas  Aston,  John  Leigh,  Robert 
Sorrell,  John  Sorrell. 

ELIZABETH  BARCROFT,  1,200  acs. 
Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  June  17,  1647,  Page 
84.  Near  the  head  of  Sewards  Cr., 
Adj.  Mr.  Cooper  &  Capt.  Barnard. 
Trans,  of  24  pers:  Char.  Barcroft,  Arth. 
Buckley,  Alice  Prichard,  John  Hardy, 
Elias  Colewell,  Eliz.  Waters,  Edmond 
Green,  Geo.  Minners,  Owen  Middleton, 
Jno.  Godwin,  Jon.  Bilbey,  Bridget  Cal- 
cup,  Cha.  Barcroft,  Jno.  Lewis,  Martin 
Crafford,  Wm.  Leur  (Lour),  John  Big- 
hill,  Wm.  Downing,  Fran.  Anderson, 
Dorothy  Darling,  Edm.  Graves,  Garrett 
Wynn,    Arth.    Floyd,    Charles    Barcroft. 

LAWRENCE  PEETERS,  300  acs. 
Nansimum  Co.,  June  17,  1647.  (Date 
erased).  Upon  head  br.  of  N.  W.  br. 
of  Nansimum  Riv.  called  Indian  Cr., 
adj.  William  Story  &  John  Garwood. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Morgan  Williams, 
Richard  Parker,  Robert  Price,  Thomas 
Norris,  Israeli  Harris,  Hen.  Berthole- 
mewe.    Page  85. 

THOMAS  PARKER,  300  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  Nov.  15,  1647,  Page  85. 
On  a  br.  of  Edwards  Cr.  known  as 
Ashen  Swamp,  adj.  Richard  Jackson. 
Due  by  assignment  of  patent  from  Tho- 
mas Morrey  (Murrey). 

PEETER  KNIGHT,  255  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  called  Basses  Choice,  May 
10,  1643,  Page  86.  Near  Pagan  Bay  & 
Dawsons  Cr.  &  land  of  Mr.  Peter  Hall. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:    Peter  Knight,  Thomas 


Harris,    James    Foster,    Edward    Wells, 
William  Nicholas,  Thomas  Cobb. 

MR.  ROBERT  VAUSE,  400  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,  Sept.  17,  1647,  Page  86. 
Upon  Queens  Cr.,  bounding  along  Hart- 
wells  Cr.  &  Maiden  Swamp  Cr.  Part  of 
grant  of  650  acs.  to  John  Hartwell,  as- 
signed to  Vause  &  Tobias  Freere,  &  by 
Nicholas  Jernew,  Atty.  of  sd.  Freer, 
wholly  assigned  to  sd.  Vause. 

MR.  GEORGE  WHITE,  Clerke,  900 
Nansimond  Co.,  &  part  in  Low.  Norf. 
Co.,  April  22,  1648,  Page  87.  Beg.  at  a 
place  called  Newgate,  adj.  lands  of  John 
Ashton,  Thomas  Brown,  William  Read 
&  Capt.  Thomas  Barbage.  On  Browns 
bay,  a  Wwd.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.  &  nigh 
the  head  of  Bullocks  Cr.  Trans,  of  18 
pers:  George  White,  Margaret  his  wife, 
Wm.  Boniday,  Mich.  Ware,  William 
Waters,  John  Williams,  John  Hobson, 
Wm.  Wright,  Walter  Harson,  Mary 
Barkeley,  Grego.  Allen,  William  Len- 
non,  Henry  Morgan,  Thomas  Gastrey, 
Abra.  Johnson,  Xtopr.  Norton,  John 
Newman,  Peter  Raven. 

JOHN  KING  &  LAWRENCE 
WARD,  500  acs.  Isle  of  Wight  Co., 
Apr.  19,  1648,  Page  87.  On  the  end 
of  the  br.  of  the  Pagan  Bay  Cr.  called 
the  Freechat,  beg.  at  Turkey  Hill.  Trans, 
of  10  pers:  Thomas  Reere,  (or  Reeve). 
Thomas  Everard,  Danll.  Goulson,  Robert 
Taylor,  Rich.  Andrewes,  Thomas  Fran- 
chiss,  John  King,  Elizabeth  his  wife. 
Fortune  the  servt.,  John  King  the  2nd 
time. 

LIEUT.  FRANCIS  MASON,  200  acs. 
Low.  Co.  of  New  Norf.,  Mar.  22,  1645, 
Page  88.  150  acs.  in  Linn  haven  at  a 
cr.  to  the  W.  of  John  Holmes'  house, 
adj.  Giles  Collinns,  &  50  acs.  being  3 
smaller  hammocks  of  land  joined  to- 
gether upon  Hogg  Island  in  Little  Cr. 
in  Linn  haven.  Due  by  former  patent 
&  trans,  of  4  pers.* 

JOSEPH  CROSHAWE,  700  acs. 
Charles  River  Co.,  June  20,  1646,  Page 
88.  Beg.  at  the  Mill  Sw.,  near  lands  of 
Richard  Major  &  John  Davis.  Trans,  of 
14  pers:    Thomas  Cooper,  Jno.  Fletcher, 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


167 


Richard  Page,  Wm.  Smith,  Seath 
Patrick,  Fra.  Hofe,  Susan  Hall,  Tho. 
Mors,  Jno.  Walker,  Jno.  Wright,  Tho- 
mas Sanders,  Ann  Wilch,  Tho.  Hin- 
shaw,  Richard  Whitley. 

EDWARD  MAJOR,  Gent.,  450  acs. 
with  50  acs.  of  marsh,  Nansimum  Co., 
Feb.  10,  1645,  Page  89.  On  the  N. 
side  of  Nansimum  Riv.,  beg.  on  Ewd. 
side  of  the  mouth  of  Majors  Cr.,  etc., 
adj.  land  of  Mr.  Oliver  Spry.  450  acs. 
by  a  former  patent  &  50  acs.  for  trans. 
of  1  per.* 

NICHOLAS  BROOKE,  the  Younger, 
Merchant,  500  acs.  commonly  called  the 
Middle  Plantation,  Yorke  Co.,  Aug.  13, 
1646,  Page  90.  Lying  S.  W.  upon  the 
Palisadoes,  &  land  formerly  belonging 
to  Thomas  Lucas,  N.  W.  upon  the  great 
swamp.  Formerly  granted  Capt.  Rich- 
ard Popeley  for  his  first  seating,  by  him 
sold  to  Henry  Brooke  the  younger,  mer- 
chant, &  since  conveyed  to  sd.  Nicholas. 

HENRY  BROOKE,  Jr.,  Merchant  to 
NICHOLAS  BROOKE,  assignment  of 
the  above.  Consideration:  7,000  Lbs. 
Tobacco  with  cask.  Mar.  3,  1645,  Page 
90.  Witnesses:  Samll.  Abbott  &  Edm. 
Mathewes,  Possession  of  the  above 
plantation  was  delivered  to  said  Henry 
by  Elizabeth,  the  relict  &  Admix,  of 
said  Popeley. 

ELIZABETH  &  RATCHELL  ROB- 
BINS,  Orphants  of  Edward  Robins,  350 
acs.  in  Northampton  Co.,  June  4,  1646, 
Page  91.  Adj.  land  of  Samuell  Scott, 
Mr.  Taylor  &  Mr.  John  Salvadge.  Trans, 
of    7    pers:    Edward    Robbins,    Thomas 

Joyner,  Oliver ,  Lawrence  Stanfeild, 

Nicho.  Rainhard,  Abra.  Boothes,  An- 
thony James. 

RICHARD  MOORE  &  WILLIAM 
WELTON,  250  acs.  Up.  Norf.  Co.. 
Apr.  23,  1646,  Page  91.  Adj.  land  of 
Mr.  Richard  Bennet  &  Mr.  Phillip  Ben- 
net.  Trans,  of  5  pers:  Wm.  Johnson, 
Danll.  Johnson,  Richard  Moore,  James 
Daley,  Thomas  Moore. 

THOMAS  TODD,  50  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  Mar.  5,  1645,  Page  92.  Up- 
on Swd.  side  of  the  Ewd.  br.  of  Eliza. 


River.    Due  by  former  patent  &  also  for 
trans,  of  1  pers.* 

JAMES  HAWLEY,  300  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  Apr.  10,  1647,  Page  93. 
Upon  the  head  of  the  lower  bay  creeke, 
adj.  land  of  John  Rowe.  By  virtue  of 
a  former  patent. 

WILLIAM  HOCKADAY,  500  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,  Aug.  6,  1646,  Page  93.  On 
the  S.  side  of  Charles  River  near  the 
Narrowes,  N.  W.  by  W.  upon  Warrany 
Cr.  N.  E.  by  E.  upon  the  river,  and  S. 
E.  by  E.  towards  Ware  Creek.  Trans, 
of  10  pers:  Wm.  Cartar,  Rich.  Parker, 
Jno.  Sturrupp,  Henry  Mason,  Ben. 
Haward,  Morian  Jones,  Charles  Brooke, 
Edmond  Strechey,  Henry  Mason,  Charles 
Engard. 

JOHN  BROACH,  300  acs.  York  Co., 
July  9,  1646,  Page  94.  Neare  the  Midle 
Plantation,  adj.  Nicholas  Brooke,  S.  S. 
W.  upon  the  Horse  path,  W.  by  N. 
upon  land  of  Nicholas  Sabbrell  N.  by 
E.  upon  the  Indian  Spring  and  S.  E. 
towards  Samuell  Mathewes.  Trans,  of 
6  pers:  Robert  Hand,  Antho.  Shandall, 
Mathew  Todd,  Ann  Richards,  Mary  Ed- 
wards, John  Woldridge. 

DAVID  JONES,  650  acs.  Charles 
City  Co.,  Nov.  20,  1646,  Page  94.  Bet. 
2  creeks  opposite  against  Taphanna 
Marsh  upon  the  Northerly  side  of  the 
River,  being  a  neck  of  land  E.  S.  E. 
upon  David  Jones  Cr.  300  acs.  by 
former  patent  &  350  acs.  due  for 
trans,  of  7  pers:  Richard  Wolfe,  Tho. 
Peacock,  Peteer  Debar,  Ja.  Thompson, 
Fra.  Rocke,  Margaret  Weym'ke  (Wey- 
marke),  Mary  Hunter. 

DANIELL  LLUELLIN,  956  acs., 
June  4,  1645,  Page  95.  The  Norther- 
most  part.  beg.  above  Mrs.  Heymans,  N. 
on  the  up.  branches  of  Turkey  Is.  Cr., 
S.  on  the  head  of  Mr.  Astons  land;  the 
Southermost  part  extending  on  Mr.  As- 
tons land  &  W.  upon  Joseph  Ryalls  bet. 
Dockham  Cr.  &  Sherley  Hundred;  100 
acs.  in  Sherley  Hundred,  adj.  Robert 
Bourne  &  John  Harris.  100  acs.  pur- 
chased of  Robert  Partin,  the  elder, 
granted  sd.  Partin  Feb.  20,  1619,  & 
conveyed  by  Robert  Partin  the  elder  & 


168 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Robert  Partin  the  younger,  his  sonn, 
unto  sd.  Lluellin  by  deed  dated  Apr.  13, 
1642.  The  residue  by  former  patent  for 
trans,  of  17  pers.* 

JAMES  BAGNOLL,  200  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  July  25,  1646,  Page  95.  Up- 
on the  head  br.  of  the  Clarkes  Cr.  be- 
longing to  the  W.  Br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  adj. 
land  of  Mr.  George  White  &  Mr.  Rich- 
ard Bennet.  Due  by  former  patent  for 
trans,  of  4  pers.* 

CAPT.     ROBERT     HUTCHINSON, 

475  acs.  James  City  Co.,  Aug.  31,  1646, 
Page  96.  350  acs.  within  Chickahamo- 
nie  Riv.,  adj.  George  Vinoyn  (or 
Unwyn),  &  125  acs.  upon  Checkroes 
Cr.  350  acs.  by  purchase  from  Thomas 
Paul  &  125  by  purchase  from  George 
Vunoyn  ?. 

EDWARD  HALL,  Admr.  of  the  es- 
tate of  Thomas  Cooper,  June  10,  1646, 
Page  97.  200  acs.  in  Low  Norf.  Co., 
near  the  head  of  Chesepeian  Riv.  Due 
by  assignment  of  patent  of  Lancaster 
Levet,  and  due  for  trans,  of  4  pers.* 

THOMAS  BRICE,  150  acs.  Up.  Norf. 
Co.,  June  6,  1646,  Page  97.  Upon  Ewd. 
side  of  the  N.  W.  br.  of  Nansimum 
Riv.,  against  Indian  Cr.,  adj.  George 
Showning  &  Francis  Maiden.  100  acs. 
due  by  former  patent  &  50  acs.  for  trans, 
of  1  person.* 

ROBERT  BYRD,  150  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  Mar.  4,  1646,  Page  98.  Up- 
on a  br.  of  the  lower  baye  called  Se- 
wards  Cr.,  beg.  at  the  mouth  of  Goose 
Hill  Cr.,  adj.  E.  S.  E.  upon  Hugh  Winn 
&  W.  N.  W.  upon  John  Steward  (or 
Seward).  Formerly  granted  to  William 
Yarrett  for  trans,  of  3  pers.*  Due  sd. 
Byrd  "under  the  hands  of  Hugh  Wynn 
&  William  Yarret,  Oct.  20,  1641. 

THOMAS  MOUNFORD,  200  acs. 
New  Norf.  Co.,  Mar.  5,  1646,  Page  99. 
Upon  W.  br.  of  Nansimum  Riv.,  adj. 
William  Stories  land.  Formerly  granted 
to  Richard  Heynes,  by  him  sold  to  Tho- 
mas Hamond,  by  him  sold  to  John 
Freebody,  who  conveyed  same  to  sd. 
Mounford.  Due  Heynes  for  trans,  of 
4  pers.* 


WILLIAM  LAWRENCE,  300  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  Apr.  6,  1647,  Page  99. 
Lyeing  on  Hogg  Island  maine,  bounded 
on  the  S.  of  Mr.  Thomas  Stamp,  N.  to- 
wards Shippeaks  Cr.  &  on  E.  with  Mr. 
Butler.  Due  by  former  patent  for  trans, 
of  6  pers.* 

JOHN  GARRET,  232  acs.  Up.  Norf. 
Co.,  Mar.  5,  1645,  Page  100.  Upon  the 
S.  side  of  New  town  haven  Riv.,  adj. 
John  Garwood  &  Henry  Bradley. 
Formerly  granted  unto  William  Jacob, 
by  him  assigned  &  due  sd.  Garret  for 
trans,  of  5  pers.* 

MR.  WILLIAM  BROWNING,  650 
acs.  James  City  Co.,  Apr.  10,  1646, 
Page  100.  Within  the  limits  of  Archers 
Hope,  E.  upon  the  Ponds  dividing  this 
land  from  Martins  Hundred.  400  acs. 
formerly  granted  unto  George  Sandis, 
Esqr.,  by  patent  dated  4  Dec.  1624,  and 
by  him  sold  to  Edward  Grindall  who 
left  it  to  his  heir  in  England  that  con- 
stituted Capt.  Brocas  &  Mr.  Thomas 
Harwood  his  Attorneys  to  dispose  of 
same,  and  who  sold  same  unto  Jno. 
Browning,  father  of  sd.  William.  250 
acs.  formerly  granted  unto  John  Jeffer- 
son in  1619,  after  granted  unto  Mr. 
John  Uti  by  order  of  court,  Oct.  16, 
1628,  &  by  sd.  Uti  for  a  valuable  con- 
sideration sold  unto  sd.  John  Browning 
Nov.  27,  1629,  unto  all  of  which  sd. 
William  is  now  heir  apparent  by  descent 
from  the  sd.  John. 

JOHN  UTY,  of  Hogg  Is.  in  Va., 
Gent.,  have  bargained  and  sold  all  the 
rights  and  interests  of  my  plantation 
whereupon  I  am  now  seated,  called 
Utopia,  unto  JOHN  BROWNING,  of 
Eliz.   City,   Gent.   Consideration:    3,000 

Lbs.  Tobacco  &  3,500  of (blank). 

Nov.  27,  1629,  Page  101.  Witnesses: 
Geo.  Menefie  &  James  Chambers. 
Signed:    John  Utye. 

JAMES  WARRADINE,  470^4  acs., 
July  8,  1647,  Page  101.  Adj.  John 
Chaplin.  Formerly  granted  unto  Tho- 
mas Mathewes  and  made  void  for  want 
of  seating  within  the  time  limited.  Due 
sd.  Warradaine  for  trans,  of  10  pers. 
assigned  unto  him  by  James  Powell: 
Robert  Williams,   Hugh   Stile,   Thomas 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


169 


Calton,  Phillip  Prendergast,  Richard 
Smith,  Tho.  Warren,  Eliza.  Pall,  Rach. 
Williams,  2  Negroes. 

JOHN  SIDNEY,  300  acs.  Low.  Norf. 
Co.,  Aug.  18,  1647,  Page  102.  Upon 
S.  side  of  the  Ewd.  br.  of  Eliza.  Riv., 
beg.  at  the  mouth  of  Tomakins  Cr.  Due 
for  trans,  of  6  pers:  Thomas  Dunton, 
Thomas  Wattkins,  Daniell  Maley,  Mary 
Peirce,  Sarah  King,  Margery  Brough. 

NICHOLAS  WILLIAMS,  50  acs., 
James   Citty   Co.,   Aug.    7,    1647,   Page 

103.  Upon  the  N.  side  of  Ralphs  Cr. 
21  yr.  lease.  Fee  rent:  2  bbls.  sound  & 
sweet  Indian  corne,  etc. 

SAMUELL  ABBOTT,  400  acs.  Nansi- 
mum  Co.,  Oct.  10,  1646,  Page  103.  Up- 
on the  head  of  Indian  Cr.,  a  br.  of  W. 
br.  of  Nansimum  Riv.,  adj.  William 
Story.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Tho.  Johnson, 
Wm.  Hewes,  Richd.  Webb,  Tho. 
Thompson,  Richard  Smith,  John  Blend, 
Henry  Foster,  Richard  Williams. 

WILLIAM  LUCAS,  800  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  Aug.  22,  1647,  Page  104. 
Beg.  2  points  below  the  place  where  the 
Bay  devides  itself  into  two  branches,  etc. 
Formerly  granted  unto  Casar  Huggett, 
Dec.  21,  1643,  &  due  sd.  Lucas  by  in- 
termarriage with  the  relict  &  Adm'x.  of 
sd.  Huggett,  and  taken  up  by  said  Lucas 
as  deserted  land. 

EDWARD  HALL,  400  acs.  Low. 
New  Norf.  Co.,   Sept.   18,   1646,  Page 

104.  Upon  the  S.  W.  side  of  the  mas- 
ter br.  of  Bennets  Cr.,  about  a  mile 
above  John  Gookins  Landing  place. 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  John  Clarke,  Jno. 
Underwood,  Hum.  Hall,  Thomas  Clay, 
Robert  Nigent,  Richard  Knight,  Edward 
Cannon,  Ann,  his  wife. 

THOMAS  HAMPTON,  Clerk,  parcel 
of  land  in  James  Island  behind  the 
Church,  June  12,  1644,  Page  105.  Con- 
taining from  the  Eastermost  bounds 
Westerly  112  paces,  5  ft.  to  the  pace, 
and  running  the  same  breadth  Nly.  to 
the  back  river,  being  8  acres.  Due  by 
Act  of  Assembly,  Feb.  20,  1636,  con- 
cerning "Undertakers  to  build  upon 
James  City  Island." 


JOHN  WILLIAMS,  150  acres,  War- 
wick Co.,  Aug.  30,  1647,  p.  105.  Near 
the  head  of  Deep  Cr.,  adj.  James  Merry- 
man.  Part  of  a  patent  granted  unto 
John  Rodis,  who  assigned  same  to 
Merryman,   who   sold   to   sd   Williams. 

JOHN  LEWIS  &  RICHARD  WOO- 
TON,  100  acs.  Warwick  Co.,  Aug.  30, 
1647,  Page  106.  At  the  head  of  Deep 
Cr.,  upon  Shotball  quarter,  adj.  James 
Merryman.  Due  by  purchase  from  sd. 
Merryman. 

JAMES  STONE,  Merchant  &  NICO- 
LAS JERNEW,  Planter,  564  acs.  Yorke 
Co.,  Nov.  4,  1647,  Page  106.  Upon 
Charles  Riv.  bet.  Queens  &  Savages 
Crks.  500  acs.  formerly  granted  sd. 
Jernew  &  164  acs.  for  trans,  of  4  pers.* 

RICHARD  WILKINSON,  236  acs., 
Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  Aug.  13,  1646,  Page 
107.  Opposite  Pagan  Point,  N.  W.  up- 
on a  swamp  dividing  same  from  land  of 
Mr.  John  Moone.  "100  acs.  being 
granted  unto  Dorothy  Woodward  the 
Daughter  Woodward,  by  order  of  Court 
at  James  City  29th  Aug.  1633  &  pur- 
chased by  sd.  Wilkinson  of  Richard 
Death."    136  acs.  for  trans,  of  5  pers.* 

JOHN  FLYNE,  50  acs.  Yorke  Cr., 
Aug.  20,  1646,  Page  107.  Upon  Chees- 
mans  Cr.,  adj.  land  upon  which  he  lives. 
Due  for  trans,  of:  John  Peagler. 

THOMAS  HOLMES,  200  acs.  in 
Yorke  River,  Oct.  7,  1647,  Page  108. 
Oposite  the  mouth  of  Matapony,  above 
land  of  Martin  Westerlin.  Due  by  as- 
signment from  Thomas  Heath  of  sur- 
vey &  certificate  for  4  pers.:  Mary  Me- 
land,  Mary  Heath,  Nicholas  Rogers, 
Tho.  Griffeth. 

WILLIAM  BLACKEY,  300  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,  July  29,  1647,  Page  108. 
Opposite  to  Pamunkee  Landing  place, 
S.  E.  &  N.  upon  land  of  Martin  Wester- 
lincke.  Due  for  trans,  of  6  pers:  Wm. 
Brown,  Eliza,  his  wife,  Debora  Brown, 
Richard  Hopkins,  Wm.  Blackey,  Step. 
Young. 

LEONARD  PETTOCK,  500  acs.  Ac- 
comack  Co.,   July   7,    1647,    Page    108. 


170 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


At  Naswattock  Cr.,  beg.  at  westermost 
part  of  land  of  John  Major.  Due  for 
trans,  of  10  pers:  Chr.  Graves,  William 
Wright,  John  Scearle,  Roger  Wormsley, 
Eliza.  Richards,  Fra.  Harber,  Jacob 
Mathews,  Henry  Frith,  Henry  Hans- 
horne. 

WILLIAM  WHITTINGTON,  450 
acs.  Northampton  Co.,  July  13,  1647, 
Page  109.  Being  a  neck  of  land  at  Nas- 
wattocke  Cr.,  bet.  Daw's  Neck  & 
Major  Neck.  Due  for  trans,  of  9  pers: 
William  Whitington,  Susan  his  wife, 
Edward  Drew,  Mary  Uxer  (uxor  his 
wife  ?),  Richard  Jacob,  William  Free- 
man, Peeter  Nowell,  William  Barbeard, 
Thomas  Parks.  Note:  This  land  being 
lost  8  of  these  rights  are  made  use  of 
in  another  patent  of  the  said  Whitting- 
tons. 

STEPHEN  HARSEY  (HARSLEY) 
NICHOLAS  WADDELOW,  400  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  called  by  the  name 
of   Dawes   Neck,   July    13,    1647,    Page 

109.  At  Naswattock  Cr.  Trans,  of  8 
pers:  Nehemiah  Coventon,  Edward 
Southerne,  Alice  Stewardson,  Toby 
Northon,  Margaret  Norton,  Nicholas 
Wadlow,  Ann  Jackson. 

EDMOND  SCARBROUGH,  100  acs. 
Northampton   Co.,   Oct.   6,    1646,    Page 

110.  On  the  northern  part  of  an  an- 
cient grant  of  200  acs.  of  sd.  Scarbrough, 
bounded  W.  by  the  main  bay,  E.  by 
land  formerly  belonging  to  John  Neale, 
now  Mr.  Deacons  &  Company.  Due  for 
trans,  of  2  pers:  Robert  Harrison, 
Sisley  Stratton. 

NICHOLAS  GRANGER,  350  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  Sept.  20,  1647,  Page 
110.  Near  head  of  Naswattocks  Cr., 
adj.  land  of  Stephen  Horsey.  Trans,  of 
7  pers.*  (Note:  The  name  of  Nicho- 
las Granger  is  the  only  name  appearing 
under  this  record.) 

JOHN  LITTLE,  100  acs.  Northamp- 
ton Co.,  Sept.  20,  1647,  Page  110.  Near 
Cheristone  Cr.,  adj.  land  commonly 
called  the  Companyes  Land,  the  Secre- 
tarys  Land,  lands  of  Mr.  Obedience 
Robbins  &  John  Wilkins.  Trans,  of  2 
pers:    John  Little  &  Eliza.  Bacon. 


WILLIAM  EGBEROW,  500  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  Aug.  20,  1647,  Page 
111.  In  up.  Chipoaks  Cr.,  next  to  land 
of  William  Rookins  deed.,  and  adj.  his 
own  land.  400  acs.  by  former  grant 
unto  Barradine  Merter  (Merler  or  Mer- 
cer), by  whom  it  was  assigned  unto  sd. 
Egberow,  &  100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2 
pers:  William  Egberow  &  Mathew 
Battle. 

JONATHAN  GILLS,  450  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  Mar.  6,  1647,  Page  112. 
At    Haigers   Cr.,    adj.   William   Gayny. 

Trans,  of  9  pers:    Francis  ,  Phillip 

Wattkins,  Wm.  Starling,  Timothy 
Thrallop,  Alex.  Wignall,  Thomas  Wig- 
nail,  William  Smart,  Roger  Burrough, 
Elizabeth  a  Negro. 

RICHARD  STARNELL,  &  GIDEON 
TILLISON,  200  acs.  Low.  Norf.  Co., 
Feb.  24,  1647.  Page  112.  Upon  W.  br. 
of  Eliz.  River,  being  a  neck  of  land  adj. 
the  Clarks  Cr.  and  bounded  on  E.  by 
Wrights  Creek.  Due  by  former  patent 
unto  John  Radford,  who  assigned  same 
to  Starnell  &  Tillison.  This  land  is  now 
divided  into  2  parcels  of  150  acs.  each. 

THOMAS  BROWN,  240  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  Oct.  7,  1646,  Page  113.  On 
the  S.  side  of  the  Clarks  Cr.  a  br.  of  Eliz. 
Riv.,  adj.  his  own  &  land  of  George 
White.  Due  by  assignment  of  the  rights 
of  5  pers.  trans,  by  Cornelius  Loyd: 
Edward  Dorsey,  Richd.  Starnell,  John 
Stibbs,    Tho.    Parker,    Richard    Hunter. 

FRANCIS  MARTIN,  300  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  Oct.  10,  1645,  Page  113. 
At  Naswattock  Cr.,  near  land  of  Henry 
Pedendan  &  William  Berryman.  Trans, 
of  6  pers:  Edward  Major,  Fra.  Major, 
Eliza.  Major,  John  Major,  Tho.  Major, 
Chr.  Peirce. 

THOMAS  STEPHENS,  300  acs.  Eliz. 
City  Co.,  Jan.  6,  1647,  Page  114.  200 
acs.  beg.  at  the  Bridge  at  the  narrow  of 
the  back  river,  &  100  acs.  beg.  at  the 
edge  of  the  road,  W.  N.  W.  into  the 
island.  200  acs.  formerly  granted  unto 
Ephaproditus  Lawson,  by  him  assigned 
unto  Samuel  Groose  (Grosse),  by  him 
unto  John  Davis,  by  Davis  to  Stephens. 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


171 


100  for  trans,  of  2  pers:    James  Bisole 
(or  Bissill)   &  Peter  Westhead. 

THOMAS  TODD,  50  acs.  Eliza.  City 
Co.,  Mar.  6,  1647,  Page  114.  At  the 
head  of  old  Poquoson  river  bounding 
upon  Mr.  Saphers  land.  Formerly 
granted  unto  Robert  Gold,  who  assigned 
same  unto  Richard  Loyd,  by  him  to 
Geoge  Sapher,  by  him  to  Thomas  Boss- 
well,  by  him  to  Thomas  Williams,  by 
him  to  Christopher  Copeland,  by  him 
to  Tho.  Boswell  &  him  unto  the  sd. 
Todd. 

EDWARD  BLAND,  Merchant,  1,300 
acs.  on  the  S.  side  of  James  River,  about 
a  mile  from  the  head  of  Upper  Chi- 
poaks,  from  the  path  leading  from 
Swann  Bay  to  the  Indian  Feilds.  Due 
for  trans,  of  26  pers:  Edward  Bland, 
Ja.  Bland,  Wm.  Beare,  Eliza.  Bland, 
Tho.  Leigh,  Geo.  Proby,  Richard  Litler, 
Robt.  Woodruffe,  Jo.  Smith,  Lydia 
Emeroy,  Mary  Beard,  Griffeth  Davis, 
John  Thomas,  Anna  Burk,  Nich. 
Weather,  Kat.  Lands  (?),  Ann.  Farrar, 
Geo.  Marrow,  Lucy  Evans,  Geo.  Price, 
Tho.  Dorwin,  William  Turke,  Thomas 
Ridley,  Richard  Strader,  Charles  Bald- 
win.   Mar.  10,  1647,  Page  115. 

JOHN  ELLIS,  JAMES  JOANES 
(JONES)  &  JOHN  TAYLOR,  500  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  Apr.  9,  1648,  Page 
115.  At  Otchahannock  Cr.,  bounded  W. 
by  land  of  Thomas  Johnson.  Due  by  as- 
signment from  Edward  Drew  by  &  for 
trans,  of  10  pers:  John  Jenkin,  Alice 
Moye,  Wm.  Berriman,  Giles  Bashaw, 
John  Saye,  Edward  Morris,  William 
Carter,  Peter  Higginson,  George  Hill, 
Tho.  Stidwell. 

JOHN  SEWARD,  1,200  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  Apr.  15,  1648,  Page  116. 
On  a  br.  of  Roynoak  River  called  the 
black  water.  Trans,  of  24  pers:  Robert 
Partin,  Margret  his  wife,  Robert  Partin, 
Junr.,  Avis,  Rebecca,  Debora,  his 
Daughters,  Richard  Goldsmith,  Abra. 
Shearman,  James  Parrit,  Richd.  Thom- 
kin,  Geo.  Duke,  Wm.  Jackson,  Wm. 
Harris,  Alice  Edwards,  James  Pelard,  Jo. 
Richards,  John  Richards,  Richard 
Wakeing,  Robert  Dowen,  John  Seanoble 


(or  Seavoble),  Ann  Yarner,  Phillip 
Martin,  Wm.  Reynolds,  Henry  Knowells. 

JOHN   SEWARD,   400   acs.   Isle   of 

Wight  Co.,  Apr.  15,  1648,  Page  117. 
Swd.  side  of  a  branch  of  Roynoak  River. 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  Tho.  Williams,  Robt. 
Brice,  Mary  Evelin,  Wm.  Walter,  Peter 
Guttrige,  Jane  How,  Fra.  Morgan,  John 
Jones. 

GEORGE  SALSBURY,  100  acs.  Nan- 
simund  Co.,  Apr.  15,  1648,  Page  117. 
Upon  S.  W.  side  of  New  town  haven 
river,  adj.  Thomas  Brice  &  Henry 
Beadly.    Trans,  of  2  pers.* 

ROBERT  PITT,  300  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  Apr.  17,  1648,  Page  118. 
S.  W.  towards  New  town  haven  river. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Robert  Horton,  John 
Tiller,  William  Walter,  Symon  Cox, 
Margaret  Orde,  Thomas  Blanch. 

HENRY  PEDENDEN,  550  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  June  10,  1646,  Page 

118.  At  Naswattocks  Cr.  Trans,  of  11 
pers:  Henry  Heakley,  Mary  his  wife, 
Xtopr.  Bryan,  Robert  Camblett,  Ja. 
Standish,  Mary  Foxly,  Jno.  Culpeper, 
Ja.  Harden,  Jno.  Price,  Nico.  Crook- 
neck,  Hen.  Pedenden. 

THOMAS  SAVEDGE,  50  Oacs. 
Northampton  Co.,  June  20,  1646,  Page 

119.  At  Naswattock  Cr.  Trans,  of  10 
pers:  Jno.  Seaverne,  Bridgett  his  wife, 
Jno.  Severne,  Jr.,  Abra.  Hargraves,  Wm. 
Alleson,  Wm.  Stephens,  Abra.  Merifield, 
John  Pott,  Robert  Satums,  John  Linch. 

THOMAS  MILES,  150  acs.  upon  the 
Eastermost  br.  of  Eliza.  Riv.  in  Nehun- 
tas  Cr.,  next  above  land  of  Robert 
Martin,  Nov.  17,  1646,  Page  119. 
Trans,  of  3  pers:  Francis  Baker,  Phillip 
Weston,  John  Ducket. 

MR.  LEWIS  BURWELL  &  THOMAS 
VAUSE,  2,300  acs.,  Apr.  18,  1648,  Page 
119.  The  lower  part  in  Yorke  Riv. 
about  7  mi.  up  the  Narrow  on  the  S. 
side  thereof,  along  lands  of  Mr.  Francis 
Fludd,  Mr.  Thomas  Broughton  and 
William  Black.  Trans,  of  46  pers:  Ed- 
ward Kingswell,  Roger  Wingatt,  ,lthe 
Minister,  his  Son"  Anthony  Kingswell, 


172 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Wm.  Bradshaw,  John  Bell,  Chastene 
(?)  Burdett,  William  Spry,  Arth.  Wil- 
son, Samll.  Mayne,  James  Cooke,  Eliza. 
Letts,  Elias  Taylors  wife,  his  daughter, 
Fra.  Wilken  (name  altered),  Tho. 
Adams,  Jno.  Hasting,  Jno.  Henman, 
Wm.  Burtenwood,  Fra.  Barington,  Rich. 
Hewitt,  Uryas  Smith,  Antho.  Waddy, 
Elias  Taylor,  Tho.  Lee,  Richard  Smith, 
Tho.  Lucas,  Eliza.  Bennison,  Wm.  Tay- 
lor, Jno.  Tolson,  Wm.  Harmon,  Jno. 
Mackreall,  Char.  Caterer,  Alex.  Rey- 
nold, the  Lady  Clifton,  Eliza.  Booth, 
Marg.  Daton,  Maids,  Dorothy  Sillingat, 
her  Daughter,  Sarah  Dera.  Coz.  (?), 
Peter  Banson,  John  Davis,  Wm.  Bur- 
well,  Fra.  Harrison,  his  wife. 

THOMAS  BROUGHTON,  1050  acs., 
Apr.  19,  1648,  Page  120.  About  5  mi. 
up  Pamunkey  Riv.  above  the  mouth  of 
Matapony  River,  near  Mr.  Francis  Fludd 
&  along  Mr.  John  Broach.  850  acs.  by 
virtue  of  the  rights  of  a  patent  granted 
unto  Eliza.  Hall  (or  Hull),  assigned  un- 
to sd.  Broughton  which  patent  is  surren- 
dered, &  200  acs.  for  trans,  of  4  pers. 
(The  following  names  appear)  George 
Hall  (or  Hull),  Eliza  his  wife,  Edm. 
his  son,  David  his  son,  Sibbella  Jenkins, 
Mary  Lowe,  John  Dorman,  David 
Holmes,  Edwd.  Michaell,  Nicho.  Fen- 
nan,  Robert  Phillips,  Evan  Morris, 
Antho.  Atkins,  Arth.  Donned,  Oliver 
Balfe,  Richd.  Workman,  Robert  Layne, 
Wm.  Burwell,  Lewis  Burwell,  Geo.  Bur- 
well,  Elizabeth  Burwell.  These  (4  last 
named)  assigned  by  Mrs.  Hall  (or 
Hull). 

FRANCIS  FLUDD,  300  acs.  York 
Co.,  Apr.  19,  1648,  Page  121.  On  the 
S.  side  about  7  mi.  up  the  Narrow, 
along  Thomas  Vaus  &  Mr.  Lewis  Bur- 
well &  adj.  Mr.  Thomas  Broughton. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  James  Redwood, 
Isaac  Jones,  Elizabeth  Potter,  Robert 
Hixams,  Edward  Pancell,  John  Powell. 

JOHN  SMITH,  200  acs.  Low.  Norf. 
Co.,  Apr.  9,  1647,  Page  121.  On  N. 
side  of  the  head  of  a  branch  of  Eliz. 
River,  called  Browns  Bay,  adj.  George 
White.  Due  by  assignment  from  Cor- 
nelius Loyd,  by  whom  they  were  trans., 
4  rights:  William  Willson,  Ph.  New- 
ton, Wm.  Lemon,  James  Smith. 


JOHN  HILL,  300  acs.  Norfolk  Co., 
Oct.  7,  1646,  Page  122.  On  the  S.  side 
of  the  Wwd.  br.  of  Eliz.  River,  on  the 
E.  side  of  the  mouth  of  Gousse  (or 
Gouffe)  Cr.  Trans,  of  6  pers.,  two  of 
whom  are  mentioned:  John  Marshall 
&  John  Resperry. 

THOMAS  WELLS,  200  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  Mar.  14,  1647,  Page  122. 
Upon  N.  side  of  the  Wwd.  Br.  of  Eliz. 
River,  adj.  John  Watford.  Trans,  of 
4  pers:  John  Trent,  Fra.  Barbar,  John 
Brooke,  Thomas  Bonner. 

RICHARD  STARNELL,  200  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,   Feb.   25,    1647,   Page 

123.  On  Nwd.  side  of  the  Wwd.  br.  of 
Eliz.  River,  called  Carter  Cr.  Trans,  of 
4  pers:  Geo.  Guest,  Eliza.  Malam,  Ed- 
ward Webb,  John  Hill. 

RICHARD  MORGAN,  150  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  Mar.  24,  1647,  Page  123. 
On  the  Nwd.  side  of  the  head  of  the 
Wwd.  br.  of  Eliz.  River.  Due  by  as- 
signment of  the  rights  of  3  pers.  by 
Thomas  Godby,  by  whom  they  were 
trans.:  Ann  Gobby,  Robert  Porter,  Tho- 
mas Radford. 

RICHARD  STARNALL,  350  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,   Mar.   24,    1647,   Page 

124.  On  the  Nwd.  side  of  the  Clarks 
Cr.,  a  br.  of  the  Wwd.  br.  of  Eliz. 
River.  200  acs.  formerly  granted  unto 
John  Radford  &  150  for  trans,  of  3 
pers:  Wm.  Wolly,  John  Hues,  John 
Hilton. 

THOMAS  GODBY,  200  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  Mar.  2,  1647,  Page  125.  On 
the  Clarks  Cr.  a  br.  of  the  Wwd.  br.  of 
Eliz.  River.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Tho. 
Wright,  James  Stringer,  Tho.  Garret, 
Thomas  Godby. 

SYMON  SYMONS,  900  acs.  Nanse- 
mund  Co.,  Aug.  5,  1647,  Page  125.  On 
the  N.  W.  side  of  Nansemund  River. 
By  assignment  of  2  former  grants  from 
Mr.  Thomas  Hill,  being  granted  unto 
John  Hill,  dec'd.  &  assigned  by  his 
Admr.  the  sd.  Thomas  Hill.  300  acs. 
residue  for  trans,  of  6  pers:  Nicho. 
Smith,  Wm.  Jones,  Hugh  Age,  Tho. 
Symker  (?),  Edward  Wood,  Tho.  Sea- 
well. 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


173 


JAMES  MASON,  450  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  Mar.  30,  1647,  Page  126. 
Upon  the  main  head  of  the  lower  bay 
cr.  Formerly  granted  unto  William 
Mills,  10  Feb.  1643,  surveyed  &  proved 
due  by  Nathaniell  White  deed.,  for 
trans,  of  9  pers.* 

MR.  THOMAS  LAMBERT,  750  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  June  1,  1648,  Page  126. 
Known  by  the  name  of  Paggetts  Neck, 
at  the  head  of  a  Little  Cr.  in  Linhaven 
Parish,  beg.  near  the  Indian  Bridge,  near 
land  of  Hen.  Snayle,  towards  path  lead- 
ing from  Mr.  Lidneys  to  Capt.  Yardlys 
house,  down  a  branch  parting  same  from 
Capt.  Thorowgood,  dee'd.  Trans,  of  15 
pers:  Mr.  Thomas  Lambert,  his  trans- 
portation twice,  William  More,  William 
Pavy,  Robert  Clarke,  Eliza.  Smith,  John 
Garret,  Thomas  Hollis,  John  Jones, 
Ann  Jones,  Step.  Robinson,  Nicho. 
Cluly,  Tho.  Marchlam,  Wm.  Allenby, 
Thomason  Wetts. 

MR.  THOMAS  BEST  &  CHRISTO- 
PHER ASHLEY,  200  acres,  Nansimund 
Co.,  June  1,  1648,  Page  127.  At  miles 
end  of  900  acs.  of  Thomas  Jurdens,  de- 
serted &c,  &  running  to  miles  end  of 
Peter  Montague.    Trans,  of  4  pers.* 

JAMES  ARTHURS  &  PETER  ELLIS 
(or  Ells),  100  acs.  Nansimum  Co.,  Apr. 
9,  1648,  Page  127.  On  the  N.  W.  br. 
of  Nansimum  Riv.,  opposite  to  an  In- 
dian town.    Trans,  of  2  pers.* 

JAMES  ARTHURS  &  PEETER 
ELLIS  (or  Ells),  450  acs.  Nansimum 
Co.,  Apr.  9,  1648,  Page  127.  Same 
location.    Trans,  of  9  pers.* 

MAJOR     RICHARD     MORRISON, 

110  acs.  Eliz.  City  Co.,  commonly  called 
fort  feild,  June  3,  1648,  Page  128.  S. 
upon  the  main  river,  from  the  mouth  of 
a  creek  called  Hooks  alias  Johns  Cr. 
unto  Sandy  Point,  near  land  of  Thomas 
Conjers,  the  Gleab  Land,  &  Thomas 
Oldis,  Gent.,  and  a  bridge  leading  to 
the  dwelling  house  of  sd.  Oldis.  Trans, 
of  3  pers.:  His  own  adventure,  Wini- 
fred his  wife  &  Henry  Morrison. 

MAJOR  RICHARD  MORRISON, 
160  acs.  Eliz.  City  Co.,  commonly  called 


Downes  feild,  June  3,  1648,  Page  128. 
Being  on  the  Strawberrie  bank,  beg.  at 
a  cedar  stump  formerly  called  the  Look 
out  tree  by  Point  Comfort  Creek  neare 
the  Round  Mill,  along  land  formerly 
Mr.  Neales  &c,  to  the  Gleab  Land,  etc. 
to  the  mouth  of  Downs  Creek.  10  acs. 
due  upon  the  above  patent  &  150  acs. 
for  trans,  of  3  pers:  Richard  Morrison, 
Mary  Sands,  Thomas  Smart. 

ROBERT  WETHERALL,  Gent.,  1,000 
acs.  James  City  Co.,  May  20,  1648,  Page 
129.  In  Chickahominy;  700  acs.  part 
thereof  W.  upon  Thomas  Stout  &  Rich- 
ard Bell,  running  by  Poetan  Swamp  & 
land  of  William  Stephens;  400  acs.  adj. 
Richard  Bell,  Xpian  William  &  John 
Edwards.  700  acs.  assigned  by  sd.  Wil- 
liams unto  John  Norton  who  assigned 
same  to  sd.  Wetherall,  &  300  acs.  as- 
signment of  patent  by  sd.  Stephens  to 
John  Gayton,  who  assigned  to  sd.  Nor- 
ton &  by  him  assigned  to  Wetherall. 

MR.  PETER  MONTEGUE,  100  acres, 
Nansimum  Co.,  Nov  3,  1647,  Page  130. 
On  N.  side  of  New  town  haven  River, 
on  the  Ewd.  side  of  the  mouth  of  Cross 
Cr.,  adj.  Thomas  Jordan,  dee'd.  &  Hum- 
phrey Scownes.    Trans,  of  2  pers.* 

JOHN  BROACH,  1,800  acs.  in  York 
River,  opposite  mouth  of  Matapony  at 
the  Narrows.  Aug.  10,  1647,  Page  130. 
Trans,  of  36  pers:  Thomas  Rattam, 
Tho.  Smalecomb,  Thomas  Gibson,  Ann 
Williams,  Richard  White,  Mary  Wilson, 
William  More,  Randall  Maudor,  James 
Saiferne,  Ma.  Norts,  Doro  More,  Fra. 
Morely,  Nicho.  Bradford,  Anthony 
Parthurst,  3  tymes,  Richd.  Heather  2 
tymes,    John    Guy,    Eliza.    Garret,    Jos. 

Pouson    (or  Ponson),   Alexander  , 

Peter  Wood,  Anthony,  Michaell,  Mary, 
Luce,  Anthony  a  child,  (Negroes)  John 
Wood.  (6  pers.  more  by  virtue  of  the 
rights  of  a  patent  granted  to  Anthon. 
Purchurst  &  surrendered  up  at  a  court 
at  Yorke  holden  the  27  Aug.  1640  & 
assigned  to  Mr.  John  Broach). 

WILLIAM  MANY,  150  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  Mar.  20,  1647,  Page  131. 
Beg.  at  land  of  George  Traveler,  run- 
ning N.  to  a  place  called  the  Muddy 
bite.    100  acs.  due  by  patent  to  George 


174 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Smith,  assigned  to  John  Waltham,  who 
assigned  same  to  sd.  Many,  &  50  acs. 
for  his  own  trans. 

THOMAS  HALL,  300  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  Nov.  20,  1647,  Page  131. 
Lying  on  the  head  of  little  creek,  a  br. 
of  the  southern  br.  of  Eliz.  River,  adj. 
John  Clarke.    Trans,  of  6  pers.* 

FRANCIS  RICE,  200  acs.  Warwick 
Co.,  Mar.  26,  1646,  Page  131.  At  the 
miles  end  of  his  first  devident,  near 
Merry  point,  adj.  Thomas  Owen,  etc. 
Mr.  Thomas  Davis,  upon  Deep  Cr.,  and 
Natha.  Eaton,  Clerke.  Trans,  of  4  pers.* 

RICHARD  BREWSTER,  Gent.,  750 
acs.  James  City  Co.,  called  the  great 
neck  of  the  Barren  Neck,  July  19,  1646, 
Page  132.  On  a  br.  of  Archers  Hope 
Cr.  parting  same  from  the  Kings  Mill 
Neck,  and  near  Jocqueys  Neck.  Due  by 
virtue  of  2  former  patents,  surrendered 
up,  and  50  acs.  yet  due. 

THOMAS  MILES,  50  acs.  Lower 
Norf.  Co.,  upon  the  S.  side  of  the  Ewd. 
branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  Nov.  1,  1647,  Page 

132.  By  virtue  of  patent  to  Thomas 
Todd,  assigned  unto  Richard  Woolman 
&  by  him  assigned  unto  sd.  Miles. 

THOMAS  ETHERIDGE,  200  acs. 
Low.   Norf.   Co.,    Nov.    1,    1647,    Page 

133.  At  the  head  of  Gaythers  Cr.,  a 
br.  of  the  Southward  br.  of  Eliz.  River, 
adj.  Thomas  Marsh.    Trans,  of  4  pers.* 

JOHN  DAVIS,  150  acs.  Yorke  Co., 
Oct.  29,  1647,  Page  133.  Upon  the  up- 
per side  of  Queens  Cr.,  adj.  Mr.  Jer- 
new,  along  John  Judson  &  Joseph  Cro- 
shaw.    Trans,  of  3  pers.* 

JOHN  SLAUGHTER,  50  acs.  Nansi- 
mund  Co.,  Nov.  3,  1647,  Page  134.  On 
the  N.  side  of  Nansimund,  bet.  his  own 
&  land  of  Robert  Rockholes.    Trans,  of 

1  pers.* 

JOHN  ROBBINS,  100  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  Nov.  5,  1645,  Page  134. 
At  the  head  of  the  first  br.  on  the 
Northern  side  of  Naswattocks  Cr.,  N. 
upon  land  of  Mr.  Charleton.    Trans,  of 

2  pers.* 


CHARLES  SCARBOURGH,  550  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  Nov.  23,  1647,  Page 
134.  At  Matchepungo  Cr.,  on  the  S. 
side  thereof.    Trans,  of  11  pers.* 

JOHN  FOSTER,  450  acs.  Northamp- 
ton Co.,  Nov.  23,  1647,  Page  135.  At 
the  seaboard  side,  at  the  N.  side  of  a 
former  devident  granted  sd.  Foster. 
Trans,  of  9  pers.* 

THOMAS  GIBSON,  600  acs.  in 
Yorke  River,  Aug.  16,  1647,  Page  135. 
About  25  miles  up  the  Narrows  of  sd. 
River.  Trans,  of  12  pers.:  Wm.  Hinde, 
his  3  wives,  his  3  children,  Peter  Peirce, 
John  Williams,  John  Green,  Henry 
Moryow,  James  Evans,  Peter  Richardson. 

HUGH  ALLEN,  420  acs.  Yorke  Co., 
Mar.  7,  1647,  Page  135.  Adj.  Mr.  Roul- 
stons  first  devident,  Martin  Becker  & 
Robert  Braw.  By  virtue  of  former 
patent  &  trans,  of  9  pers.* 

WILLIAM  SHIPP,  200  acs.  Lower 
Norf.  Co.,  Nov.  1,  1647,  Page  136.  At 
a  creek  near  Francis  Land's  plantation. 
By  virtue  of  patent  made  to  Ensigne 
Thomas  Keelding,  &  by  sd.  Keeling  as- 
signed to  sd.  Shipp. 

DOROTHY  STORY,  the  Elder  & 
DOROTHY  STORY  the  Younger,  600 
acs.  Up.  Norf.  Co.,  Nov.  3,  1647,  Page 
136.  On  Indian  Cr.  of  the  Western  br. 
Nansimund  River,  adj.  miles  end  of 
land  of  John  Garrett.  Due  by  virtue  of 
a  patent  granted  to  William  Storry,  17 
Nov.  1641. 

LEONARD  GUINNS  (or  Gwinns), 
150  acs.  Nansimund  Co.,  June  9,  1648. 
Page  137.  Upon  the  Westward  side  of 
Nansimund  Riv.,  30  acs.  being  an  island 
called  Dumplinn  Is.,  opposite  to  land 
of  Francis  Maiden  Sc  near  Thomas 
Parker.  Due  by  purchase  from  Toby 
Smith. 

TOBY  SMITH  to  Leonard  Guinns, 
of  Nansemund,  Planter,  the  above  tract 
of  land.  Feb.  3,  1647,  Page  137. 
Signed  Toby  Smith,  and  acknowledged 
before  Toby  Smith,  Clk.  Ct.  in  said 
county.  Witnesses:  George  Gwillum  & 
Robert  Gibson. 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


175 


JOHN  HEWITT  (HOWITT)  of 
Eliz.  City,  Carpenter,  204  acs.  in  sd. 
county,  June  1,  1648,  Page  138.  On 
the  S.  side  of  the  ould  poquoson  river, 
adj.  land  late  of  George  Hall  (Hull). 
Part  due  by  former  patent,  of  500  acres 
in  the  name  of  John  Laydon. 

RALPH  HUNT,  300  acs.  Eliz.  City 
Co.,  May  30,  1648,  Page  138.  Near  W. 
side  of  the  head  of  Salfords  Cr.,  S.  up- 
on the  head  of  Bartholomew  Wethersbys 
land,  Nly.  towards  Scowins  Dam,  and 
adj.  Thomas  Cely  &  William  Holder. 
Due  by  former  patent. 

JOHN  HOULDER,  50  Eliza.  City 
Co.,  Nov.  25,  1648,  Page  138.  Near 
head  of  Salfords  Crr.,  dividing  same 
from  land  of  Mr.  Thomas  Cely,  adj. 
land  of  Barthalomew  Wethersby  & 
Ralph  Hunt.    Trans,  of:    John  Peikins. 

CAPT.  FRANCIS  POYTHRES,  750 
acs.  Charles  City  Co.,  May  8,  1648 
Page  139.  Near  mouth  of  Baylyes  Cr., 
adj.  land  belonging  to  the  orphants  of 
Jenkin  Osborne,  thence  Wly.  to  land  of 
Thomas  Bayly,  now  in  the  tenure  of 
John  Butler.  350  acs.  formerly  granted 
to  Jenkins  Osborne  &  purchased  by  sd. 
Poythres  of  Jenkin  Osborne,  Mary  Os- 
borne &  Capt.  Edward  Hill  by  the  right 
of  Dictoris  Christmas,  confirmed  by 
order  of  court  27  Feb.  1636.  The  other 
450  acs.  due  by  former  patent. 

WILLIAM  ap  THOMAS,  335  acs. 
Eliza.  City  Co.,  June  2,  1648,  Page  139. 
Adj.  Thomas  Watts,  now  in  possession 
of  Mrs.  Lucy  Purify.  100  acs.  formerly 
granted  unto  Nicholas  Hill  &  purchased 
by  the  sd.  Thomas.  150  acs.  assigned 
to  sd.  Thomas  by  Walter  Cade  for  trans, 
of  3  pers:  Walter  Cade,  his  wife  twice; 
and  100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Wm. 
ap  Thomas,  Jane  Killicke. 

JOHN  INGRAM,  300  acrs.  Elizabeth 
City  Co.,  Nov.  23,  1647,  Page  140.  E. 
upon  Point  Comfort  Cr.,  W.  uoon  land 
of  Humphry  Tabb,  N.  upon  land  now 
in  possession  of  John  Hawkins.  50  acs. 
due  by  right  of  patent  granted  unto 
Giles  Jones,  Oct.  29,  1628,  assigned  to 
sd.  Ingram,  &  the  other  250  acs.  part 
of  an  order  of  court  of  500  acs.  granted 


to  David  Poole  &  by  him  assigned  to  sd. 
Ingram. 

EDWARD  PARISH  (Parrish),  Plan- 
ter, of  the  County  of  Eliz.  City  Co.,  200 
acs.  in  sd.  county,  dated  last  of  May, 
1648,  Page  140.  Adj.  land  formerly  be- 
longing to  Robert  West,  &  W.  on  Rich- 
ard Grigson,  &  Sly.  on  the  back  river. 
200  acs.  part  of  a  patent  to  John  Graves, 
purchased  by  sd.  Parrish. 

JOHN  SAYNES,  250  acs.  James  City 
Co.,  July  3,  1648,  Page  140.  Near 
Smiths  Fort,  Upon  Powells  Cr.  &  S. 
upon  land  of  Thomas  Hart,  Orphant, 
and  N.  E.  towards  James  River.  Trans, 
of  5  pers:  William  Jones,  John  Pouis, 
Symon  Atwell,  John  Burgis,  Jos.  Lawyer. 

THOMAS  HILL,  Gent.,  3,000  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  April  28,  1648,  Page 
141.  Near  head  of  Upper  Chipoaks  Cr. 
Due  by  former  patent  &  trans,  of  60 
pers.* 

THOMAS  HILL,  Gent.,  PLANTER, 
of  Va.  assignment  unto  EDWARD 
BLAND,  Merchant,  of  the  above  tract, 
Dec.  23,  1649.  Witnesses:  Garret  Cor- 
bitt,  John  Hill,  Jos.  Gobert.    Page  141. 

WILLIAM  BARRET,  700  acs.  on  the 
Eastermost  side  of  Chickahominy  River, 
commonly  called  by  the  name  of  War- 
rany  ould  town,  bounded  E.  N.  E.  from 
the  further  end  of  the  ridge,  thence  N. 
N.  W.  to  a  br.  of  Warrany  Cr.,  along 
same  W.  S.  W.,  thence  along  the 
Meadowes  under  the  ridge,  &  S.  S.  E. 
to  beg.  June  7,  1648,  Page  141.  Trans, 
of  14  pers:  Wm.  Barret,  Jno.  King, 
Walter  Price,  Dav.  Phillips,  Robert 
Castle,  Gabrell  Thomas,  John  Greene, 
Sym.  Thomas,  Edm.  Foxmond,  Wm. 
Batts,  Joice  Farlo,  Pat.  Paul,  Francis 
Story,  Peeter  Norrell. 

WILLIAM  PARRY,  90  acs.  Eliz. 
City  Co.,  June  6,  1648,  Page  142.  Beg. 
at  upper  bounds  of  Florentine  Paynes 
devident,  near  Daniell  Tanners,  near  a 
great  path  leading  from  Kequotan  to 
Mr.   Eatons   house.    Trans,  of   2   pers.* 

RICHARD  MASFEILD,  50  acs.  Up. 
Norf.  Co.,  July  3,  1648,  Page  142.    At 


176 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


the  head  of  Chuckatuck,  adj.  Mr.  Robt. 
Praiser  &  Mr.  Rockwell.  Due  by  his 
own  trans. 

GEORGE  HARDEY  (Hardy),  THO- 
MAS WOMBWELL  &  PETER  HALL, 
1,100  acs.  called  Timber  Neck,  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  (no  date  appears)  Page  142. 
Bet  the  two  S.  W.  branches  by  the  side 
of  black  water.  650  acres  in  an  abso- 
lute Necke  belonging  to  said  Hardy  & 
said  Wombwell,  and  400  acrers  without 
the  Necke  to  Peter  Hall,  orphant.  Trans, 
of  22  pers:  Mr.  Hardy  himself  the  2nd 
time,  his  wife  2d  &  3d  time,  Xpian. 
Wilson,  Thomas  Green,  William  Tay- 
lor, Alexr.  Hux,  Richard  Bell,  David 
Greere,  Thomas  Claus,  Eliz.  Holmes, 
John  Monser,  Robert  Ward,  John  Tay- 
lor, John  Oliver,  James  Louder,  Antho. 
Tyngle,  Xtopr.  Medcalfe,  Edward  Holt, 
Thomas  Soopson,  Mary  Booth,  Ann 
Garner. 

WILLIAM  EWEN,  Merchant,  1,400 
acs.  James  City  Co.,  July  8,  1648,  Page 
143.  N.  W.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Green- 
don,  N.  E.  upon  the  river.  400  acs.  by 
a  patent  granted  him  Sept.  15,  1619  & 
1,000  acs.  by  patent  granted  him — of 
Jany.  1621,  also  due  for  trans,  of  28 
pers.:  His  own  per.  right,  John  Munck, 
Wm.  Garnett,  Jno.  Musquoy  (?), 
Nicho.  White,  Anthony  Young,  Wm. 
Pugly,  Hugh  Chick,  Lewis  Elliot,  Wm. 
Phillips,  Richd.  Auston,  Wm.  Knight, 
Phill.  Rogers,  Richd.  Dareing,  Nicho. 
Feeton,  Richd.  Penne,  (or  Peirce),  Jno. 
Flaxton,  Wm.  Nuse,  Peter  Montegue, 
Jno.  Muckeford,  John  Cootes,  Ad.  Mar- 
grand,  Henry  Persons,  John  Williams, 
Griffeth  George,  Wm.  Marshall,  Wm. 
Berwicke,  John  Layne. 

WILLIAM  EDWARDS  &  RICE 
DAVIS,  1,080  acs.,  James  City  Co., 
July  10,  1648,  Page  143.  Along  sunken 
marsh  main  runn,  land  of  Mr.  Grindon 
&  Willm.  Ewin  to  the  passage  over 
sunken  marsh.  Trans,  of  22  pers.: 
William  Edwards,  Dorothy  his  wife, 
Robert  Willson,  Thomas  White,  Tho. 
Wombwell,  Tho.  Bryan,  Christopher 
Weston,  Fra.  Hall,  Jno.  Mathews,  Ann 
Hill,  David  Hussey,  Henry  Price,  Bar- 
bery Hill,  Gartwragh  Eberomy,  Hump. 
Sherwood,  Jason  Rovely,  Mathew  Hud- 


son, Sarah  Srovell,  Wm.  Handley,  Robt. 
Night,  David  Husey. 

JOHN  TWY,  200  acs.  James  City 
Co.,  July  6,  1648,  Page  144.  Upon  the 
main  branch  of  Powells  Cr.,  adj.  lands 
of  Thomas  Hart,  Orpht.  &  William 
Foster.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Henry  Al- 
sopp,  Rich.  Rytherland,  Henry  Hill, 
Abbigall  Jorden. 

JOHN  WATKINS,  850  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  July  3,  1648,  Page  144.  Lye- 
ing  above  the  head  of  Greys  Cr.,  adj. 
Christopher  Lawson.  350  acs.  by  former 
patent  &  500  acs.  for  trans,  of  10  pers. 
Only  the  following  names  are  given 
under  this  patent:  Christopher  Barker, 
Nicho.  Brown,  Alice  his  wife,  "one 
whose  name  is  not  known." 

THOMAS  GIBSON,  1,000  acs. 
Charles  River  Co.,  May  2,  1648,  Page 
145.  Upon  the  S.  side  of  Chas.  River, 
and  running  to  the  head  of  a  swamp 
and  along  same  to  Ware  Cr.  Due  by 
purchase  of  a  former  patent  for  sd.  land 
made  unto  John  Broach. 

THOMAS  HART,  sonn  unto  Henry 
Hart,  deed.,  100  acs.  at  Smiths  Fort, 
James  City  Co.,  July  3,  1648,  Page  145. 
Adj.  land  of  William  Milnes.  Trans, 
of  4  pers:  Robert  Knight,  Judith 
Greene,  William  Pierce,  Phillip  Clave. 

MR.  THOMAS  WARREN,  290  acs. 
at  Smiths  Fort,  James  City  Co.,  July  3, 
1648,  Page  146.  Adj.  Goodman  Spil- 
timber  &  John  Corker.  Part  of  a  former 
patent  for  450  acs.  granted  sd.  Warren. 

THOMAS  WOODHOUSE,  200  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  July  3,  1648,  Page  146. 
About  2  mi.  distant  from  James  River 
on  the  S.  side,  adj.  Henry  Hart.  By 
virtue  of  former  patent. 

THOMAS  WOODHOUSE,  400  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  July  3,  1648,  Page  146. 
Near  the  head  of  the  N.  W.  br.  of 
Smith  Fort  Cr.,  along  John  Watkins' 
land.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Edm.  Marshall, 
John  Fludd,  Edm.  Tedmund  (or  Ed- 
mund), Samll.  Cattan,  William  Russell, 
Willm.  Savadge,  Richard  Browne,  Ed- 
ward Buderhill. 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


177 


MR.  GEORGE  HARDY,  500  acs., 
July  17,  1648,  Page  147.  Lyeing  on 
the  E.  side  of  Lawnes  Cr.,  extending  to 
the  main  river,  along  land  reputed  Tho- 
mas Gaynes,  along  the  great  river  to  a 
cr.  dividing  same  from  land  of  Alice 
Bennet.  300  acs.  by  former  patent  & 
200  acs.  for  trans,  of:  4  pers.,  3  of 
whom  are  named:  Ellin  Sleeve,  Ann 
Clarke,  Ann  Poorey. 

MR.  WILLIAM  BARRET,  850  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  June  7,  1648,  Page  147. 
Upon  the  W.  side  of  Chickahomany 
Riv.,  beg.  at  land  of  Edward  Travers 
that  he  purchased  of  John  Robins.  200 
acs.  part  beg.  at  a  small  cr.  deviding 
this  from  the  Gleab.  This  land  was 
assigned  to  sd.  Barret  by  Thomas 
Symonds. 

MR.  PHILLIP  BENNET,  1,230  acs. 
Nancemund  Co.,   Aug.   16,    1648,   Page 

148.  Upon  E.  side  of  Bennets  Cr.,  adj. 
land  of  James  Knott,  Anthony  Weels  & 
Epaphroditus  Lawson.  Due  by  former 
patents  &  as.  Admr.  of  Robert  Bennet, 
except  330  acs.  due  for  trans,  of  7  pers: 
Sibira,  Negro,  John  Huse,  William 
Thomas,  Danll.  Feild,  William  Peirce, 
John  Richinson,  Tho.  Acreland. 

RANDALL  CREW,  460  acs.  Nance- 
mund Co.,  Sept.  9,  1648,  Page  148.  Up- 
on Ewd.  side  of  the  Southern  br.  of 
Nancemund  Riv.,  beg.  on  Nwd.  side  of 
the  mouth  of  Crany  Cr.,  adj.  land  of 
William  Hatfeild.  Trans,  of  10  pers: 
Jane  Snape,  John  Barlo,  John  Preston, 
Jasper  Pillary,  Henry  Hawkins,  Wm. 
Johnson,  John  Johnson,  Wm.  Long. 
Richard  Philpot,  Thomas  Harris. 

CAPT.     ROBERT     HUTCHINSON, 

200  acs.  James  City  Co.,  June  12,  1648, 
Page  149.  In  Pasbehayes,  adj.  lands  of 
Edward  Oliver,  John  White,  Daniell 
Lyell  &  Sir  Francis  Wyatt.  Lease  for 
term  of  21  years.  Annual  Rent:  "8 
bbls.  Merchantable  Indian  Come  Sheald 
at  the  State  house  in  James  City." 

Assignment  of  the  above  lease,  to 
Sir  Wm.  Berkeley,  June  13,  1648,  Page 

149.  Witnesses:  Samll.  Abbott  &  Henry 
Fleet.    Teste:    Geo.  Reade,  Clk.  Ct. 


WILLIAM     DRUMOND,     25     acs. 

James   City   Co.,    Sept.    10,    1648,   Page 

150.  Lease  for  21  years.  Annuall  Rent: 
1  bbl.  Mer.  Indian  Corn  sheld  at  the 
Statehouse  at  James  City,  payment  to 
begin  at  the  Nativity  of  our  Lord  1649. 

MRS.  JANE  PIRKINS,  27  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  Sept.  9,  1648,  Page  150.  Adj. 
land  of  Anthony  Coleman  &  near  John 
Fitchett.  This  land  was  given  to  Alex- 
ander Stoner  by  Capt.  William  Peirce 
in  open  court  and  forfeited  by  sd.  Stoner 
unto  John  Knight,  who  assigned  to  to 
William  Edwards,  who  assigned  it  to 
Edward  Prince,  who  assigned  it  to 
Robert  Miles,  who  assigned  it  to  the  sd. 
Mrs.  Pirkins. 

ROBERT  THROGMORTON,  650 
acs.  Up.  Norf.  Co.,  Sept.  7,  1644,  Page 

151.  Upon  the  W.  side  of  Nansimund 
Riv.  Due  as  followeth:  300  acs.  part  of 
a  patent  granted  unto  Francis  Maiden; 
100  acs.  part  of  patent  to  George  Lud- 
low; part  of  a  patent  to  Geo.  Chewning 
&  250  for  trans,  of  5  pers.* 

JAMES  MASON,  60  acs.  commonly 
called  Smith  Fort,  James  City  Co.,  July 
8,  1648,  Page  151.  Adj.  William  Mil- 
nes  &  Thomas  Hart.  Trans,  of  2  pers: 
Richard  Davis  &  Mary  Mutton.  40  acs. 
remaining  due. 

JAMES  MASON,  250  acs.  James  City 
Co.,  July  8,  1648,  Page  152.  At  the 
head  of  Greys  Cr.,  adj.  Thomas  Grey. 
Trans,  of  5  pers:  John  Newman,  Eliz. 
Ebbell,  Thomas  Williams,  John  Watson. 

RICHARD  PETTIBON,  700  acs.  up- 
on Southward  side  of  Rappahanock  Riv.. 
Nov.  28,  1648,  Page  152.  Adj.  land  of 
John  Benton,  crossing  Pettibon  Cr.  Due 
for  trans,  of  14  pers.,  assigned  unto  him 
by  Thomas  Sabin:  Tho.  Sabin,  Phil. 
Smith,  Geo.  Vaughan,  Tho.  Pooe,  Eliza. 
Blackman,  John  Dunery,  John  Jolly, 
Licha  Jolly,  Fran.  Jolly,  Tho.  Jones,  Ja. 
Pontian  (or  Pontiau),  Gama  Symons, 
Step.  Laroch,  Fran.  Holmes. 

JOHN  WILSON,  100  acs.  Charles 
River  Co.,  Oct.  1,  1648,  Page  153.  W. 
upon   land    formerly   granted   unto   Ed- 


178 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


ward  Major  and  bounded  on  E.  by  land 
of  John  Judson.  This  land  was  granted 
unto  Richd.  Major,  including  150  acs. 
assigned  him  by  Joseph  Croshaw  to 
whom  it  was  due  for  trans,  of  3  pers.; 
the  aforesd.  100  acs.  was  asssigned  by 
Major  to  Thomas  Lucas,  who  assigned 
it  to  William  Roberts  &  Nicho.  Davis, 
who  assigned  it  to  Henry  Greborne  & 
John  Wilson  by  deed  dated  Feb.  23, 
1642  &  by  the  death  of  Henry  Gre- 
borne, one  of  the  joint  tennants,  the  sd. 
100  acs.  is  now  due  to  John  Wilson  by 
Survivorship. 

RICHARD  LEE,  Gent.,  1,250  acs., 
21  Dec.  1648,  p.  153.  On  the  N.  side 
of  Yorke  River,  opposite  to  the  poplar 
Neck  on  the  S.  side  of  the  river,  being 
land  formerly  possessed  by  John  Bayles 
&  George  Knight  &  for  want  of  an 
heir  devolved  to  his  Majesty.  Due  sd. 
Lee  for  trans,  of  24  pers.:  Wm.  Craw- 
ford, Henry  Hed  (or  Sled),  Wm. 
Batchelor,  Nicho.  Merror,  Mathew  Lee, 
John  Farror,  George  Way,  Chris. 
Feathergill,  Edward  Dicks,  Wm.  David, 
Joane  Peayler  (or  Peagler),  John  Lyne, 
Elizabeth  Reds,  John  Hunt,  John  Tho- 
mas, James  Ware,  Mary  Martin,  Peter 
Parchmore,  George  Light,  Fra.  Newton, 
Geo.  Lee,  Tho.  Kidd,  Henry  Cloyd, 
John  Permeter.  Note:  400  acs.  sold  to 
Ralph  Green;  400  acs.  to  Geo.  Austin, 
and  50  acs.  to  Antho.  Savage). 

RICHARD  WYATT,  500  acs.  in 
Mockjack  Bay,  Aug.  20,  1645,  Page  154. 
Upon  the  Eastermost  side  of  Ware 
River,  and  running  to  Cow  Cr.  Trans, 
of  10  pers.:  John  Bandwick,  Silvanas 
Ricraft,  Thomas  Wilmot,  Samuell  Sures, 
Ann  GrifTen,  Morcas  Morgrave,  Hen. 
Brightmon,  Mary  Wilkinson,  Lydia 
Berry,  (The  4  last  names  are  yt  due  sd. 
Wyatt,  which  are  assigned  to  Richd. 
Diminge). 

THOMAS  LUDWELL,  Gent.,  500 
acs.,  James  City  Co.,  June  16,  1648, 
Page  154.  Upon  the  N.  side  of  Jones 
Cr.  in  Chickahominy  River.  Trans,  of 
10  pers.:  Elinor  Bigg,  Alice  Jefferson, 
John  Barker,  Wm.  Vicard,  Adam  Rich- 
ardson, John  Daniell,  John  Chinley, 
John  Newton,  Wm.  Druit,  Henry 
Collier. 


FRANCIS  CEELY,  600  acs.  Mar.  2, 
1648,  Page  155.  (County  not  given). 
At  a  long  Cedar  point  where  Seaverne 
divided  itself  into  2  branches.  300  acs. 
adj.  land  of  Thomas  Williams.  Due  for 
trans,  of  12  pers.,  viz.:  Fran.  Ceely, 
Hills  John,  Carry  Fitts,  Richard  Cooper, 
Walter  Edward,  Hen.  Stipthorpe,  Wm. 
Waters,  Henry  Steele,  Humphry  Wey- 
don,  John  Andrewes,  Ralph  Seane, 
Nathll.  More. 

RICHARD  RICHARDS,  Gent,  350 
acs.  at  Arches  Hope,  called  by  the 
name  of  Little  town,  Nov.  12,  1648, 
Page  155.  W.  upon  land  of  Winster 
Fax  (?),  now  in  possession  of  Capt. 
Humphrey  Higginson,  E.  upon  John 
Jefferson,  now  in  possession  of  Mary 
Williams.  250  acs.  granted  unto  Capt. 
William  Claiborne,  Dec.  12,  1625,  & 
100  acs.  granted  unto  John  Comandres 
Feb.  20,  1619,  and  purchased  by  sd 
Richards. 

THOMAS  BOURNE,  200  acs.  Yorke 
Co,  Feb.  10,  1648,  Page  156.  In  Chis- 
kyak  Parish,  near  head  of  Chiskyake  Cr, 
adj.  William  Barber.  Trans,  of  4  pers.: 
John  Wayne,  Edward  Cock,  Tho. 
Bourne,  Thomas  Borne.  "For  his  seat- 
ing Chesceake  the  first  yeare." 

RICHARD     THOMPSON,     son     of 

Richard  Thompson,  560  acs.  lyeing  in 
little  Wickocomoke  Cr,  Northumber- 
land Co.,  commonly  known  as  Kings 
Neck,  Apr.  5,  1649,  Page  156.  Beg. 
from  the  mouth  of  a  branch  called  Old 
Mans  Cr.  Trans,  of  11  pers.:  Richard 
Russell,  Tho.  Griggs,  Richard  Ridges, 
Robert  Gare,  Patience  Brown,  John 
Daniell,  Grace  Goodriffe,  John  Ander- 
son, Ann  Badger,  John  Bamfeild,  Justin 
Davis. 

MR.  ROBERT  EYRES,  350  acs.  on  the 
Southward  side  of  Rappahannock  River, 
Jan.  1,  1645,  Page  157.  Trans,  of  7 
perrs.:  Peter  Welden,  Bridgett  Ellins, 
Symon  Robinson,  Pemett  Foster,  John 
Cooper,  George  Hudson,  Henry  Watson. 

MR.  BARTHALOMEW  HOSKINS, 
800  acs.  upon  the  Northward  side  of 
the  Ewd.  branch  of  Eliz.  River,  Jan.  1, 
1645,    Page    157.    Near    Hoskins    Cr. 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


179 


Trans,  of  16  pers:  Richard  Hoskins, 
Osmond  Boardman,  Joane  Curtis,  Bar- 
bara Douse,  Alice  Curtis,  Tho.  Cake- 
bread,  Mary  Richardson,  Edward  Spicer, 

Edmond   ,    Sands    Nicholls,    Roger 

Gilbert,  Sr.,  Roger  Gilbert,  Junr.  Robert 
Body,  Robert  Harwood,  Wm.  Knowles, 
Masld  Fisher. 

CAPT.  JOHN  SIBSEY,  80  acs.  called 
the  Thickett,  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  Apr.  5, 
1649,  Page  158.  Bounding  on  land  of 
Mr.  Sewell,  dec'd.  &  on  the  main  river. 
Trans,  of  2  pers:  John  Peat  &  Arthur 
Watson. 

CAPT.  JOHN  SIBSEY,  240  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  Apr.  5,  1649,  Page  158.  N. 
N.  E.  upon  James  River,  Sandy  point, 
Masons  Cr.,  Watkins  branch  &  land 
formerly  granted  to  Capt.  John  Subsey 
—  others.  Trans,  of  5  pers:  Andrew 
Dolson,  Ja.  Millacha,  Mary  Evans,  Barb. 
Carter,  Tho.  Sheriffs. 

JOHN  BALDWIN,  300  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  Mar.  18,  1648,  Page  159. 
At  Occohannocke  Cr.  &  Compekeeke  Cr. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  John  Baldwin,  Wil- 
liam Holse,  George  Hall,  Wm.  Stanley, 
Thomas  Key,  Marg.  Holmes. 

CAPT.  JOHN  SYBSEY,  50  acs. 
called  by  the  name  of  Craney  Island, 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  Mar.  26,  1649,  Page 
159.  At  the  mouth  of  Eliza.  Riv.,  adj. 
on  the  W.  end  with  an  isthmus  or 
narrow  neck,  unto  Crany  point,  on  all 
other  parts  surrounded  and  compassed 
partly  with  James  river,  Eliza.  River  & 
Crayny  Br.  Trans,  of  1  person,  Tho. 
Williamson. 

MR.  THOMAS  MEARES,  100  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  26  Mar.  1649  (date 
erased),  Page  159.  Upon  the  N.  side 
of  Wwd.  br.  of  Eliza.  River,  adj.  John 
Watford.    Trans,  of  2  pers.* 

LIEUT.  STEPHEN  GILL,  25  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,  Apr.  30,  1649,  Page  160. 
Upon  N.  side  of  Charles  River,  E.  S.  E. 
with  Rosewell  Cr.,  W.  S.  W.  on  Burn- 
ham  Cr.    Due  by  former  patent. 

RALPH  GREEN,  50  acs.  Charles 
River    Co.,    Apr.    9,    1649,    Page    160. 


Upon  N.  side  of  Queens  Cr.,  near  land 
of  John  Uty  &  John  Bell.  This  land 
was  part  of  a  devident  of  Capt.  John 
Uty,  who  assigned  it  to  John  Lylly  & 
John  Bell,  who  assigned  it  to .  Richard 
Major,  who  assigned  it  Richard  Jones, 
who  assigned  it  to  Robert  Bouth,  who 
assigned  it  to  Owen  Loyd,  &  by  John 
Broach,  Atty.  for  sd.  Loyd,  conveyed  to 
John  Hartwell.  Due  unto  sd.  Green  by 
intermarriage  with  the  relict  of  sd. 
Hartwell,  who  also  dyed,  and  said  land 
now  becoming  due  to  sd.  Green. 

JOB.  CHANTER,  240  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  Mar.  7,  1648,  Page  161.  W. 
upon  Linhaven  River,  unto  mouth  of 
Strattons  Cr.,  adj.  Capt.  Francis  Yard- 
ley.  Trans,  of  5  pers:  Mary  Francis, 
Rob.  Bayly,  Jno.  Martiall,  Mary  Allen, 
Eady  Creadell. 

MR.  JOHN  JENNINGS,  211  Acs! 
James  City  Co.,  Apr.  11,  1649,  Page 
161.  Upon  the  two  Northermost 
branches  of  Greys  Cr.,  N.  E.  &  S.  E. 
upon  land  of  Thomas  Woodhouse,  N. 
E.  &  S.  E.  upon  John  Watkins  &  S.  E. 
upon  James  Mason.  Trans,  of  5  pers., 
there  remaining  39  acres  due  upon  the 
last  name.    (Names  not  mentioned). 

MR.  WILLIAM  BATT,  128  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  Apr.  11,  1649,  Page 
161.  Upon  Lower  Chipokes  Cr.  called 
by  the  natives  the  Indian  pacotacke, 
bounded  from  the  head  of  Pond  Swamp, 
along  land  of  George  Powell.  Trans, 
of  3  pers.,  22  acs.  being  due  upon  the 
last  name:  Ema.  Lowrey,  Elinor  Lowrey, 
John  Roseires. 

RICHARD  WHITEHURST,  250  acs. 
Norf.  Co.,  Oct.  20,  1648,  Page  162.  On 
Gaythers  Cr.  of  the  S.  branch  of  Eliza. 
River.  Trans.  of  5  pers:  Andrew 
Nichols,  his  wife  Elizabeth,  Andrew, 
William    &    Elizabeth,    his    3    children. 

JOHN  CLARKE,  250  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  Oct.  20,  1648,  Page  162.  N. 
side  of  Little  Cr.,  a  br.  of  the  S.  br.  of 
Eliz.  River,  adj.  land  of  Thomas  Marsh. 
Trans,  of  5  pers.:  Jacob  Atwack, 
Nathan  Kingsland,  Ann  Broadfeild, 
Elizabeth  Gelding. 


180 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


CAPT.  THOMAS  BARBAGE,  614 
acs.  Upper  Norfolke  County,  Page  163. 
(No  date.)  Lyeing  at  the  miles  end  of 
a  devident  of  land  now  in  his  tenure, 
on  the  westward  side  of  Bullocks 
Creeke,  crossing  same  &  adjoining  land 
of  George  White.  Said  land  being  due 
as  followeth:  300  acs.  by  patent  dated 
12  Oct.  1638  which  patent  is  surren- 
dered into  the  office  &  314  acs.  for  trans. 
of  7  persons  into  the  Colony,*  there 
being  due  36  acs. 

JOHN  BIDE,  50  acs.,  Yorke  Co., 
Feb.  6,  1648,  page  163.  Lyeing  between 
the  two  main  branches  of  St.  Andrewes 
Creeke.  Due  by  order  of  the  Quarter 
Court,  7  Oct.  1646. 

STEPHEN  GILL,  1150  Acs.,  Yorke 
Co.,  30  Apr.  1649,  p.  163.  Lyeing  on 
N.  side  of  Yorke  River  up  Rosewell  Cr., 
part  being  a  neck  of  land  within  the 
main  branches  of  said  Cr.  &  the  rest 
S.  E.  upon  a  pocoson,  S.  upon  land  of 
Mr.  Gouch  &  W.  upon  a  former  devi- 
dent of  sd.  Gills.  Due  for  trans,  of  23 
pers:  Francis  James,  Wm.  Thomas, 
John  Hart,  Tho.  Hollo  well,  Richd. 
Smith,  Sarah  Smith,  Robert  Cartar,  An- 
drew Cobb,  James  Hunt,  Edwd.  Harvey, 
Wm.  Roberts,  Fra.  Smith,  Ja:  Winchett, 
Edward  Parr,  Robt.  Pinn,  Tho.  Hackery, 
Edwd.  Nessum,  James  Wilson,  Wm. 
Frost,  Wm.  Wright,  Ralph  Jarret,  Alex. 
Downes,  Peter  Sterkey. 

ROGER  NICHOLLS,  150  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  17  Apr.  1649,  p.  164.  S.  side 
James  Riv.  a  mile  from  the  river,  N. 
W.  by  W.  on  land  formerly  Thomas 
Crouches,  S.  E.  by  E.  on  land  of  John 
Bisshop,  N.  N.  E.  upon  land  of  John 
Seanor.  Due  for  trans,  of:  Eliza.  Col- 
lins, Elizabeth  Blacke,  John  Carner. 
This  is  surrendered  and  the  right  to 
John  Barker  28  Nov.  1649.  Test:  R. 
Huberd. 

CHRISTOPHERS  BURRO  WES,  150 
acs.,  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  known  by  the 
name  of  Burrowes  his  old  plantation, 
8  Mar.  1648,  p.  164.  Beg.  at  a  point 
next  Burrowes  Island,  runing  S.  W.  by 
S.  Southerly  along  the  marked  trees  and 
bounds  of  the  Grand  patent  and  now 
appearing    to    Bullocke,    etc.    Due    for 


trans,  of  3  pers:  John  Hungerton, 
Fardinn  Fautres  (or  Fantres)  Richard 
Costelford. 

JOHN  MANNING,  200  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  25  Oct.  1648,  p.  165.  Upon 
Northward  side  of  Gaythers  Cr.,  being 
a  branch  of  the  Southward  br.  of  Eliza- 
beth Riv.,  runing  unto  land  of  Mer- 
madicke  Merrington.  Due  unto  said 
William  for  trans,  of  4  pers:  William 
Baxter,  Chr.  Collins,  Martha  Brice, 
Francis  Robinson. 

GEORGE  READ,  Gent.,  2,000  acs., 
2  Nov.  1648,  p.  165.  On  the  S.  side  of 
Peanketanke  and  W.  side  of  Chiskyake 
Creeke,  beg.  at  the  mouth.  Due  for 
trans,  of  40  pers:  Capt.  Nich.  Martin, 
Mrs.  Jane  Martin,  Jane  Bartlett,  Eliza. 
Martin,  Geo.  Brookes,  Eliza.  Sharpless, 
Robt.  Brown,  Robert  Awly,  John  Felton, 
Wm.  Galipin,  John  Broach,  1  Negro, 
Ann  Lockley,  Charles  Justion,  Roger 
Leamin,  John  Fryer,  Richard  Haward, 
Jno.  Jenerles  (?),  Jno.  Corassue,  Wal- 
ter Pitchfork,  William  Richard,  John 
York,  Peter  Ford,  Ann  Hilton,  John 
Shirt,  Wassett  Reyner,  Jone  his  wife, 
Francis  Compton,  Mr.  George  Read, 
Sackford  Brewster.  These  make  good  a 
pattent  for  said  Geo  Read  dated  18 
Oct.  1650.  Mich.  Gangrine,  Tho. 
Nightingale,  Owen  Hughs,  John  Parvin, 
John  Peirce,  Jno.  Humphrys,  Jno. 
Wilks,  Edward  Mason,  Geo.  Smith, 
Fra.  Batherp  (or  Batters).  Note:  These 
are  assigned  by  Mr.  Read  to  Edmd. 
Kemp  &  are  to  make  good  a  patent  of 
500  acres  granted  to  him  the  18th  of 
Oct.  1650.   Test:    R.  Huberd. 

NICHOLAS     DIXSON,     300     Acs. 

Nancemund  Co.,  20  Nov.  1648,  p.  166. 
Lyeing  on  the  Swd.  side  of  the  N.  W. 
br.  of  Nancemund  Riv.  about  4  mi.  up 
the  br.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  John  Person, 
Christian  Mann,  Jane  Ewen,  John  Ewen, 
John  Davis,  Mary  Davis. 

THOMAS    MORLAND,     100    Acs. 

Chas.  River  Co.,  5  Mar.  1648,  p.  166. 
In  Chiskyake,  butting  upon  Capt.  Wests 
Cr.,  on  N.  side  with  land  of  William 
Sayor  &  on  S.  side  with  the  master 
branch  of  Capt.  Wests  Cr.  The  sd.  land 
being  granted  to  Elizabeth  Bayly  in  her 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


181 


right  &  her  husbands  as  2  of  the  first 
adventurers  to  seat  upon  Charles  River 
&  by  the  sd.  Bayly  assigned  to  Ellis 
Brown  &  by  sd.  Brown  assigned  unto 
William  Reynolds  &  by  Reynolds  to 
Robert  Cager,  &  by  sd.  Cager  to  sd. 
Morland. 

WILLIAM  SHRIMPTON,  Gent., 
2000  acs.,  Northampton  Co.,  11  Apr. 
1649,  p.  167.  Bounded  on  the  E.  with 
the  seaboard  side,  W.  by  land  of  the 
old  plantation  Cr.  &  on  S.  by  land  of 
Edward  Douglass.  Due  sd.  Shrimton  as 
being  the  survivor  &  sole  Exor.  of  Dame 
Elizabeth  Dale  &  due  unto  her  as  being 
the  sole  Exix.  of  Sir  Thomas  Dale  to 
whom  it  was  due  by  bill  of  adventure 
into  this  Colony. 

MR.  HENRY  WOODHOUSE,  200 
acs.  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  5  Apr.  1649,  p. 
167.  Lyeing  on  the  Swd.  side  of  a  bay 
issueing  into  Stratton  Cr.  which  run- 
neth into  Linhaven  Riv.  Beg.  at  a  point 
on  the  Wwd.  side  of  the  mouth  of 
Grigory  Cr.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Thomas 
Watts,  Susan  his  wife,  Dennis  Lyall, 
Richard  Allen. 

MR.  CHARLES  SPARROW,  750 
Acs.,  Chas.  City  Co.,  p.  168.  Lyeing  on 
W.  side  of  Chipoaks  Cr.,  N.  E.  by  E. 
on  Martins  Brandon  &  Hackers  Cr.,  S. 
E.  upon  Chipoakes  Cr.,  S.  W.  on  the 
Cross  Cr.  which  separateth  the  land  now 
set  out  for  Samuell  Williams,  &  the 
750  acs.  By  assignment  from  Nicholas 
Perry,  30  Sept.  1645. 

MR.  WILLIAM  HOCCADAY,  1346 
acs.,  whereof  246  acs.  of  marsh  lyeing 
neare  the  narrow  of  Yorke  river,  N.  E. 
by  N.  upon  the  river,  S.  &  by  W.  &  E. 
&  by  S.  upon  the  Ware  Cr.  &  N.  W. 
by  NA  upon  Warreny  Cr.  500  acs. 
granted  him  by  patent  6  Aug.  1646  & 
846  acs.  for  trans,  of  17  pers:  Thomas 
Seawell,  Hugh  Smister,  Hugh  Jones, 
Junr.,    Edward    Wood,    Hugh    Arther, 

Hugh    (?),    John    Limicar     (?), 

William  Jones,  Senr.,  Nicho.  Smith, 
Edward  Wood,  Hen.  James,  Jno.  Wil- 
liams, Mary  Gardner,  Peeter  Green, 
John  Arthur,  William  Richards,  John 
Thomas.    10  Dec.  1648,  p.  168. 


GEORGE  BURCHER,  300  Acs.  Chas. 
City  Co.  &  part  in  James  City  Co.,  6 
June,  1649,  p.  168.  Lyeing  at  the  head 
of  up.  Chipoaks  Cr.  200  acs.  by  patent 
dated  22  Aug.  1637  &  100  acs.  for 
trans,  of:  Dorothy  Clarke,  James  Willis. 

MR.  JOHN  HILL,  300  Acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  29  May  1649,  p.  169.  On 
Swd.  side  of  the  Wwd.  br.  of  Eliz. 
Riv.,  beg.  on  the  Ewd.  side  of  the  mouth 
of  Goose  Cr.  Due  by  vertue  of  patent 
granted  him  7  Oct.  1646. 

WILLIAM  HOCCADAY,  900  Acs., 
6  June  1649,  p.  169.    Beg.  at  the  S.  E. 

of  Chiskyake  side  at  the  head  of  Arth: 
Price,  adj.  his  former  patent  &  a  cr. 
dividing  this  from  land  of  George  Read. 
Trans,  of  18  pers:  James  Drapp, 
Richd.  Moores,  Fra.  Pett,  Tymo.  Turton, 
Eliza.  Avile,  Joan  Cannon,  Fra.  Crave, 
Tho.  Inarnold  (Juarnold  ?),  Edward 
Tybatts,  John  Pye,  Peter  Coge  (?), 
Thomasin  Drew,  Richard  Spence,  Benja. 

,  Mary  Aswell,  Robert  Hill,  Wm. 

Nurton,  Fra.  Rowland. 

GILES  COLLINS  &  THOMAS 
ADAMS,  200  Acs.  in  Linhaven  Parish, 
Low.  Norf.  Co.  No  date.  P.  170.  Beg. 
neare  Adams  Cr.  side.  Trans,  of  4  pers.* 

CAPT.  RALPH  WORMELEY,  3,200 
acs.,  16  June  1649,  p.  170.  On  the  S. 
side  of  Rappahanock  Riv.  about  10  mi. 
up  the  river,  including  the  Indian 
Townes  of  old  &  new  Nimcock,  bounded 
N.  W.  upon  Rosegill  Cr.,  E.  towards 
land  of  Thomas  Trotter,  N.  E.  &  N. 
upon  the  river;  Trans,  of  3  score  &  4 
pers:  John  Price,  Pet.  Sterkey,  Lewis 
Comquest,  Xpian  Frederick,  John 
Styam,  Mary  Bennet,  John  Pinford, 
William  Leigh,  Saliman  DeCarvalco  (or 
Carvalox),  (name  altered),  Margt. 
Savage,  John  Jackson,  Fra.  Ferewether, 
Eight  Negroes — (Transported  in  Capt. 
Jno.  Williams  Shipp) — ,  John  Hamp- 
ton, William  English,  Samll.  Jones, 
Edwd.  Murferry,  Wm.  Ginsey,  Tho. 
Sackes,  Richd.  Marmaduke,  Jere  Linch, 
Richd.  Lewis,  Wm.  Robinson,  Erasmas 
Cole  (or  Cobe),  Wm.  Ginkin,  John 
Cornish,  Edward  Gaprell,  George  Wil- 
son, Thomas  Jackson,  Cristian  Best, 
Edward  Tyball,  Wm.  Baycock,  Andrew 


182 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Hancock,  Tho.  Allen,  Wm.  Midleton, 
Morris  Walker,  John  Bennet,  Arthur 
Lahay,  Richard  Smith,  Glode  Gallant, 
Andrew  Carelesse,  John  Coleman,  John 
Coleman,  John  Tap  Lady,  William 
Hodgkinson,  Thomas  Walker,  Richard 
Watson,  Hugh  Higinson,  9  Negroes. 

MR.  BENNET  FREEMAN,  400  Acs., 
James  City  Co.,  20  Dec.  1648,  p.  171. 
Up  Thomaham  Cr.,  being  part  of  the 
devident  of  Mr.  Francis  Fowler; 
bounded  N.  W.  upon  the  sd.  Cr.,  S.  E. 
and  S.  W.  upon  land  of  Capt.  Bridges 
Freeman.  200  Acs.  being  bequeathed  to 
Capt.  Bridges  Freeman  by  Mrs.  Antania 
Fowler,  deed.,  &  by  Capt.  Freeman 
given  to  sd.  Bennet  Freeman,  &  200  acs. 
by  the  sd.  Mrs.  Fowler  equally  be- 
queathed to  Richard  Balfin  &  Thomas 
Dennington  &  by  sd.  Balfin  &  Dening- 
ton  assigned  severally  to  sd.  Bennet 
Freeman,  all  which  by  deed  appeareth. 

JAMES  MILLER,  150  acs.,  butting 
upon  Roulstons  Cr.  Sly,  on  two  sides 
with  two  branches  of  sd.  Cr.  &  from 
the  place  where  the  water  mill  should 
stand  it  runs  up  with  the  Southermost 
runns  or  water  course  untill  it  comes  to 
Hugh  Aliens  land,  &  adj.  his  own  land. 
Trans,  of  3  pers:  Anne  Wille,  John 
Chanelor,  John  Erett.  26  Jan.  1648,  p. 
171. 

BARTHOLOMEW  HOSKINS,  1350 
acs.,  lyeing  on  the  Swd.  side  of  Rappa- 
hanock  Riv.,  First  Jan.  1648,  p.  172. 
Trans,  of  27  pers:  Mr.  Barth.  Hoskins, 
5  times;  6  Negroes;  Richard  Harway, 
Richard  Foster,  2  times;  Richd.  Winter, 
Abra.  Thomas,  Richd.  Holmes,  Richard 
Symonds,  Fra.  White,  Margary  Smith, 
Andrew  Edwards.  Renewed  12  Aug. 
1651. 

SAME.  400  acs.  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  6 
Mar.  1648,  p.  172.  Lyeing  on  Nwd. 
side  of  the  Broad  Cr.,  being  a  br.  of 
the  Ewd.  br.  of  Elizabeth  River.  Sd. 
land  granted  to  Henry  Watson,  10  June 
1639  &  by  the  relict  of  sd.  Watson  as- 
signed to  Richard  Foster,  &  by  him  as- 
signed to  Richard  Day  &  Richard  Wood- 
man (or  Woolman),  &  200  acs.  the 
residue  due  sd.  Wolman  for  trans,  of 
4   pers:    (&   the   whole   400    acs.   pur- 


chased of  Day  &  Woolman  by  sd.  Hos- 
kins.) Walter  Rash,  Oliver  Holliway, 
Ann  Virosse,  Phillip  Land. 

MR.  THOMAS  MEARES,  400  acs., 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  p.  173.  (No  date.) 
Lyeing  on  the  Wwd.  side  of  the  Wwd. 
br.  of  Eliz.  Riv,  beg.  at  a  point  on 
Wwd.  side  of  the  mouth  of  Allinton 
Cr.,  running  W.  N.  W.  etc;  and  oppo- 
site to  Goose  Cr.  Trans,  of  8  pers: 
Richard  Danance  (altered),  John  Hos- 
kins, John  Harris,  John  Carliere,  John 
Stawe,  John  Woolcot,  Ann  Askue,  1 
Negro. 

MR.  ROBERT  HAYES,  500  acs., 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  22  Nov.  1648,  p.  174. 
On  the  Southermost  br.  of  Little  Cr.,  in 
Linhaven  Parish,  beg.  at  Craine  Marsh 
Point,  etc.,  along  land  of  Capt.  John 
Gookin,  dee'd.,  &  by  Adam  Thorogoods 
land.  250  acs.  by  patent  dated  28  Sept. 
1643  &  the  other  50  acs.  for  trans,  of 
1  per.* 

RICHARD  KEMP,  Esqr.,  Secty.  of 
State  for  this  Colony,  3,500  acs.,  on 
Mockjack  Bay  in  Ware  River,  29  May 
1649,  p.  174.  According  to  2  surveys 
thereof  made  3,000  acs.  lyeing  towards 
the  narrow  of  the  sd.  river,  beg.  at 
Snare  Cr.  etc.  crossing  the  mouth  of 
Creans  Cr.  etc.,  which  tract  is  called 
Hunting  Dale.  The  other  500  acs.  beg. 
at  a  small  cr.  dividing  it  from  John 
Terry,  joyning  land  of  Dictoris  Christ- 
mas, running  due  E.  nye  St.  Michaells 
Cr.  called  by  the  name  of  the  Meadowes. 
Due  for  trans,  of  70  pers.  into  the 
Colony,  assigned  him  by  Capt.  Ralph 
Wormeley,  viz:  Mrs.  Agatha  Worme- 
ley,  Co:  (Col.)  Xtopher.  Wormeley, 
Mrs.  Mary  Wormeley,  Mr.  Ralph 
Wormeley,  Mr.  William  Littlewood, 
Richard  Lewis,  Robert  Cheanine,  Wil- 
liam Buttler,  Teague  Bryan,  Doctor 
French,  John  Blacke,  Robert  Brown,  1 
Negro  woman,  1  Negro  boy,  12 
Negroes;  Nicholas  Clarke,  Nicholas 
Jernew,  Ryon  Fletcher,  Symon  Byle, 
Robert    Huett,    A    french    man,    John 

Losway,    Cornelious   ,    4   Negroes; 

Hugh  Gwyn,  John  Thomas,  Henry 
Marshall,  Thomason  a  Maid,  Jenkin 
Williams,  Morris  Prower  (or  Procier) 
(?),    Henry    Hewes,    William    Watts, 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


183 


Charity  his  wife,  Daniell  Gale,  Nicho- 
las   . 

CAPT.  JOSE  JOHNSON,  639  acs., 
Chas.  City  Co.,  6  June  1649,  p.  175. 
On  S.  side  James  Riv.  opposite  to 
Weynoke,  bounded  N.  W.  upon  the 
river,  N.  E.  and  N.  W.  upon  the  Gleab, 
N.  E.  upon  Martins  Brandon,  S.  S.  E. 
upon  George  Birchers  land  &  W.  S.  W. 
upon  land  of  John  Wall.  Formerly 
granted  by  patent  29  June  1643. 

CHRISTOPHER  LEWIS,  400  acs., 
James  City  Co.,  4  July  1649,  p.  176. 
Lyeing  at  blackwater  upon  Eastermost 
br.  thereof,  poynting  up  to  Chipoakes 
Cr.,  bounded  S.  upon  land  of  Francis 
England  &  N.  upon  sd.  swamp.  Trans, 
of  8  pers:  Wm.  Hunt,  David  Brumly, 
Thomas  Guar  2,  John  Palmer,  Kath. 
Nightingale,  Humiliation  Telgate,  Jane 
Cross. 

HENRY  WHITE,  200  acs.,  James 
City  Co.,  4  July  1649,  p.  176.  Lyeing 
at  blackwater  upon  the  Eastermost  br. 
poynting  up  to  Up.  Chipoakes,  bounded 
E.  upon  the  said  swamp,  N.  upon  land 
of  Francis  England  &  S.  towards  land 
of  Peter  Hull.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Rich- 
ard Enbrooke,  Eliz.  Bussie,  Digon  Pal- 
lard  (or  Pollard),  Richd.  Conquest. 

ROBERT  WARREN,  300  acs.,  James 
City  Co.,  6  Aug.  1649,  p.  176.  Lyeing 
bet.  the  heads  of  Lawnes  Cr.  &  lower 
Chipoakes  Cr.,  bounded  E.  upon  land 
of  Mr.  William  Buttler,  N.  towards 
Hogg  Island  &  S.  upon  land  of  James 
Taylor.  Formerly  granted  unto  William 
Lawrence  6  Apr.  1647  &  by  him  as- 
signed unto  sd.  Warren. 

JOHN  WALTHAMS,  450  acs., 
Northampton  Co.,  15  Sept.  1649,  p. 
177.  At  Occahanock  Cr.,  beg.  at  the 
Eastermost  side  of  a  devt.  of  600  acs. 
granted  to  Richard  Vaughan,  extending 
Ely.  upon  the  maine  Cr.  Due  for  trans, 
of  9  pers:  Eliza.  Wesson,  Lake  (Luke 
?)  Wilson,  Dorothy  Watkins,  Jane 
Pupill,  George  Snow,  Thomas  Symson, 
Thomas  Jones,  Henry  Pilsberry,  Tho. 
Sheapheard. 

JOHN  DENNIS,  350  acs.,  scituate 
at  great  Wicocomoco,  15  Sept.  1649,  p. 


177.  Bounded  on  the  Northern  parts 
with  a  branch  of  sd.  river,  on  the 
Southern  part  by  a  small  br.  parting 
same  from  land  of  Thomas  Goscoigne 
&  making  this  a  neck  of  land.  Trans, 
of  7  pers:  Richard  Parker,  Chr.  Wals- 
grave,  Barbery  Dennis,  Robert  Swanson, 
Thomas  Long,  Thomas  Octies  (Acties 
?),  a  servant  of  Capt.  Stoner. 

NICOLAS  WADDILOW,  300  acs., 
Northampton  Co.,  15  Sept.  1649,  p. 
177.  At  Occhanock  Cr.,  bounded  on  the 
W.  with  the  land  of  Jno.  Baldwin  & 
Robert  Marrett.  (Note:  The  following 
names  appear  under  this  pattern):  Ed- 
ward Morris,  John  Thompson,  George 
Hall,  Wm.  Stanley,  Thomas  Key, 
Nehemiah  Coventon. 

NICHOLAS  WADDILOWE,  400 
Acs.,  Northampton  Co.,  15  Sept.  1649, 
P.  178.  At  Occahannock  Cr.  &  bounded 
on  the  Northern  parts  thereof  on  the 
Easterne  by  Compeekeeke  Cr.,  extend- 
ing Wly.  down  the  sd.  great  Cr.  Trans, 
of  8  pers:  Edwd.  Southerne,  Alex 
Stewardson,  Robert  Spraklin,  Richard 
Kellum,  Ja.  Adkinson,  John  Smite,  John 
Davis,  Nicho.  Oyles. 

EDMOND  SCARBURGH,  JUNR., 
2,000  acs.  Northampton  Co.,  12  Aug. 
1649,  p.  178.  Being  at  a  little  creek 
on  the  Ewd.  side  of  an  old  Indian  feild, 
running  down  Occahannocke  Cr. 
bounded  on  the  Swd.  part  therewith, 
W.  part  by  the  maine  bay  &  on  the 
Nwd.  part  by  Craddockes  Cr.,  formerly 
called  Nundue.  Trans,  of  40  pers: 
John  Thompson,  Robert  King,  Roger 
Isham,  Thomas  Scott,  Robert  Huncer, 
Walter  Laine,  John  Watts,  George 
Nelson,  John  Marrell,  Jane  Styles,  Mar- 
garett  Cossens,  Robert  Harrison,  Tho- 
mas Meere,  Tymothy  Gancer,  Thomas 
Jones,  Fra.  Gardner,  Dorothy  Hosnard, 
Henry  Bourne,  Phillip  Wattkins,  Rich- 
ard White,  James  Corewell,  Fenla  mac- 
William,  William  Bane,  Thomas  Mas- 
grave,  John  Reny,  George  Frisell,  John 
Forsith,  John  Thompson,  Lacrecia  Potts, 
John  Booth,  George  Gorden,  Richard 
Watson,  Sisley  Scratton,  Ann  Swann, 
Richard  Radley,  Thomas  Jones,  Mathew 
Overy,  Robert  Williams,  George  Nelson, 
Ann  Winter. 


184 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


RICHARD  VAUGHAN,  300  Acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  15  Sept.  1649,  P. 
179.  At  Occahannock  Cr.,  beg.  on  the 
Eastermost  side  of  Edmond  Scarburghs 
land,  and  Ely.  upon  the  maine  cr. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Richard  Vaughan, 
John  Shepway,  William  Jones,  William 
Thresher,  Herman  Major,  William 
Huttons. 

RICHARD  BAYLY,  700  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  15  Sept.  1649,  p.  179-  At 
Cradicks  beg.  at  Edmond  Scarbrugh's 
land.  Trans,  of  14  pers:  Eliza  Lacy, 
Edwd.  Tripp,  Phill  Landford,  John 
Butcher,  James  Wren,  Henry  Wood, 
Fra.  White,  Wm.  Wheeler,  Hangatt 
Baker,  Tho.  Bournham,  Willm.  Howes, 
Eliza.  Wheatley,  Lydia  Wheatly,  Amb. 
Dixon. 

HENRY  BISHOP,  300  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  15  Sept.  1649,  p.  179.  At 
Occahannock  Cr.,  bounded  on  W.  by  a 
small  branch  parting  this  from  the 
Batchelors  Neck.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
John  Follard,  Eliza  Pedocke,  Tho. 
Howell,  Henry  Haynes,  Eliza  Backen, 
Tho.  Deanes. 

THOMAS  GASCOYNE,  250  acs. 
scituated  in  great  Wicocomoco  river,  15 
Sept.  1649,  p.  180.  Being  a  neck  of 
land,  bounded  on  the  Northerne  part  by 
a  br.  parting  this  from  land  of  John 
Dennis,  on  the  S.  from  the  land  of 
Peeter  Knight.  Trans,  of  5  pers.* 
Note:  150  acs.  by  right  of  a  patent  of 
300  acs.  dated  9  Sept.  1636  of  which 
there  can  be  but  150  acs.  found  the  rest 
being  taken  up  before  by  John  Harloe, 
Wm.  Waters,  Kath:  his  wife. 

MR.  EPAPHRODITUS  LAWSON, 
700  Acs.  in  Rappahanock  River,  3  Sept. 
1649,  p.  180.  In  Rappahanock  River, 
lying  about  12  mi.  upon  the  N.  side, 
beg.  on  the  Ewd.  side  of  the  mouth  of 
Slaughters  Cr.  which  parts  this  from  the 
land  of  John  Cartar.  Trans,  of  14 
pers.* 

LEWIS  BURWELL,  Gent.,  2,350  acs., 
12  June,  1648,  p.  181.  Lying  upon  the 
N.  side  of  York  River  up  Rosewell  Cr. 
on  the  Swd.  side  thereof,  beg.  at  Bacon 


point,  bounded  for  length  up  the  cr.  to 
the  head  or  maine  swamp  &c,  &  for 
breadth  beg.  at  sd.  point  running  S.  S. 
E.  down  the  river  along  the  land  of 
Georg  Menefy,  Esq.,  until  it  meets  the 
land  of  William  Smoot.  900  acs. 
formerly  surveyed  by  Nicholas  Jernew; 
400  acs.  by  Francis  Cartar;  &  1050  acs. 
by  Symon  Bosman.  Due  for  trans,  of 
47  pers:  Francis  Burwell,  Allis  Atkin- 
son, Eliza  Clap,  Anthony  Rock,  Thomas 
Vand,  Hump.  Vand,  Gerrard  Hancorne, 
Robert  Throndon,  Susan  Bayard,  Henry 
Hubberd,  William  Cromp,  Mary  Wood, 
William  Webb,  Thomas  Mase,  William 
Pidd,  John  Axton,  Kath.  Key,  Edward 
Croppage,  Thomas  Lane,  Richard 
Howard,  Thomas  Reves,  John  Smith, 
William  Lase,  James  Hume  (or  Hane), 
Robert  Deby,  Peter  Lobbins,  Eidith 
Taylor,  Adam  Finly  (or  Finby),  Eliza. 
Clapp,  Alice  Adkinson,  George  Coudell, 
Gri.  Condry,  Dow.  Cozens,  Fra.  Bur- 
well,  Henry  Brake,  Wm.  Andrewes, 
Nicho.  Conell  (or  Covell),  James 
Tyrrill,  Michall  Aldrop,  Alex  Grey, 
John  Loppham,  Mary  Frisser,  John 
Cordy,  Edward  Owley,  Ferd.  Foster, 
Ma.  Hamilton,  And.  Adkinson  (or 
Akinson.) 

JOHN  GRAVETT  (Grevett),  250 
Acs.  Nancemund  Co.,  12  Apr.  1649,  p. 
181.  150  acs.  thereof  lying  on  the  Swd. 
side  of  the  N.  W.  br.  of  Nancemund 
Riv.,  and  adj.  the  other  100  acs.  150 
Acs.  formerly  granted  to  the  sd.  John 
Grevett  10  Oct.  1642  &  100  acs.  granted 
to  Thomas  Brice  18  July,  1640  &  by 
him  sold  to  sd.  Gravet. 

MR.  THO.  CURTIS,  300  acs.,  16 
July  1649,  p.  182.  Beg.  at  the  head  of 
a  br.  of  Fordes  Cr.  &  down  Mockjack 
Bay.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  John  Yates, 
Margaret  Yates,  Henry  Bourne,  Doro- 
thy Dile,  Thomas  Moore,  &  Tonny  & 
Basse  2  Negroes,  for  whom  land  is  due. 

PETER  KNIGHT,  Gent.,  500  acs.  17 
Oct.  1649,  p.  183.  On  the  S.  of  great 
Wicocomocoe,  being  a  neck  of  land, 
bounded  Ely.  upon  the  great  bay,  Wly. 
on  the  Cr.  that  parts  same  from  the 
Indian  Town  of  Cattalowmen,  N.  &  N. 
E.  upon  the  mouth  of  sd.  river.  Trans, 
of  10  pers.* 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


185 


JOHN  SPILTIMBER,  100  acs., 
James  City  Co.,  16  Nov.  1648,  p.  183. 
Lyeing  about  1^4  mi.  above  the  head  of 
Smiths  Fort  Cr.,  bounded  Wly.  upon 
land  of  John  Corker,  Sly.  upon  a  swamp 
that  parts  it  from  the  land  of  Thomas 
Warren.  50  acs.  formerly  granted  to 
William  Coffer  10  Feb.  1640  &  pur- 
chased of  him,  &  50  acs.  for  trans,  of 
Dorothy  Bishopp. 

ROWLAND  BURNEHAM,  Gent., 
500  Acs.,  16  Oct.  1649,  p.  184.  About 
15  mi.  up  the  S.  side  of  Rappahanock 
River,  bounded  S.  upon  land  of  Capt. 
Wormeley  &  N.  upon  Abraham  Eng- 
lish. Trans,  of  10  pers:  Katherin 
Burneham,  Mary  Richford  (or  Richard- 
ford),  Aron  Elrock  (or  Elcock),  Rich- 
ard White,  Owin  Davis,  5  Negroes. 
(Note:  This  name  has  been  altered  and 
it  is  possible  it  should  be  Barneham.) 

MR.  RALPH  BARLOWE,  850  acs., 
Northampton  Co.,  5  Oct.  1649,  p.  184. 
Lyeing  N.  N.  W.  upon  great  Noswat- 
tock  Riv.  from  Arokoko  Cr.  Mouth, 
bounded  W.  S.  W.  with  sd.  Cr.,  E.  N. 
E.  with  Mansotanzick  Cr.  Trans,  of  17 
pers:  Himself  "2  Severall  tymes",  Ann 
Parker,  William  Bosman,  Walter  Nor- 
ton, Bridgett  Richardson,  Abraham  Mor- 
gan, Robert  Parker,  Thomas  Daniell, 
James  Kemp,  George  Parker,  John 
Meller,  Elinor  Odait,  John  Peter,  one 
Negro,    Roger    Hengan,    Wm.    Hopkin. 

MR.  ROBERT  PARKER,  500  acs.  in 
Naswattock  Riv.,  Northampton  Co.,  5 
Oct.  1649,  p.  185.  Lyeing  N.  N.  W. 
upon  ereat  Naswattock  River  from 
Mossacotanzick  Cr.  Mouth  to  Matta- 
wompson  Cr.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Ed- 
ward Preston,  Robt.  Speed,  3  tymes, 
Henry  Hudson,  John  Spences  (or  Spen- 
cer), James  CockDale,  Henry  Croopp, 
Robert  Persivale,  John  Thomas. 

CAPT.  RANDALL  HERLE,  Marri- 
ner,  600  acs.  Northampton  Co.,  5  Oct. 
1649,  p.  185.  Lyeing  N.  N.  W.  upon 
great  Naswattock  Riv.  from  Chineande- 
hee  Cr.  Mouth  unto  Arokoko  Cr.  Trans, 
of  12  pers:  Anthony  West,  Ann  his 
wife,  William  Bragg,  John  West, 
Kathe:  West,  Edward  Clarke.  (Other 
names  not  given.) 


MR.  JOHN  TRUSSELL,  400  acs. 
lyeing  on  the  Southermost  side  of 
Chicokolne  (or  Chicokolue)  River.,  beg. 
at  a  small  cr.  that  devides  this  land  & 
Mr.  John  Motrams  land.  14  Oct.  1649, 
p.  185.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Henryr  Nar- 
gatt,  Robert  Wild,  Robert  Honyborne, 
Wm.  Crooke,  Stephen  Cockney,  John 
Pitts,  Nicho.  Lancellot,  John  Eatere. 

MR.  WILLIAM  PRESLY,  1150  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  14  Oct.  1649,  p. 
186.  Lyeing  on  Potomeck  Riv.  between 
Chingehan  Cr.  &  Preslys  Cr.  mouth, 
over  to  the  Codd  point,  Mattrams  Cr. 
parting  this  from  land  of  Mr.  John 
Motrums,  &  Chingehan  Cr.  parting  this 
from  land  of  Mr.  Robert  Newman. 
Trans,  of  23  pers:  John  February, 
Richd.  Steevens,  Robert  Crabbe,  John 
Ridford,  William  Louder,  William 
Hicks,  Hump.  Dale,  Tho.  Fowler,  John 
Warren,  John  Buttler,  John  Chappell, 
Peter  Willet,  William  Pippin,  Tho. 
Spalding,  Humph.  Blackman,  Peter 
Callay,  Jno.  Wildblood,  Henry  Plump- 
ton,  Wm.  Presly,  Jane  his  wife,  Wm. 
Preslv,  Payle  (or  Paule)  Presly,  Peter 
Presly. 

WILLIAM  PEIRCE  &  FRANCIS 
SYMONS,  220  acs.  Northumberland 
Co.,  16  Oct.  1649,  p.  187.  Between 
Powells  Cr.  &  Lees  Cr.  comeing  out  of 
Claytons  Cr.,  beg.  at  a  point  next  Ralph 
Horselys  land.  Trans,  of  5  pers:  John 
Clarkson,  Geo.  Wescomb,  Thomas 
Buckham,  Elizabeth  Bowin,  John  Sooter. 

RALPH  HORSLY,  130  Acs.,  North- 
umberland Co.,  16  Oct.  1649,  p.  187. 
On  Lees  Creek,  being  a  branch  come- 
ing out  of  Claytons  Cr.,  beg.  at  a  poynt 
parting  this  from  John  Earles  land. 
Trans,  of  2  pers:  Richard  Wall,  Rich- 
ard Buckham. 

JOHN  THOMAS,  350  acs.  Yorke 
Co.,  7  Oct.  1649,  p.  188.  Upon  the  N. 
side  of  Queens  Cr.,  N.  by  W.  upon  land 
of  Joseph  Croshaw,  S.  by  E.  upon 
Queens  Cr.,  W.  by  S.  upon  a  little  Cr. 
and  swamp  leading  to  the  Indian  Cabin 
&  E.  by  N.  upon  the  land  of  Mr.  Jer- 
new.  300  acs.  formerly  granted  unto 
John  Broach  &  by  him  assigned  unto 
Anthony  Barckurst  &  purchased  of  him 


186 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


by  sd.  Thomas,  &  50  acs.  for  trans,  of: 
Dorothy  Wife.  (It  is  assumed  this 
means  Dorothy,  his  wife.) 

LIEUT.      WILLIAM     WORLEICH, 

150  acres  in  Eliz.  City  Co.,  14  Oct. 
1649,  p.  188.  Upon  Cursons  (or  Car- 
sons  Cr.  in  Hampton  Riv.,  100  acs.  lye- 
ing  Ely.  upon  Carsons  Cr.  from  a  red 
poynt  at  the  2nd  br.  mouth,  bounded 
on  W.  with  Capt.  Thorowgoods,  dec'd., 
land,  N.  with  Capt.  William  Clayborne; 
and  50  acs.  lyeing  at  the  head  of  the 
devidends  of  Lansden,  and  Capt.  Cley- 
borne;  100  acs.  &  part  of  Capt.  Thorow- 
good  bounded  on  the  S.  W.  with  Mr. 
Thomas  Eatons  land  &  W.  N.  W.  with 
Mr.  Tohn  Robins  land.  Trans,  of  3  pers: 
himself,  Mary  Worleich,  Henry  Wor- 
leich. 

FRANCIS  BROWN  (Browne),  500 
acs.  called  Poplar  Neck,  Northumber- 
land Co.,  14  Nov.,  1649,  p.  189-  On 
the  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  at  the 
mouth  of  Shallo  Cr.,  running  N.  by  W. 
to  Narrow  Cr.  parting  this  from  land 
of  Wm.  Dounman  (or  Downman). 
Trans,  of  10  pers:  Xtoper.  Garlington, 
John  Mappine,  Elizabeth  Crane,  Henry 
Barnes,  Mary  Blackford,  John  Read, 
William  Smith,  William  Taylor,  Tho- 
mas Hudson,  Hester  Heytens. 

BEN.  HARRISON,  the  son  of  Ben. 
Harrison,  Gent.,  dec'd.,  500  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  9  Oct.  1649,  p.  189.  On  the 
S.  side  James  River,  beg.  on  the  Sly 
side  of  the  Round  Island  Swamp. 
Granted  to  Benja.  Harrison,  dec'd.,  by 
patent  dated  21  March,  1643,  "and  now 
due  unto  the  said  Banja.  Harrison  Junr. 
by  being  his  son  in  heir." 

THOMAS  HARWOOD,  300  acs., 
14  Nov.  1649,  p.  190.  Being  a  neck, 
adj.  next  John  Merriman  upon  a  br.  of 
Island  Neck  Cr.  called  Grimes  Crr.  in 
Rappa.  Riv.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Mary 
Compton,  Nicho.  Hare,  Tho.  Waldie, 
Nicho.  Flower,  Mary  Sawyer,  Robert 
Wilkinson. 

JOHN  MERRIMAN,  500  acs.,  14 
Nov.  1649,  p.  190.  Being  a  neck,  lye- 
ing on  the  N.  side  of  Rappa.  River,  up- 
on Island  Neck  Cr.,  beg.  at  a  poynt  at 


Seymes  Cr.  Mouth,  up  Island  Neck  Cr. 
to  the  head,  being  Wm.  Newsom's  ut- 
most bounds,  to  the  head  of  parting  cr. 
dividing  this  from  land  of  Thomas  Har- 
wood.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Angle  John- 
son, Elinor  Gillis,  Tho.  Tuata  (?), 
William  Harrison,  Heilton  Arrens, 
Rebecca  Fraine,  Audry  Merryman, 
Robert  Adkins,  his  own  adventure  3 
tymes.  His  last  adventure  is  yett  due  to 
him.    Test:    R.  Huberd. 

WILLIAM  CAPPS,  150  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  10  Apr.  1649,  p.  191.  On 
Strattons  Cr.  issueing  into  Linhaven 
Riv.    Trans,   of   3   pers.* 

JOHN  KING,  500  acs.,  York  Co., 
19  Nov.  1649,  p.  192.  On  the  N.  side 
of  York  Riv.  upon  the  W.  side  of  the 
mouth  of  Poropotanke,  bounded  N.  E. 
upon  Kings  Cr.  Trans.  10  pers:  Robert 
Lester,  Geo.  Littleton,  Tho.  Lomans, 
Thomas  Mansfeild,  John  Boshoe,  John 
Daniell,  Morgan  Joanes,  John  Williams, 
Henry  Thompson. 

NICHOLAS  BROOKE,  Senr.,  Gent., 
500  acs.  Yorke  Co.,  12  July,  1649,  p. 
192.  Commonly  called  by  the  name  of 
Middle  Plantation;  bounded  S.  E.  upon 
land  formerly  belonging  to  Tho.  Lucas, 
N.  W.  upon  the  great  swamp,  &  S.  W. 
upon  the  Palisadoe.  Formerly  granted 
to  Nicholas  Brooke,  Jr.,  13  Aug.  1646 
&  purchased  by  sd.  Brooke,  Sr.,  of  his 


NICHOLAS  BROOKE,  Junr.  to 
NICHOLAS  BROOKE,  Senr.,  "for  a 
valuable  consideration  to  me  in  hand 
payd  before  the  date  hereof  by  Mr. 
Nicholas  Brooke,  Senr.,  my  father",  etc. 
12  July  1649,  p.  192.  Witnessed  by: 
Robert  Huberd  &  Matt.  Huberd. 

WALTER  CHILES,  Gent.,  813  acs. 
Chas.  City  Co.,  5  Nov.  1649,  p.  193. 
Lyeing  upon  the  Sly.  side  of  Appomat- 
tuck  Riv.,  200  acs.  thereof  bounded  N. 
W.  upon  the  river,  E.  N.  E.  upon  the 
other  devidend  of  600  acs.,  a  deep 
bottom  parting  it  W.  S.  W.  unto  a  run 
of  water  that  parteth  this  from  land  of 
Nath.  Tatum;  the  other  613  acs.  beg. 
at  the  upward  bounds  of  Mr.  Tonstalls 
land,  &  W.  N.  W.  upon  the  river.    200 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


187 


acs.  granted  to  William  Sanders,  10 
Oct.  1640  &  by  him  assigned  unto 
Walter  Brooke,  &  by  Brooke  to  William 
Thomas  alias  Fluellin,  &  purchased  by 
Chiles  of  sd.  Thomas.  The  other  613 
acs.  granted  to  sd.  Chiles  20  Oct.  1642. 

JOHN  BARKER,  300  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  29  Nov.  1649,  p.  193.  Lyeing 
at  the  verry  head  of  the  maine  branch 
of  Lower  Chipoaks  Cr.,  bounded  upon 
land  of  Master  Dunstan  &  N.  W.  upon 
land  of  William  Cartar.  Trans,  of  6 
pers:*  Eliza.  Blacker,  John  Carver, 
Elizabeth  Collins,  John  Musgrove. 

JOHN  VAUGHAN,  1200  acs.  lyeing 
on  the  Swd.  side  of  Potomack  Riv  on 
the  Eastermost  side  of  Cedar  Island  Cr. 
at  the  mouth  thereof,  running  S.  E. 
parallel  to  sd.  river  Formerly  granted 
to  Edward  Murfrey  &  sd.  Vaughan  24 
Feb.  1643.    Page  194.    (No  date.) 

WILLIAM  MOORE,  300  acs.  called 
Timber  Neck,  17  Oct.  1649,  p.  194. 
Lyeing  some  18  mi.  upon  S.  side  of 
Rappa.  Riv.,  E.  N.  E.  from  mouth  of 
Fishing  Cr.  to  another  small  cr.  to- 
wards Sandy  poynt;  bounded  S.  S.  E. 
with  Fishing  Cr.  parting  this  from  Rich- 
ard Parret's  land.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
Nathan  Barker,  Jacob,  Jordaine,  John 
Green,  Tho.  Husband. 

COLL.    PHILLIP    HONNYWOOD, 

Esq.,  3050  acs.  14  Mar.  1649,  p.  194. 
1550  acs.  lying  in  York  Riv.  next  above 
Warrannucock  Island,  &  1500  acs.  lye- 
ing on  S.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.  neare  sd. 
Is.,  bounded  S.  E.  along  marked  trees 
of  Mr.  Jernew,  S.  W.  by  S.  &  W.  by  S. 
along  the  mountaynes,  includeing  two 
tongues  of  land  running  to  the  river 
containing  14  acs.    Trans,  of  61  pers.* 

MANWARRING  HAMON,  Esqr., 
3,760  acs.,  Yorke  Co.,  15  Mar.  1649,  p. 
195.  Lyeing  up  Yorke  Riv.  on  the  S. 
side  thereof  commonly  called  Fort 
Royall,  bounded  N.  E.,  N.  W.,  S.  W., 
N.  E.  &  N.  upon  the  Riv.,  S.  S.  W.  by 
S.  upon  the  Mts.  &  N.  W.  by  N.  upon 
black  cr.,  &  S.  E.  upon  the  Bay,  in- 
cludeing on  the  other  side  the  sd.  Bay 
one  neck  contayneing  350  acs.  600  acs. 
purchased   of  Capt.   Roger   Marshall   to 


whom  it  was  granted  14th  of  this  In- 
stant March  &  3160  acs.  for  trans,  of 
63  pers.* 

NOTE:  Same  page.  Whereas  by  Act 
of  Assembly  dated  at  James  City  the 
5th  Day  of  October  1646  Fort  Royall 
ah.  Ricahock  with  Six  Hundred  acres  of 
Land  joyning  upon  the  same  with  all 
Houses  and  Edifices  belonging  to  the 
same  was  granted  unto  Capt.  Roger 
Marshall  upon  Condition  that  he  the 
said  Capt.  Marshall  should  Maynetayne 
ten  men  upon  the  Same  dureing  the 
tyme  of  three  yeares  which  said  Condi- 
tion being  performed,"  etc. 

THOMAS  BOURNE,  250  acs.,  being 
a  neck  of  land  called  Store  poynt  Neck, 
lyeing  on  the  N.  side  of  Peanketanke 
Riv.,  bounded  on  S.  &  E.  with  Pyanke- 
tank  Riv.,  on  N.  E.  with  Bornes  Cr., 
on  N.  W.  with  a  branch  comeing  out 
of  sd.  cr.  &  to  the  Bay  side  &  on  the 
W.  with  a  deep  bay  or  bite  of  Peanke- 
tank  Riv.  20  Dec.  1649,  p.  196.  Due 
sd.  Borne  for  trans,  of  5  pers:  James 
Clarke,  John  Bell,  John  Burd,  Tho. 
Nurdon,  John  Johnson. 

JOHN  CABBIDGE,  200  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  13  Mar.  1649,  p.  196.  In 
Linhaven  Parish,  up  the  Little  Cr. 
against  Hogg  Is.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
Mary  Erefined,  Tho.  Rennolds,  Robert 
Winter,  Joane  Welch. 

ARTHUR  ALLEN,  200  Acs,  James 
City  Co.,  14  Mar.  1649,  p.  197.  Lye- 
ing bet.  Lawnes  &  Chipoaks  Crks., 
bounded  N.  upon  land  of  Capt.  Peirce 
now  in  possession  of  Edward  Blane,  E. 
towards  Lawnes  Cr.  joyning  with  his 
Eastermost  angle  on  the  land  of  Mr. 
Rennolds.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Ailce 
Tucker,  Wm.  Eyres,  Wm.  Mors,  Tho- 
mas Rastill. 

HENRY  BRAKES,  250  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  13  Mar.  1649,  p.  197.  In 
Lynhaven  Parish,  up  a  little  cr.  against 
Hogg  Is.,  beg.  at  John  Cabbidge's 
marked  tree  by  Hogg  Is.  Cr.  side.  Trans, 
of  5  pers:  Mary  Elitherby,  Dorothy 
Wyaneford,  Robert  Russell,  Tho.  Wards, 
Sarah  Walker. 


188 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


FRANCIS  LAND,  270  acs.  lyeing  & 
being  at  the  head  of  Francis  Land  devi- 
dent  &  along  Thomas  Watts  devdt.,  in 
Linhaven  parish,  towards  Lancaster 
Levites  land,  S.  E.  by  S.  to  marked  trees 
of  Tho.  Watts  now  Fra.  Land's.  14 
Mar.  1649,  p.  198.  Trans,  of  5  pers: 
Jane  Driver,  Jane  Ruddeford,  Edward 
Long,  John  Johnson,  Ailce  Young. 

RICHARD  WHITEHURST,  300  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  15  Mar.  1649,  p.  198. 
On  the  Swd.  side  of  the  Ewd.  br.  of 
Eliz.  Riv.,  running  S.  S.  W.  on  land  of 
John  Godfrey,  through  the  maine 
poquoson,  N.  N.  E.  to  a  poynt  on  the 
Wwd.  side  of  the  Church  Cr.  Granted 
to  Thomas  Davis  by  patent  22  May 
1637,  by  whom  it  was  assigned  to  Law- 
rence Peters  &  purchased  by  sd.  White- 
hurst  of  Peters. 

HENRY  FENTON,  Gent.,  1500  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,  1  Dec.  1649,  p.  199.  Lye- 
ing within  the  mouth  of  Mattapony 
Riv.,  on  the  E.  side  thereof,  bounded 
N.  W.  upon  the  Riv.,  &  S.  W.  upon  a 
cr.  dividing  this  from  land  of  Richard 
Major,  &  N.  E.  up  the  river  including 
Fentons  Cr.    Trans,  of  30  pers.* 

FRANCIS  WILLIS,  450  acs.,  29  Jan. 
1649,  p.  199.  Beg.  towards  the  head  of 
the  Eastermost  br.  of  Severne  at  a  point 
where  that  br.  divides  itself  into  two 
branches  &  measuring  from  the  poynt 
unto  marked  trees  that  divides  this  from 
land  of  Richard  Burt.  Trans,  of  9  pers.* 

MR.  RICHARD  TYE,  1450  acs., 
known  by  the  name  of  the  old  Towne 
above  Merchants  Hope,  beg.  at  a  place 
called  the  great  Market,  extending  in 
breadth  at  the  head  of  Samuell  Walker's 
land,  due  S.  into  the  woods  makeing  a 
long  square,  W.  towards  the  head  of 
Jordaynes  &  Bayleys  Cr.,  towards 
Wardes  Cr.  &  N.  on  sd.  Walker's  & 
Richard  Craven's  lands;  the  height 
thereof  into  the  maine  woods  is  a  mile 
all  reduced  into  horizontall  measure. 
Due  bv  vertue  of  the  rights  of  a  patent 
granted  Chene  Boys,  23  Aug.  1637  for 
1500  Acs.  &  surrendered  into  the  office 
by  sd.  Tye,  who  married  the  relict  of 
sd.  Chene  Boys.    26  Oct.  1649,  p.  199- 


JOHN  SADLER  &  RICHD. 
QUYNY,  Merchants,  1,140  acs.  Chas. 
City  Co.,  11  Jan.  1649,  p.  200.  Lyeing 
from  the  head  of  Wards  Cr.  up  the 
Eastermost  br.  of  same  the  distance  of 
4  mi.  or  thereabouts,  called  by  the  name 
of  the  Pondes,  bounded  from  the  run 
below  the  Ponds  S.  E.  by  E.  80  chaines 
from  thence  S.  W.  by  S.  240  chs.,  from 
thence  N.  W.  by  W.  190  chs.,  from 
thence  N.  E.  by  N.  240  chs.  &  from 
thence  to  the  river  S.  E.  by  E.  to  place 
where  it  begun.    Trans,  of  23  pers.* 

RICHARD  MAJOR,  300  acs.  Yorke 
Co.,  lyeing  at  the  verry  mouth  of  Matta- 
pony Riv.  on  the  E.  side  thereof  &  on 
N.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.,  bounded  on  the 
West  by  the  River,  S.  &  E.  by  Majors 
Cr.  &  on  the  N.  by  another  cr.  17  Jan. 
1649,  p.  200.  Trans,  of  6  pers.*  Note: 
This  patent  renewed  in  name  of  Edward 
Simpson,  Junr.  after  the  Court  

THOMAS  CONIERS,  40  acs.  Eliz. 
City  Co.,  30  July  1649,  p.  201.  Run- 
ning by  the  end  of  Basnets  house  to  the 
cr.  side  that  parts  this  from  the  Fort 
feild,  bv  marked  trees,  then  N.  N.  E. 
along  sd.  cr.  by  Plackett  Well,  to  a  tree 
hard  by  Major  Morrisons  ground,  N. 
N.  W.  to  the  Gleab  land,  to  the  per- 
sons (parsans)  Ditch.  Trans,  of:  Sarah 
Stratton. 

MR.  JOSEPH  CROSHAW,  1350  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,  27  Feb.  1649,  p.  201.  Lye- 
ing in  Yorke  Riv.  on  S.  side  thereof 
about  8  mi.  above  the  Fort,  bounded 
upon  the  river  &  upon  Monke  (or 
Mouke),  Moggadegum  Cr.,  &  W.  by  S. 
upon  the  Mts.  Trans,  of  27  pers: 
Mary  Sawford,  John  Proctor,  John 
Peirce,  Tho.  Hartland,  Samll.  Wright, 
John  Clare,  Thomas  Adams,  Mary 
Williams,  William  Eye,  Thomas  Mor- 
ton, Ralph  Spencer,  William  Dyon,  Ed- 
ward Loes,  Wm.  Cartar,  Richd.  Hen- 
wath,  John  Sprons  (of  Sprous)  Richd. 
Sharpe,  Fra.  Furboyes,  Wm.  Lodey, 
Robt.  Salter,  John  Morne,  Edward  Fox, 
Ja.  Crockell,  Richd.  Redman,  Richard 
Hill,  Wm.  Hunt,  John  Jede. 

MR.  RICHARD  CROSHAW,  750  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,  27  Feb.  1649,  p.  202.    Lye- 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


189 


ing  on  N.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.,  called 
by  the  name  of  the  Stayres,  bounded 
N.  N.  W.  upon  the  land  of  Tymothy 
Lodell.  Trans,  of  5  pers:  Richard 
Finch,  Mary  Finch,  Elizabeth  Finch, 
Richard  Saeton,  John,  William,  &  Mary 
Finch,  Wm.  Coote,  Tho.  Laramore,  Ja. 
Clarke,  John  Elly  (or  Eley),  Wm. 
Pountney,  John  Buckerin,  Mart  Lear, 
Walt.  Tealter. 

MR.  HENRY  LEE,  247  acs.  Yorke 
Co.,  3  Mar.  1649,  p.  202.  Abutting  N. 
W.  upon  a  br.  of  Capt.  West's  Cr.,  S. 
W.  upon  land  of  Thomas  Morley  &  N. 
E.  upon  land  of  William  Sawyer.  Trans, 
of  5  pers:  Henrry  Lee,  John  Lee,  Eliza- 
beth Boshfeild,  Ann  Russell,  Thomas 
Johnson. 

WILLIAM  NESUM,  THO.  SAX, 
MILES  BATTERSBY  &  JOHN  PYNE, 
800  acs.  called  the  Island  Neck,  lyeing 
on  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  neare  Curri- 
tomon  Riv.  mouth,  Northumberland  Co., 
29  Jan.  1649,  p.  202.  Trans,  of  16 
pers:  Richd.  Mallery,  Jno.  Williams, 
Mary  Cotterell,  Richd.  French,  Joane 
Neale,  Richd.  Riley,  Edward  Thomas, 
Tho.  Chenell  (Chevell),  Richd.  Smyth, 
Edwd.  Parke,  Henrry  Loady,  Henry 
Biggs,  Henry  Abbs,  Thomas  Abbs,  Mary 
Abbs,  Tho.  Steed. 

SAME.  550  acs.  in  same  county  & 
same  date.  On  N.  side  the  Rappa.  Riv., 
adj.  to  the  Island  Neck,  running  N.  N. 
W.  to  Marsh  Poynt  Cr.,  Page  203. 
Trans,  of  11  pers:  Richd.  Pagget, 
Richd.  Jones,  Ja.  Richardson,  Wm. 
Horlson,  Hugh  Griffin,  Tho.  Griffin, 
Tho.  Grimsditch,  Edward  Wright,  John 
Gibbs,  Richd.  Ownes,  Robert  Poole. 

WALTER  CHILES,  Gent.,  813  acs. 
Chas.  City  Co.,  5  Nov.  1648,  p.  203. 
Confirmation  of  pattern  dated  20  Oct. 
1642. 

STEPHEN  DURDEN,  150  acs.  Up. 
Norf.  Co.,  14  Mar.  1649,  p.  204.  Lve- 
ing  on  the  Ewd.  side  of  the  N.  W.  br. 
of  Nancimum  Riv.  at  Indian  Cr.,  adj. 
land  of  George  Chewing  &  Francis 
Maiden.  Formerly  granted  unto  Tho- 
mas Brice,  19th  Oct.  1643;  100  acs.  of 
which   was    granted   to   him   by   patent 


dated  11  Nov.  1640  &  50  acs.  for  trans, 
of  1  per.,  whose  name  is  not  given. 
Assigned  unto  George  Chewning,  who 
assigned  same  unto  sd.  Durden. 

MR.  RICHARD  QUINEY,  300  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  9  Feb.  1649,  p.  205. 
Upon  Up.  Chipoakes,  bounded  S.  E. 
upon  land  of  Mr.  William  Egborough 
&  W.  Sly.  upon  land  of  Jerremy 
Dickinson.    Trans,  of  6  pers.* 

THOMAS  WILLIAMS,  326  acs., 
Nansimund  Co.,  17  Oct.  1648,  p.  205. 
On  Swd.  side  &  nigh  the  mouth  of 
New  Towne  haven  Riv.,  running  S.  E. 
unto  land  of  George  Salisbury  deserted, 
butting  the  miles  end  of  land  of  Capt. 
Daniell  Grokin  (Gookin),  and  crossing 
Island  Cr.    Trans,  of  7  pers.* 

MR.     JOHN     ROBINS,     400     acs. 

Northumberland  Co.,  called  Indian  Feild 
Necke,  15  Mar.  1649,  p.  206.  Lyeing 
on  the  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  at 
Narrow  Cr.  mouth  parting  this  from 
land  of  Francis  Brown,  running  N.  by 
W.  along  the  river  unto  a  creek's  mouth 
parting  this  from  land  of  John  Place. 
Due  sd.  Robbins  for  trans,  of  8  pers.* 

RICHARD  PARRETT,  neck  of  land 
containing  450  acs.,  lyeing  on  the  S. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  some  18  mi.  up, 
bee.  N.  E.  on  same  at  the  mouth  of 
Wadeing  Madley  Cr.  to  the  mouth  of 
Fishing  Cr.  Trans.  9  pers:  Elizabeth 
Steele,  Henry  Armes,  Henry  Sharpe, 
Kath.  Swadlin,  Richard  Case,  Charles 
Jackson,  Ellen  Sheep,  Wm.  Dunstan, 
James    Pettin.    13    Mar.    1649,    p.    206. 

THOMAS  SPAKE,  Gent.,  400  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,    10  Jan.   1649,  p. 

206.  Abutting  N.  E.  upon  Nomeny 
Bay,  S.  E.  upon  cr.  dividing  this  from 
land  of  Walter  Broadhurst  &  N.  W. 
upon  cr.  dividing  this  from  land  of 
John  Hollowes.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Mr. 
Tho.  Spake,  Ralph  Sayler,  Winter  Chap- 
man, Robert  Bolewell  (or  Bollwell) 
Richd.  Biggs,  Richd.  Tonne,  Pru.  Dover. 

MR.  THOMAS  SPAKE,  600  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,   10  Jan.   1649,  p. 

207.  Abutting  Nly.  upon  the  mouth  of 
a    cr.    issueing    out    of    Nomeny    Bay. 


190 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Trans,  of  12  pers:  Katherine  Terrell, 
John  Russell,  Edward  King,  Tho.  West, 
Ann  King,  Ann  Chandler,  Mr.  Win. 
(ter)  Chapman,  John  Towne,  George 
Day,  Richd.  West,  Henry  West,  Ailce 
Crooke. 

JOHN  SENEOR,  100  acs.  on  S.  side 
James  River  a  little  above  the  Colledge, 
bounded  S.  E.  upon  the  land  of  Mr. 
Edwd.  Grindon,  N.  W.  of  Mr.  George 
Sandyes,  N.  E.  upon  the  river  &  S.  W. 
into  the  woods.  9  Apr.  1650,  p.  207. 
Trans,  of  2  pers:  Elizabeth  Barker, 
Mary  Taylor. 

NICHO.  JERNEW,  1,000  acs.  Yorke 
Co.,  27  Feby.  1649,  p.  207.  Joyneing 
upon  Warranuncock  Island  on  the  N. 
side  of  Yorke  Riv.  Trans,  of  20  pers., 
of  which  the  following  are  mentioned: 
Paule  Chiffton,  Timo.  Woldridge,  2 
Negroes;  Henry  Smith,  Francis  Jernew, 
Eliza.  Blanchett,  Francis  Coote,  Edmd. 
&  wife  (?)  (altered),  Elinor  Thomas, 
Masser  William,  Ann  Burton,  Wm. 
Wells.  Note:  This  patent  is  relin- 
quished and  the  rights  to  make  good  a 
patent  of  900  acres  in  the  name  of  the 
said  Jernew  Dated  the  18th  Oct.  1650. 

NICHOLAS  JERNEW,  200  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,  27  Feb.  1649,  p.  208.  S. 
side  Yorke  Riv.  opposite  to  his  other 
devdt.  of  1,000  acs.  on  the  N.  side  and 
bounded  upon  Col.  Honnywood's  land. 
Trans,  of  4  pers.*  Note:  This  alsoe 
relinquished.    Teste:    R.  H. 

MR.  JOHN  HOLDING,  850  acs. 
known  by  the  name  of  Warranuncock 
Island,  Yorke  Co.,  27  Feb.  1649,  p. 
208.  Lyeing  in  Yorke  Riv.,  bounded 
round  with  two  great  swamps  one  of 
them  dividing  it  from  Col.  Honny- 
wood's &  the  other  from  land  of  Mr. 
Jernew.    Trans,  of  17  pers.* 

TIMOTHY  LODELL,  575  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,  27  Feb.  1649,  p.  209. 
Bounded  on  N.  side  by  Yorke  Riv.,  S. 
S.  W.  upon  Mr.  Croshaw's  land.  Trans, 
of  12  pers.,  of  whom  only  the  follow- 
ing are  mentioned:  John  Worker,  9 
Negroes. 

WILLIAM  DURAND,  800  acs.  in 
Rappa.  Riv.  about  35  mi.  up  on  the  S. 


side.  15  Mar.  1649,  p.  209.  Formerly 
granted  to  sd.  Durand  by  patent  dated 
4  Nov.  1642.  Note:  This  is  voyd  the 
said  Durand  being  a  bannished  man  and 
soe  uncapable  of  holding  any  land  in 
this  Colony  and  is  granted  unto  Capt. 
William  Brocas. 

BERTRAM  OBERT,  200  acs.  lyeing 
on  S.  side  Rappa.  Riv.  about  14  mi.  up 
the  same,  bounded  N.  E.  by  N.  upon 
Sunderland  Cr.  2  Oct.  1649,  p.  210. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  Ellin  Robinson, 
Eustace  Sanders,  Joan  Miller,  Tho. 
Drew. 

THOMAS  HAWKINS,  466  acs. 
Chas.  River  Co.,  2  Apr.  1650,  p.  210. 
Lyeing  in  the  new  poquoson,  beg.  at 
Hawkins  Point,  running  parallel  to 
Hawkins  Cr.  to  the  Bridg  at  the  head 
of  the  Cr.  which  divides  this  from  land 
of  Capt.  Cheesman.  300  acs.  formerly 
patented  him,  9  May,  1636,  &  166  acs. 
for  trans,  of  4  pers:  John  Griffin, 
Richard  Hews,  Roger  Thomas,  James 
Aston. 

THOMAS  DALE,  son  of  Nicholas 
Dale,  dec'd.,  800  acs.  on  S.  side  of 
Rappa.  Riv.,  some  8  mi.  up,  lyeing  E. 
N.  E.  upon  sd.  river  from  the  mouth 
of  Wadeing  Cr.  to  mouth  of  Marsh  Cr. 
13  Mar.  1649,  p.  211.  Trans,  of  16 
pers:  Dorothy  Cole,  Edward  Spencer, 
Richd.  Jones,  John  Walton,  Mathew 
Wallis,  Thomas  Brewer,  Edw.  Williams, 
Tho.  Richards,  John  Read,  Patience 
Marken,  Dan.  Sympson,  Jefferry  Wat- 
son, Robt.  Woodcroft,  Sarah  Key,  Ann 
Fletcher,  Fran.  Hues. 

MR.  JAMES  WILLIAMSON,  1150 
acs.  In  Rappa.  Riv.  on  the  N.  side, 
150  acs.  being  marsh.  22  May  1650, 
p.  211.  Trans,  of  23  pers:  Silvester 
Thacher,  Wm.  Freeman,  Robert  Dunn, 
Wm.  Harrison,  Kath.  Peirce,  James 
Loyd,  John  Richardson,  Henry  Cromp- 
ton,  Edward  Hurt,  William  Jury,  Me- 
thusalem  Hart,  Ralph  England,  Wm. 
Hutt  (or  Nutt),  Robert  Wildge,  Mor- 
gan Davis,  Eliza.  Harton,  Walter 
Owens,  Jno.  Cadin,  Wm.  Jefferson, 
John  Fennell,  Marg.  Baker,  John  Davis, 
Tho.  Whitlock. 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


191 


SAME.  1800  acs.  in  Rappa.  Riv.  on 
the  N.  side,  22  May  1650,  p.  212.  Beg. 
at  a  marked  cedar  tree  nigh  the  mouth 
of  Milleck  Cr.,  running  N.  E.  by  E.  on 
the  land  of  Wm.  Underwood,  &  to  the 
mouth  of  Willing  Cr.,  being  above  the 
land  of  Antho.  Jackman.  Trans,  of  36 
pers:  John  Jackson,  Wm.  Smarley,  2 
children  of  John  Marshalls,  Ellen  Sheen, 
Ann  Yarnar,  George  Wye,  Chrper.  (?) 
Medcalfe,  John  Tingle,  John  Nouseir, 
Tho.  Cooperson,  Robt.  Ward,  Abigail 
Huse,  Wm.  Jackson,  Nicholas  Stone, 
Mary  Powett,  Mar.  Williams,  Alexr. 
Cammell,  James  Rogers,  John  Dickin- 
son, Leon.  Jones,  Richd.  Thomas,  Alexr. 
Rosse,  Tho.  Cartwright,  Xtopr.  Gran- 
feild,  Mary  Hudson,  Mary  Cripps,  Wm. 
Jones,  Hester  Foord.  300  by  vertue  of 
a  patent  granted  to  Richd.  Bennet  2nd 
Mar.  1638  &  now  deserted. 

WILLIAM  UNDERWOOD,  Gent., 
1400  acs.  in  Rappa.  Riv.,  lyeing  on  N. 
side,  22  May  1650,  p.  212.  Beg.  at  a 
poynt  at  the  mouth  of  Mileck  Cr.,  run- 
ning N.  E.  by  E.  above  Mr.  James 
Williamson,  &  to  Brushwood  Cr.  Trans. 
28  pers.,  whose  names  are  not  given. 
Note:  "The  rights  that  belongs  to  this 
patent  is  in  the  Old  Booke  in  folio  146." 

SAME.  600  acs.  in  Rappa.  Riv.  on 
N.  side,  beg.  at  a  poynt  nigh  the  mouth 
of  Indian  Cr.,  running  N.  E.  by  N.  & 
above  land  of  Mr.  James  Williamson. 
Trans,  of  12  pers:  Wm.  Moseley,  Wm. 
Underwood  4  tymes,  Mary  his  wife, 
Wm.  Underwood  his  Son,  Henry  Succor 
&  ux,  George  Bryer,  Joseph  Robins, 
Elizabeth  Penn  (or  Prenn)  22  May 
1650,  p.  213. 

RICE  JONES,  350  acs.  in  Rappa. 
Riv.,  about  9  mi.  up  the  N.  side,  beg. 
on  a  poynt  of  an  Island  called  Muskeeto 
poynt.  Trans,  of  7  pers.*  22  May 
1650,  p.  213. 

THOMAS  BRICE,  200  acs.  in  Rappa. 
Riv.,  lyeing  on  N.  side,  adj.  land  of 
sd.  Brice.  Trans,  of  4  pers.*  18  Apr. 
1650,  p.  213. 

ANTHONY  JACKMAN,  550  acs.  in 
Rappa.  Riv.  about  37  mi.  up  the  N. 
side,  beg.  on  Ewd.  side  of  the  mouth  of 


Jackmans  Cr.,  adj.  above  land  of  Capt. 
Moore  Fantleroy.  18  Apr.  1650,  p.  214. 
Trans,  of  11  pers.* 

THOMAS  PAYNE,  600  acs.  in 
Rappa.  Riv.  about  43  mi.  upon  the  S. 
side,  about  a  mile  above  land  of  Rich- 
ard Bennett.  18  Apr.  1650,  p.  214. 
Trans,  of  12  pers.* 

HENRY  DEADMAN,  350  acs.  in 
Rappa.  Riv.,  on  S.  side,  below  600  acs. 
taken  up  by  Thomas  Payne,  and  S.  W. 
towards  land  of  Richard  Bennett.  27 
June  1650,  p.  215.    Trans,  of  7  pers.* 

JOHN  MANGOR,  800  acs.  on  N. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  in  Corotoman  Riv. 
on  the  N.  side  of  the  Eastermost  br. 
thereof,  bounded  by  a  cr.  that  divides 
this  from  land  of  Ellyas  Edmonds.  29 
July  1650,  p.  215.  Due  sd.  Manger  for 
trans,  of  16  pers:  Charles  Barcraft  the 
4th  tyme,  George  Moore,  Anthony 
Peace,  Hugh  Cary,  William  Hadway, 
William  Lucas,  Jose  Scriver,  Garrett 
Williams,  Zachary  Pady,  Henry  Page, 
John  Macduell,  Walter  Keyes,  Walter 
King,  James  Price,  John  Tallott,  Tho. 
Fry,  Nicholas  Hawkins,  Robert  Sidney, 
William  Stalmy  (or  Salmy),  John 
Hobbs,  Mary  Munday.  Land  due  for 
Tho.  Ailce,  and  Joane  Williams  (or 
Tho.  Wms.  (Williams)  and  Ailce 
Joane.) 

JOHN  MANGER,  300  acs.  on  N. 
side  Rappa.  Riv.,  on  W.  side  of  the  W. 
branch  thereof.  24  July  1650,  p.  216. 
Trans,  of  6  pers.,  whose  names  doe  not 
appear.  Note:  "The  names  are  under 
the  within  written  patent  5  more." 

WILLIAM  YARRETT  &  FRANCIS 
WHITTINGTON,  660  acs.  N.  side  of 

Rappa.  Riv.,   next  above  land   of  

Coleman.  29  July  1650,  p.  216.  Trans, 
of  14  pers:  Fra.  Wittington,  Eliza, 
his  wife,  Mary  Mares,  Anne  Dudifer, 
John  her  son,  Mary  Payton,  George 
Bell,  Hen.  Palmer,  Wm.  Morris,  Kath- 
erin  Taylor,  Rice  Jones,  Wm.  Farra, 
Geo.  Todd,  Richd.  Read.  40  acs.  being 
still  due  upon  the  last  name  in  the 
certificate. 

WM.  YARRETT  &  FRANCIS 
WHITTINGTON,  580  acs.  on  N.  side 


192 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


of  Rappa.  Riv.  next  above  land  of 
Robert  Bird.  29  July  1650,  p.  216.  20 
acs.  still  due  upon  last  name  in  certifi- 
cate. Trans,  of:  12  pers:  Richard  Read, 
Samll.  Clarke,  Antho.  Little,  wife  of 
Amb.  Procter,  John  Beife,  Mary  Bur- 
banck,  Tho.  Gwalpmey,  Tho.  Meares, 
Robert  Perfect,  wife  of  Robt.  Perfect. 

JOHN  BOND,  760  acs.  on  N.  side  of 
Rappa.  Riv.  in  Corotoman  Riv.,  on  the 
S.  side  of  the  Eastermost  br.,  along  land 
of  Mr.  Geo.  Taylor.  29  July  1650,  p. 
217.  Trans,  of  15  pers:  John  Elliott, 
Joseph  Oxford,  Morgan  Williams,  Wal- 
ter Hart,  John  Neale,  Jno.  Lawrence, 
Henry  Weblin,   his  wife,  John  White. 

ELYAS  EDMONDES,  890  acs.  lye- 
ing  on  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  in  Coro- 
toman Riv.,  on  the  Eastermost  br.  on 
the  N.  side  thereof.  29  July  1650,  p. 
217.  Trans,  of  18  pers:  John  Kendall, 
Nicho.  Taylor,  John  Kesn  (or  Lesh), 
Duncom  Grant,  Rice  Throughtgood, 
Ailce  Dawes,  Tho.  Cuck,  Ann  Myller, 
Tho.  Hobson,  Kat.  Geames,  John  Wake- 
feild,  Richd.  Embrock,  Eliza.  Bassye, 
Hellen  Shore,  Eliza.  Stretton,  Farrar 
Flinton,  Jane  his  wife,  Eliza.  Flinton, 
Math.  Harecastle,  Hen.  Nesfeild. 

ROBERT  BIRD,  1400  acs.  lyeing  on 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  next  above  land 
of  Silvester  Thacker  &  Thomas  Whit- 
lock,  29  July  1650,  p.  218.  Trans,  of 
28  pers:  Perregrine  Williams,  Thomas 
Paine,  William  Edmonds,  Robert  Clerke, 
Wm.  Banister,  Eliza.  Clubb,  Hum. 
Clarke,  Hen.  Draper,  Anne  Guyne  (or 
Gayne),  Tho.  Goardon,  Wm.  James, 
John  Lane,  Hugh  Powell,  James  Davis, 
Richd.  Steevens,  Henry  Barlye,  Anne 
White,  Wm.  Wood,  Geo.  Ashall,  Mase- 
lin  Bennett,  Ann  Deany,  William  God- 
din,  Hester  Carrar,  Mary  Pitcher,  Wal- 
ter Heard,  Robert  Medley,  Richd.  Down- 
ing, Jane  Williams. 

THO.  KIDBY  &  JOHN  JOHNSON, 

227  acs.  Northumberland  Co.,  24  July 
1650,  p.  218.  Abutting  Sly.  upon  great 
Wickocomeco  River.    Trans,  of  5  pers.* 

JOHN  OLIVER,  300  acs.  James  City 
Co.,  2  July  1650,  p.  219.  Lyeing  upon 
the  second  br.  of  the  black  water  poynt- 


ing  towards  head  of  the  lower  Chipoaks 
Cr.,  conteyning  one  neck  of  land  joyn- 
ing  upon  the  Beaver  Dams.  Trans,  of 
6  pers:  Hugh  Waydon,  Antho.  Hutton, 
Eliza  Newman,  Walter  Apleby,  Eliza 
Fleming. 

EDWARD  JAMES,  350  acs.  in 
Rappa.  Riv.  lyeing  about  30  mi.  up  on 
the  N.  side,  22  May  1650,  p.  219.  Beg. 
on  Ewd.  side  of  Willing  Cr.,  running  to 
Wwd.  side  of  the  mouth  of  Newhaven 
Cr.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  Walter  Wyer, 
Alex  Portus,  William  Phillips,  Wm. 
Billingsley,  Tho.  Billingsley,  Jane 
Funge,  Ann  Richardes. 

JOHN  BAUGH,  100  acs.  Henrico 
Co.,  6  Aug.  1650,  p.  219.  Bounding 
E.  N.  E.  upon  land  of  George  Brown- 
ing, S.  E.  upon  the  Bay  of  Appamattock, 
&  W.  S.  W.  upon  land  of  John  Baugh. 
Trans,  of  2  pers.* 

ROGER  NICHOLLS,  300  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  6  June  1650,  p.  220.  Upon 
the  S.  side  of  the  river  2  mi.  from  the 
river  side,  being  a  triangular  peece  of 
land,  bounded  Sly.  upon  the  Colledge 
Land,  Nly.  upon  the  Reedy  Swamp  and 
the  head  of  John  Bisshops  land. 
Formerly  granted  to  Phillip  Clarke,  1 
Mar.  1640  &  deserted  for  want  of  seat- 
ing, &  due  sd.  Nicholls  for  trans,  of  6 
pers.* 

PHILLIP  CHESLEY,  400  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  7  June  1650,  p.  220.  Lyeing 
on  the  Ewd.  side  of  Chickahominy  Riv., 
bounded  W.  upon  little  Neck  Cr.,  S. 
upon  land  of  Mr.  Robt.  Holt  &  Mr. 
Felgatt  &  N.  towards  land  of  Mr.  James 
Cockett,  deed.    Trans,  of  8  pers.* 

JOHN  COX,  1,000  acs.,  150  acs.  be- 
ing marsh,  on  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
22  May  1650,  p.  220.  Standing  on  a 
poynt  of  an  island  running  to  the  mouth 
of  Cedar  Creek,  etc.  Trans,  of  20  pers: 
John  Cox  twice,  Eliza.  Cox,  Francis 
iStankey,  Robert  Lewis,  Fra.  Little, 
Richard   Hickes,  Edward  Britton,  Allen 

Mackbitt,  Samll.  Farmer,  his  wife , 

Hester  Brown,  James  Goninon  (or 
Gonnion),  Mary  Wilson,  John  Greene, 
Mary  Rassell,  Richard  Shipp,  Robert 
Gonnyon,     Bennett     Cooper,     Xtophr. 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


193 


Holleman,  Judeth  Halloman,  Ellis  New- 
man. 

LAWRENCE  BAKER  &  JAMES 
TAYLOR,  500  acs.  James  City  Co.,  11 
June  1650,  p.  221.  Lyeing  neere  the 
head  of  Lawnes  Cr.  upon  the  Wester- 
most  br.  thereof,  joyning  upon  their 
former  devident,  bounded  N.  upon  land 
of  William  Lawrence,  now  in  possession 
of  Robert  Warren.  Due  by  the  rights 
of  another  patent  of  500  acs.  granted 
them  6  Mar.  1644,  which  is  relinquished 
&  surrendered  into  the  office  and  the 
certificate  thereof  taken  to  make  good 
this  patent. 

GEORGE  PARKER,  450  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  5  June  1650,  p.  221.  Up- 
on Ockahannock  Cr.,  lyeing  S.  S.  E. 
upon  sd.  cr.  from  Shallow  Br.  to  Cedar 
Br.  Trans,  of  9  pers.*  Note:  This 
land  was  recovered  from  the  patent  in 
Accomack  Court  &  the  rights  to  make 
good  another  of  his  Anno.  1655. 

JOHN  BROWN,  200  acs.  Low. 
Norf.,  13  July  1650,  p.  222.  Upon 
Swd.  side  of  the  Ewd.  br.  of  Elizabeth 
Riv.,  nigh  Ewd.  side  of  a  small  gutt 
called  Smoggs  hole,  crossing  branches  of 
Billingsgate  Cr.,  etc.    Trans,  of  4  pers.* 

CAPT.  WILLIAM  BROCAS,  Esqr., 
and  one  of  his  Majesties  Councill  of 
State,  800  acs.  in  Rappa.  Riv.  about  35 
mi.  up  the  river  on  the  S.  side.  18 
July  1650,  p.  222.  Formerly  granted 
to  William  Durand,  14  Nov.  1642, 
which  was  made  voyd  etc.  Trans,  of 
16  pers.* 

JOHN  WATTS,  Gent.,  200  acs.,  be- 
ing a  neck  of  marsh  &  wood  land  called 
Ducking  Pond  Cr.,  preceeding  from 
Mockjack  bay  which  bounds  it  on  W., 
&  on  E.  by  a  gutt  dividing  it  from  land 
of  William  Holder,  and  running  on  W. 
side  of  his  mill.  13  Aug.  1650,  p.  223. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  himself,  Martha  his 
wife,  Bernard  Bradshaw,  Edward  Hollo- 
well. 

ROBERT  MOSELY,  Gent.,  1100  acs. 
above  the  head  of  Upper  Chipoakes 
about  V/z  mi.  above  the  westermost  br. 
thereof.    7    Jan.    1649,    p.    223.    Trans. 


of  20  pers:  Gilbert  Hurst,  Robt.  Powis, 
John  Reason,  Silvanus  Griffeth,  Tho. 
Foltham,  William  Short,  Meacom  (or 
Meawin)  Cary,  Robert  Seullin,  Xtopr. 
Flower,  Ambroce  Cottrell,  Thomas 
Wilson,  George  Rey,  Michaell  Hoddon, 
Wm.  Paggett,  Joane  Skinner,  Jno.  Spay- 
ford,  Sara  Barrett,  Phillis  Wright, 
Judeth  Allen,  Sara  Watts,  Joane  Crosse, 
Dyana  Sneldon. 

EDWARD  HALL,  400  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  24  Sept.  p.  224.  Lying  to- 
wards the  head  of  the  master  br.  of 
Samuell  Bennetts  Cr.,  neare  about  a 
mile  above  John  Gookins'  Landing 
Place.  Formerly  granted  sd.  Hall  1 
Sept.   1646. 

JOHN  CATLETT  &  RALPH 
ROUSE Y,  400  acs.  lyeing  on  the  freshes 
upon  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  at  a 
swamp  which  divides  it  from  land  of 
Geo.  Eaton.  23  May  1650,  p.  224. 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  Ralph  Rousey,  John 
Catlett,  Valentine  Allen,  Nicholas  Cat- 
lett,  Peter  Neale. 

MR.  JOHN  HALLOWES,  328  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  8  June  1650,  p. 
225.  Abutting  E.  upon  Potomock  Riv., 
N.  W.  upon  land  of  Andrew  Monrow 
&  S.  W.  upon  his  own  Cr.  Trans,  of  7 
pers:  Joane  Hungerford,  Tho.  Barefoot, 
Francis  Heede,  Wm.  Skiffin,  John  Hunt, 
John  Hughes,  Wm.  Hickman  (or 
Thickman). 

ANDREW  MUNROW,  200  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  8  June  1650,  p. 
225.  Abutting  N.  E.  upon  a  cr.  issue- 
ing  out  of  Potomeck  Riv.  dividing  this 
from  a  neck  of  land  late  in  possession 
of  Thomas  Sterman,  S.  E.  upon  land  of 
John  Hollowes,  Gent.,  S.  W.  upon  a 
great  Indian  Path  neare  Hallowes  Cr. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  Andrew  Monrow, 
Sarah  Hungerford,  Christian  Bell,  Richd. 
Farmer. 

HENRY  BROOKE,  658  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  31  May  1650,  p.  225. 
N.  E.  upon  Potomeck  Riv.,  S.  E.  upon  a 
cr.  dividing  this  from  land  of  Nath. 
Pope,  Gent.,  N.  W.  upon  a  cr.  dividing 
this  from  land  of  Hercules  Bridges. 
Trans,  of  13  pers:   Henry  Brooke,  David 


194 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Whitliff,  Eman.  Brooke,  Jane  Brooke, 
Jane  Brooke,  Robt.  Whitliffe,  Lydia 
Brooke,  Ailce  Whitliffe. 

CAPT.  HENRY  FLEET,  1750  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  27  May  1650,  p. 

226.  A  neck  of  land  lyeing  on  N.  side 
of  Rappa.  Riv.  at  the  mouth,  beg.  & 
poynting  E.  on  the  maine  bay  with  a 
point  called  Windmill  or  Rappa.  Point, 
bounded  N.  E.  with  Fleet's  Bay  from 
Windmill  Pt.  to  Island  Pt.,  Trans,  of 
35  pers.* 

WILLIAM  HODGSON,  500  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,  7  June  1650,  p.  226.  In 
Yorke  Riv.  above  the  Narrowes, 
bounded  N.  N.  E.  upon  land  of  Tota- 
potama,  E.  by  S.  upon  Tanks  Maccade- 
quin  Cr.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Wm. 
Hodgson,  Anne  Ashwell,  Hannah 
Daurnport,  (or  Davenport),  Grace 
White,  Wm.  Moore,  John  Pratt,  Peter 
Wallis,  Mary  Greene,  Richd.  Croshaw, 
Jos.  Moseley.  Note:  Adjudged  voyd 
by  order  of  the  Governor  &  Councill 
dated  the  8th  of  December  1652.  Test: 
Robert  Huberd,  Clk.  Councill. 

CAPT.  JOHN  FLOOD,  Gent.,  1100 
acs.  James  City  Co.,   7  June   1650,  p. 

227.  On  S.  side  the  river,  bounded  S. 
E.  S.  upon  land  of  Capt.  Henry  Brown, 
N.  W.  by  N.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Charles 
Foord,  and  Richard  Baven.  Due  by 
patent  for  2100  acs.  to  sd.  Flood,  dated 
12  May  1638,  which  is  surrendered  into 
the  office  and  part  of  the  rights  maketh 
good  this  grant,  whose  names  are  men- 
tioned under  this  patent:  John  Flood, 
an  Ancient  Planter,  Marg.  Flood,  Jno. 
Flood,  Fra.  Finch,  John  Connaway, 
Morgan  Welch,  Roger  Harner,  Richd. 
Thornbury,  Wm.  Wood,  Joan  Gravelin, 
John  Biby,  John  Abry,  John  Cooper, 
John  Cole,  Richd.  Bruce,  Joseph  Marsh, 
Barth  Horton,  John  Wright,  Eliza. 
Browne,  John  Lawrence. 

JOHN  BROWN,  350  acs.  Northamp- 
ton Co.,  21  June  1650,  p.  227.  At 
Naswattock  in  the  broad  creek,  bounded 
W.  upon  land  of  Liveing  Denwood. 
Trans,    of    7    pers:    John    Browne,    his 

wife     ,     Robt.     Salisbury,     Symon 

Smith,  Wm.  Heath,  Amey  his  wife, 
John  Heath. 


JOHN  SMITH,  300  acs.  lyeing  with- 
in Home  Harbor  Cr.,  boundeth  upon 
William  Holder.  13  Aug.  1650,  p.  227. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Tho.  Purner,  Senr., 
Dorothy  his  wife,  Tho.  Purner,  Junr., 
Wm.  Larkin,  Arthur  Cannanna,  Mar- 
garet Morton. 

JOHN  GUNDRY,  200  acs.  on  E. 
side  of  New  Poynt  Comfort  Cr.,  13 
Aug.  1650,  p.  228.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
John  Gundry,  John  Gundry  his  Brother, 
Jno.  Gundry,  Junr.,  Eliza.  Gundry. 

WILLIAM  HOLDER,  100  acs.  upon 
Home   Harbor  Cr.,    13   Aug.    1650,   p. 

228.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Richard  James, 
Richard  Jones. 

SAME.  200  acs.  on  N.  side  of  Duck- 
ing Pond  Cr.  in  Mockjack  Bay,  bounded 
on  W.  side  by  a  small  cr.  which  divides 
it  from  the  land  of  John  Watts.  13 
Aug.  1650,  p.  229.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
Hugh  Inman,  John  Cabboe  (or  Cab- 
bore),   Edw.  Roberts,   Elizabeth  Grant. 

CAPT.  MOORE  FANTLEROY,  350 
acs.  in  Rappa.  Riv.,  on  S.  side,  running 
S.  W.  &  adj.  200  acs.  formerly  taken 
up  by  sd.  Fantleroy.    22  May  1650,  p. 

229.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  Edmond 
Hamond,  John  Cable,  Richard  King, 
Wm.  Lewellin,  Eliza  Warren,  Antho. 
Aston,  John  Till. 

SAME.  5,350  acs.  on  N.  side  of 
Rappa.  Riv.,  22  May  1650,  p.  230. 
2600  acs.  lyeth  on  the  upper  side  of 
Farnham  Cr.,  adj.  land  of  Anthony 
Jackman;  2750  acres  lyeth  on  lower 
side  of  sd.  Cr.,  running  nigh  the  mouth 
of  New  Mencococond  Riv.  Trans,  of 
107  pers:  John  Shaw,  John  Price,  Tho. 
Golding,  Pet.  Swaine,  Joseph  Groomer, 
George  West,  John  Wright,  And.  Bon- 
ner, Symon  Taylor,  Geo.  Atten  (or 
Allen)  Hen.  Bryan,  Theo.  Jones,  Richd. 
Greenwell,  Richd.  Hooke,  Maudlin 
Cartar,  Jane  Welch,  Eliz.  Ranson,  Mary 
Bayle,  Joane  Moore,  Eliz.  Havant,  Robt. 
Garlick,  Xtopr.  Miller,  Jno.  Welchman, 
Ri.  Rice,  Ri.  Jones,  Rich.  Carrick,  David 
Crisrall,  Robt.  Thomas,  Tho.  Poulter, 
Henrry  Langley,  Morgan  Jones,  Ri. 
Dixon,  Aotan  Hoord,  Andrew  Nokes, 
Lewis    Hutchins,    Wm.    Mason,    John 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


195 


Mixon,  Tho.  Richardson,  Fra.  Hill, 
Tho.  Hill,  Jno.  Smellock  (or  Mellock) 
Peter  Wilson,  Banill  Harris,  John  Den- 
ton, Giles  Lactins,  Dom.  Lumby,  John 
Skidd,  Tho.  Wariner,  John  Pope,  Henry 
Fry,  Step.  Hall,  Jam.  Weston,  Ben. 
Hayfeild,  Wm.  Watts,  Geo.  Walgrove, 
Peter  Craner,  Jno.  Murrey,  Wm.  Valler, 
Jos.  Cowling,  Geo.  Price,  Wm.  Hown- 
son,  Richd.  Smith,  Tho.  Stelet,  Edw. 
House,  John  Collins,  Joner  Sharper, 
Law.  Chiles,  Hen.  Grimes,  Tho.  Poult- 
ner,  And.  Holmes,  Wm.  Nusum,  Mary 
Porten,  Eliz.  Rey,  Matt.  Whorson,  Eliz. 
Turner,  Fra.  Carpenter,  John  Holly, 
Tho.  Harding,  Robt.  Manker,  Lawlin 
Rawkin,  Alex.  Camell,  Tho.  Mann, 
Mary  Hill,  Ann  Demecry,  Eliz.  Barker, 
Marg.  Cripps,  Jno.  Williams,  Edw. 
Barber,  Wm.  Richards,  Jno.  Gouge, 
Marke  Wight,  Robt.  Nuttall. 

SAME.  450  acs.  in  Rappa.  Riv.  on 
the  N.  side  in  Swan  bay,  beg.  on  Ewd. 
side  of  the  mouth  of  Swan  Cr.,  running 
N.  E.  by  N.  for  length  &  nigh  unto  the 
maine  river  side  for  breadth.  22  May 
1650,  p.  231.  Trans,  of  9  pers:  Gabriell 
Willson,  Eliza,  his  wife,  Henry  Cox, 
George  Dillard,  Ann  Vecery,  Richd. 
Powell,  Mr.  Geo.  Underwood,  Mary  his 
wife,  Anne  Underwood.  Note:  This 
patent  is  relinguished  and  the  rights  to 
make  good  the  patent  on  the  other  side 
being  5350  acs. 

SAME.  1800  acs.  in  Rappa.  Riv.  on 
N.  side;  500  being  marsh  &  faceing 
the  river  &  1300  acs.  of  the  high  land 
beg.  at  a  point  on  Wwd.  side  of  the 
mouth  of  Bushwood  Cr.,  running  for 
length  N.  E.  by  E.  &  adj.  land  of 
William  Underwood.  22  May  1650,  p. 
231.  Trans,  of  36  pers:  Thomas  Un- 
derwood, Elizabeth,  William,  Sarah, 
Margarett,  Tho.  Wright,  his  wife, 
Children  5,  Maide,  Nicho.  Spakman, 
Fra.  Moseley,  Elizabeth  Symon,  Sarah 
Cade,  Tho.  Scott,  Anthony  Johnson, 
Walter  Richards,  Richard  Smith,  Rich- 
ard Davis,  Alex.  Leshley,  Edward  Skip- 
ner,  Richard  Hall,  Wm.  Everfleet,  Ann 
Cooper,  Ann  Dennis,  Ailce  Williamson, 
Tho.  Newman,  Susanna  his  wife,  David 
Johnson,  Robert  Nusser,  Rice  Adridge, 
William  Davis,  Geo.  Day,  Margarett 
Coward. 


SAME.  700  acs.  in  Rappa.  River,  on 
the  N.  side,  adj.  Anthony  Jackman's 
550  ac.  patent,  running  unto  the  maine 
river  side  to  a  poynt  on  the  W.  side  of 
the  mouth  of  Newhaven  Cr.;  also  adj. 
350  ac.  patent  of  sd.  Jackman.  27  June 
1650,    p.    232.    Trans,    of    10    pers.* 

Note:  This  patent  relinquished  and  the 
rights  to  make  good  the  patent  of  5320 
acs. 

MRS.      WINEFRID      MORRISON, 

Widdow,  300  acs.  lying  upon  the  head 
of  Pepper  Cr.,  beg.  at  Southermost  mile 
end  of  Richard  Hull,  running  for  her 
mile  towards  Town  Harbor,  bounding 
upon  land  of  Richard  Grigson.  13  Aug. 
1650,  p.  232.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Major 
Francis  Morrison,  twice,  Thomas  Jack- 
son, Wm.  Thorpe,  Robert  Noble,  Ann 
Darby. 

RICHARD  HULL,  300  acs.  lyeing 
within  Peper  Cr.  on  the  N.  side  upon 
Mock  jack  Bay,  bounded  on  S.  by  sd. 
Cr.,  W.  side  by  small  gutt  parting  it 
from  land  of  William  Morgan.  13 
Aug.  1650,  p.  232.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
Richard  Bundick,  Temperance  Hyer, 
Charles  Williams,  John  Williams,  Henry 
Church,  John  Paul. 

LIEUT.     WILLIAM     WORLEICH, 

650  acs.  being  a  neck  of  land  called 
New  Point  Comfort  Neck,  bounded  on 
E.  by  New  Pt.  Comfort  Cr.  &  on  W. 
side  with  the  Eastermost  side  of  Mock- 
jack  Bay,  running  W.  by  S.  to  head  of 
John  Gundry's  land.  13  Aug.  1650,  p. 
233.  Trans,  of  13  pers:  Nicholas 
Guilt,  3  Negroes;  Jno.  Worleich, 
Joane  Jones,  Wm.  Cadwell,  Hump. 
Edwards,  Wm.  Humphryes,  Henry  Holt, 
John  Evans,  Elizabeth  Curtis,  Mary 
Blackford. 

LIEUT.  WILLIAM  WORLEICH, 
300  acs.  upon  Mock  jack  Bay,  beg.  at 
the  end  of  William  Morgan  &  running 
N.  by  E.  Nly.,  through  Croynes  quarter. 
13  Aug.  1650,  p.  233.  Trans,  of  6 
pers:  Francis  Brown,  John  Thucker, 
(or  Thacker),  Christopher  Leake,  Tho- 
mos  Binniton,  Margery  Clements,  Wil- 
liam White. 


196 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


SAME.  100  acs.  upon  Home  Harbor 
Cr.,  beg.  at  a  point  at  the  W.  side  of 
William  Holder's  land.  13  Aug.  1650, 
p.  233.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Robert  Arme- 
son,  &  James  Foster. 

Note:    Pages  234  and  235  are  blank. 

MR.  EPAPHRADITUS  LAWSON, 
2,000  acs.  in  Rappa.  Riv.  on  the  S.  side, 
beg.  on  the  lowermost  point  of  a  great 
Island,  running  S.  S.  W.  crossing  Law- 
son's  Cr.  22  May  1650,  p.  236.  Trans, 
of  40  pers:  Edward  Stone,  Tho.  Mason, 
Theo.  Thompsom,  Jno.  Johnson,  Jno. 
Bowland,  Tho.  Thomas,  Angues  Soil, 
Wm.  Gunnell,  Ri.  King,  John  Lewis, 
Edy  Bradford,  Ri.  Bennett,  Gab.  Roberts, 
Eliza.  Barnard,  John  Seemer,  Symon 
Parrett,  Charles  Sybley,  Wm.  Dunbar, 
John  Pinne  (?),  Kath.  Hewitt,  Edm. 
Sheerman,  John  Congdon,  James  Rich- 
ards, John  Robinson,  Marg.  Davis, 
Mary  Tocwrick,  Tho.  Rawley,  Danll. 
Dickey,  Rice  Welch,  Eliza.  Ditch,  Mary 
Chapleman,  Edward  Payne,  Sarah  Jones, 
Jno.  Buckmanreyne,  Mary  Dewse,  Wm. 
Bell,  Alice  Ryppin,  Roger  Hayes,  Tho- 
mas Bates,  Gabriell  Golding. 

SAME.  1,000  acs.  lyeing  about  10 
mi.  up  on  the  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
adj.  land  of  John  Slaughter.  22  May 
1650,  p.  236.    Trans,  of  20  pers.* 

SAME.  900  acs.  in  Rappa.  Riv.,  on 
S.  side,  beg.  at  point  on  an  island,  adj. 
&  above  land  of  Mr.  John  Cox,  and 
running  to  the  mouth  of  Lawsons  Creek. 
22  May  1650,  p.  237.  Trans,  of  18 
pers:  Francis  Barloe,  John  Newton, 
Wm.  Thomas,  Tho.  Watch,  Eliz.  Peirce, 
Jane  Heath,  Ann  Halsey,  Phill.  Bagley, 
Eliz.  Crossing,  Ellis  Dunrich,  John 
Dunrich,  John  Dunrich,  Hump.  Sead- 
gall,  Wm.  Thomson,  Adam  Watson, 
Patrick  Clarke,  Eliza.  Satchell,  Henry 
Berry. 

FRANCIS  HOBBS,  1,000  acs.  on  N. 
side  of  Rappa.  River,  along  a  creeke  at 
the  foot  of  a  mountaine.  20  Aug.  1650, 
p.  237.  Trans,  of  20  pers:  Tho. 
Loverton,  David  Meredith,  Jane  Fox, 
Richd.  Staples,  John  Cox,  David  Ellis, 
David  Rice,  James  Vargan,  James  Ennis, 
Robins    Graves,    Judith   Robins,    Julyan 


Cox,  John  Giller,  John  Reddock,  Eliza- 
beth Davis,  Mary  Lovett. 

HENRY  LEE  &  WM.  CLAPHAM, 

250  acs.  in  Corotoman  Riv.,  being  a 
branch  of  Rappa.  Riv.  20  Aug.  1650, 
p.  238.  Trans,  of  5  pers:  Elizabeth 
Sparkes,  John  Greene,  John  Benton, 
John  King,  John  Walton. 

WILLIAM  CLAPHAM,  1100  acs.  on 
S.  side  Rappa.  Riv.    20  Aug.   1650,  p. 

238.  Trans,  of  22  pers:  John  Salter, 
Cutbert  Sparkes,  Ri.  Sturdge,  Ri.  Wes- 
son, Ri.  Roe,  John  Mackfassum,  Ann 
Barkeley,  Eliz.  Dyamond,  Joane  Persons, 
Wm.  Perkins,  Griffin  Morgan,  James 
Butt,  John  Mangor,  Wm.  Tandey,  Ja. 
Bandleson,  Isabel  Walker,  Eliz.  Speedi- 
ly, Jane  Turner,  Sara  Heleme  (?). 

PHILLIP  CHESLEY,  400  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  7  June  1650,  p.  238.  Lyeing 
on  E.  side  of  Chicohominey  Riv., 
bounded  W.  upon  Little  Neck  Cr.,  S. 
upon  land  of  Mr.  Robert  Holt  &  Mr. 
Felgatt  &  N.  towards  land  of  Mr.  James 
Cockett,  dec'd.    Trans,  of  8  pers.* 

HUMP.  LYSTER,  Merchant,  1,000 
acs.  within  2  mi.  of  the  falls  of  James 
Riv.  on  the  E.  side  thereof,  bounded  S. 
upon  a  gutt  dividing  this  from  land  of 
James  Place,  dec'd.,  &  opposite  to  the 
lower  end  of  Princes  Folly.  31  Aug. 
1650,  p.  239.  Trans,  of  20  pers:  Tho- 
mas Sharpe,  And.  Steevenson,  Ralph 
Nicholson,  Hump.  Lyster,  John  Gard- 
ner, Francis  Brown,  Daniell  Stepping, 
Tho.  Forville,  Winckfield  Bill,  Ri.  Up- 
rence,  Lewis  Price,  Robt.  Richards, 
Daniell  Thomas,  Jura  Clarke,  John 
Mathews,  Francis  Williamson,  Edward 
Baldwin,  Mary  Farington,  Tho.  Arnee, 
Jane  Dawson,  Mary  Barker,  land  due 
for. 

GEORGE  GOLDSMITH,  600  acs.  on 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  upon  the  E.  side 
of  the  W.  branch  of  Corotoman  Riv., 
running  N.  N.  E.  &  W.  N.  W.  to  the 
head  of  Nicholls  Cr.    20  Aug.  1650,  p. 

239.  Trans,  of  12  pers:  George  Gold- 
smith, his  wife,  3  children,  Lucretia 
James,  Eliza.  Pymm,  Fra.  Wrenn,  Joseph 
Morris,  Kath.  Jones,  Joane  Prichett, 
John  Poulton,  Wm.  Burges. 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


197 


GEORGE  TAYLOR,  800  acs.,  ex- 
cluding the  Marsh,  in  Rappa.  Riv.  on 
the  N.  side  &  crossing  Taylor's  Cr.  22 
May  1650,  p.  239.  Trans,  of  16  pers: 
Margarett  Davis,  Tho.  Russell,  John 
Mansell,  Eliza.  Hopkins,  George  Tay- 
lor, Tho.  Cooper,  James  Merrott,  Daniell 
Harris,  James  Danister,  Samll.  Perkins, 
the  wife  of  Sil.  Thacker,  &  her  child, 
Richard  Westall,  John  Macklayne, 
James  Boyd,  Ann  Mathews. 

ROBERT  BLAKE  &  SAMUELL 
ELDRIDGE,  560  acs.  Isle  of  Wight 
Co.,  20  Aug.  1650,  p.  240.  Lyeing  up- 
on the  third  swamp  S.  W.  by  W.  from 
Henrry  White's  plantation.  Due  unto 
sd.  Flake  &  Eldridge  for  trans,  of  11 
pers:  John  Clemens,  Edw.  Alchard,  Jo. 
Storrey,  Wm.  Batts,  Eliz.  Phillips,  John 
Vassae  (or  Vassal),  Richard  Walton, 
Mary  Martin,  Martha  Cole,  Tho.  Syer, 
Wm.  Baldwinn. 

RANDALL  HOLT,  son  &  lawfull 
heire  of  Mary  Baylye,  late  of  Hogg  Is- 
land, sole  daughter  and  heyre  of  John 
Baylye,  of  the  same  island,  1022  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  known  by  the  name  of 
Hogg  Is.,  adj.  the  late  dwelling  house 
of  Robert  Ewres,  E.  upon  a  marsh  to- 
wards Goosehill,  N.  upon  a  green 
Thickett  lately  belonging  to  William 
Fairefax,  E.  upon  another  thicken, 
lately  belonging  to  Jenkin  Andrews. 
6  Aug.  1650,  p.  240.  Note:  Same 
conditions  as  noted  in  a  former 
pattent. 

JOHN  LANDMAN,  650  acs.  in 
Rappa.  Riv.  on  the  S.  side  in  Breack- 
neck  Bay,  adj.  land  of  Richard  Armond. 
22  May  1650,  p.  241.  Trans,  of:  Wm. 
Cooke,  Alex.  Henderson,  Dungue 
Kellester,  Hugh  Williams,  Wm. 
Densby,  Edw.  Appes,  Tho.  Meechwell, 
Susan  Maskall,  Eliza.  Allen,  John 
Turner,  John  Hunt,  Hen.  Peirce,  Jno. 
Quayle. 

JOHN  PERROTT,  900  acs.  Nance- 
mund  Co.,  2  July,  1650,  p.  242.  800 
acres  beg.  at  the  first  cr.,  running 
parallel  to  the  river  untill  it  come  to 
Pigg  Point,  &  crossing  Burbage's  Cr. 
The  residue  butteth  Mr.  White's  second 


devt.  800  acs.  granted  unto  Mr.  Francis 
Hough,  17  May  1637  &  purchased  by 
sd.  Perrott  16  Aug.  1637;  &  100  acs. 
for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Robert  Aldred  & 
Ann  Comes. 

FRANCIS  HOUGH,  Gent.,  of  the 
Up.  Co.  of  New  Norf.  to  JOHN 
PERROTT,  Gent.,  of  Graungers  Point, 
16  Aug.  1637,  conveys  the  beforemen- 
tioned  800  acs.  Consideration:  4,000 
Lbs.  Tobacco.  Witnesses:  George 
Stretton,  &  Thomas  Boulton.  Page 
242. 

ANDREW  GILSON,  600  acs.  in 
Rappa.  Riv.  on  the  S.  side,  beg.  at  a 
point  by  the  N.  side  of  Tigners  Cr.  22 
May  1650,  p.  243.  Trans,  of  12  pers: 
Watt  the  Plowman,  Ann  Price,  John 
Charles,  Samll.  Sloper,  Wm.  Wignall, 
Geo.  Whitle,  Jane  Gaynes,  Tho.  Car- 
ter, Andrew  Gilson,  Mary  Gilson,  Wm. 
Spooner,  Tho.  Baylye,  Elizabeth  Peter, 
land  due  for  the  last  name. 

RICHARD  AXOM  &  THOMAS 
GODWIN,  550  acs.  in  Rappa.  Riv.  on 
the  S.  side,  beg.  at  Troublesome  Point, 
running  S.  S.  W.  to  Axoms  Cr.  22  May 
1650,  p.  244.  Trans,  of  11  pers:  Nicho. 
Lawrey,  Amos  Hamelton,  Morgan  Tho- 
mas, Ann  Paggett,  Xtopr.  Neate  (or 
Neale),  Richard  Axom,  Mary  Carpen- 
ter, Ann  Alderson,  Richd.  Harrow,  John 
Giblin,  Wm.  Cottin. 

SYMON  SYMONDS,  400  acs.  Nance- 
mund  Co.,  10  Nov.  1649,  p.  244.  Lye- 
ing on  the  head  of  Indian  Cr.,  a  br.  of 
the  Western  br.  of  Nancemund  Riv., 
&  adj.  land  of  William  Storrey.  Pur- 
chased of  Samuell  Abbott,  to  whom  it 
was  granted  10  Oct.  1646. 

RICHARD  AXOM  &  THOMAS 
GODWIN,  1,000  acs.  S.  side  Rappa. 
Riv.  in  Breckneck  Bay,  &  adj.  on  & 
below  land  of  John  Landman.  22  May 
1650,  p.  245.  Trans,  of  20  pers:  Ro. 
Stephen,  Tho.  Godwin,  Sara  Thomlin, 
Richd.  Lapham,  Tho.  Harlow,  Robert 
Mosse,  Tho.  Molfe,  Wm.  Molfe,  John 
Michell,  Edw.  Fisher,  Ann  James,  Tho. 
Keator,  Jno.  Burdix,  Jno.  Kelman,  Geo. 


198 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Kelman,  Robert  Koggan,  Stoffle  Staffle- 
son,  Antho.  Hunt,  Susan  Newman,  Sara 
Thomblin. 

WM.  TIGNER,  1150  acs.  in  Rappa. 
Riv.  on  S.  side,  beg.  at  the  mouth  of 
Lawsons  Cr.,  adj.  land  of  Epa.  Lawson 
&  nigh  mouth  of  Tigners  Cr.  22  May 
1650,  p.  245,  Trans,  of  23  pers.*  Note: 
"Void  by  a  ward  of  the  Governor.  The 
rights  crost." 

JAMES  METGRIGAR  &  HUGH 
FOUTCH,  300  acs.  Northumberland 
Co.,  24  July,  1650.  P.  246.  On  Poto- 
meck  Riv.,  beg.  from  Sandy  Point  at 
Chetanck  Cr.  mouth,  etc.  Trans,  of  6 
pers:  Richard  Sparling,  John  Downes, 
John  Cullam,  Mary  Benchamp  (or 
Beuchamp),  Richard  Leake,  Wm. 
Pike. 

WM.  PRESLEY,  Gent.,  100  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  29  July  1650,  p. 
246.  Butting  Ely.  upon  Potemeck  Riv. 
&  Sly.  upon  land  of  John  Earle.  Trans. 
of  2  pers.* 

WM.  EGBROUGH  (Egbourne),  500 
acs.  James  City  Co.,  6  Aug.   1650,  p. 

246.  On  S.  W.  side  of  Up.  Chipoakes 
Cr.,  100  acs.  lying  next  to  land  of  Wm. 
Rookins,  (deed.),  butting  S.  on  the 
other  land  hereunder  mentioned  now 
taken  up  by  the  said  Wm.  Egbourne. 
400  acs.  formerly  granted  unto  Barraine 
Mercer,  17  May,  1638,  &  purchased  by 
sd.  Egbourne,  to  whom  it  was  later 
patented  in  addition  to  100  acs.,  for 
trans,  of  2  pers.* 

MR.  JOHN  MOTTRUM,  963  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  13  Aug.  1650,  p. 

247.  Abutting  Nly.  upon  Potomecke 
Riv.,  Wly.  upon  Nomeny  Bay  &  Ely. 
upon  Mackatix  Riv.,  including  a  small 
island  on  the  Wwd.  side  of  sd.  land. 
Trans,  of  20  pers:  Wm.  Greested,  Tho. 
Merideth,  Wm.  Bedlem,  Eliz.  Moore, 
John  Parrfy,  Israeli  England,  Fra.  Pinke, 
Tho.  West,  Henry  West,  John  Shakley, 
Wm.  Key,  Sara  Thompson,  John  Persi- 
vall,  John  Mint,  John  Barnes,  Rob. 
Halsworth,  Grace  Gining,  Marg.  Win- 
terton,  Marg.  Evans,  Elinor  Jones. 

RICHARD  TYE  &  CHARLES  SPAR- 
ROWE,   2,500  acs.  Chas.  City  Co.,   12 


Aug.  1650,  p.  248.  Near  the  head  of 
Powells  Cr.  adj.  to  the  land  called 
Weynoake  old  Town,  beg.  at  certain 
trees  called  the  great  Maukes,  etc.,  run- 
ning S.  along  Tye's  old  devdt.,  W.  along 
land  of  Thomas  Wheeler  to  beg.  Trans, 
of  50  pers:  Jane  Peirce,  Sara  Cuddens, 
Edm.  Pickery,  Hen.  Thurlby,  Ja.  Durant, 
Tho.  Hill,  Tho.  Cooke,  Hen.  Cruthen, 
Fra.  Hawkwood,  Wm.  Symonds,  Robt. 
Scott,  Bridgett  Spheere,  Alex.  Eager, 
Wm.  Smith  2,  Geo.  Duglass,  Tho. 
Duglass,  Jam.  Duglass,  Mich.  Huey, 
Eliz.  Hutchinson,  John  Wright,  Walter 
Sheild,  Wm.  Longland,  Samll.  Aude, 
Tho.  Pritchett,  Ri.  Young,  Tho.  Chap- 
pell,  Walter  Piegatt,  Jno.  Marshall,  Pet. 
Stathard,  Wm.  Moyle,  Tho.  Taylor, 
Wm.  Kirby,  Jno.  Hardway,  Geo.  Knigh- 
ton, Richd.  Cooke,  Robt.  West,  John 
Joyce,  Jane  Goulding,  Kath.  Cooke, 
John  Harris,  Baptiscoe  Corbone,  Wm. 
Tucker,  Phillip  Coltrey,  John  Gapper, 
John  Grand,  Ailce  Coiby,  John  Septon, 
John  Turner,  John  Blachard,  Henry 
Turner,     "Perfect." 

EDWARD  WALKER,  900  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  20  Sept.  1650,  p. 
248.  Abutting  Ely.  upon  Potomeck 
Riv.,  Nly.  upon  land  of  Thomas  Hoyles 
(or  Hoyley),  Sly.  towards  Yeacomico 
Riv.  &  Wly.  upon  a  br.  issuing  out  of 
sd.  River.  Trans,  of  18  pers:  Himself, 
Sarah  his  wife,  John  Walker,  Tho. 
Foote,  Edw.  Gaynes,  Tho.  Kerbys  wife, 
Tho.  Ball,  Wm.  Wood,  Richd.  Taylor, 
Richd.  Hopkins,  Nat.  Moore,  Jno. 
Greenfield,  Richd.  Holding,  Grace  his 
wife,  Wm.  Hinam,  Mary  Batts,  Geo. 
Smith,  Wm.  Garnett. 

THOMAS  GERRARD,  Gent.,  1,000 
acs.  Northumberland  Co.,  18  Oct.  1650, 
p.  249.  Upon  the  S.  side  of  Potomeck 
Riv.,  beg.  at  the  mouth  of  Herring  Cr. 
on  the  N.  side,  which  issues  out  of 
Nomeny  Riv.  Trans,  of  20  pers:  Tho- 
mas Gerrard,  Susana  Gerrard,  Susa.  his 
daughter,  Temp.  Gerrard,  Fra.  Gerrard, 
Justinian  Garrard,  Henry  Chesly  and 
for  adventure  of  a  servt.  ?,  Cornelius 
Canedy,  John  Goldsmith,  Mary 
Strong,  John  Shanks,  Edw.  Shelly,  John 
Taylor,  Fra.  Hutton,  John  Gerrard, 
Richd.    Wright,    Tho.    Downe,    Richd. 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


199 


Walker,  Joell  Gibbs.    Land  due  for  4 
Indians. 

WALTER  BROADHURST,  Gent., 
500  acs.  on  S.  side  of  Potomeck  Riv., 
beg.  at  a  point  on  the  W.  side  of  Poore 
Jack  Cr.,  extending  nigh  the  main  river 
course  N.  W.  to  a  point  on  the  mouth 
of  Conawoman  Cr.,  which  divides  same 
from  land  of  William  Hardigg  etc.  to 
an  Indian  cleerefield,  etc.  18  Oct.  1650, 
p.  249.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Robert 
Beard,  William  Enson,  Ann  Knowles, 
Richard  Broadman,  Hump.  Farmar,  John 
Piper,  John  Goane,  Richard  Sabrell,  2 
Indians. 

NICHOLAS  JERNEW,  Gent.,  900 
acs.  upon  S.  side  of  Potomeck  Riv.,  beg. 
on  a  point  on  the  Ewd.  side  of  Macho- 
tick  Cr.,  S.  E.  along  the  river  to  W. 
side  of  Jernews  Cr.  18  Oct.  1650,  p. 
250.  Trans,  of  18  pers:  Paul  Clifton, 
Timo.  Woolrich,  2  Negroes;  Henry 
Smith,  Francis  Jernow,  Francis  Cole, 
Edm.  Williams,  his  wife  Elinor,  Tho- 
mas Masser,  Ann  Burton,  Wm.  Wells, 
Eliza.  Blanchett. 

RICE  JONES,  350  acs.  lyeing  about 
9  mi.  up  on  the  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
beg.  at  Muskeeto  Point.  18  Apr.  1650, 
p.  250.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  Rice  Jones, 
Marg.  Jones,  Robert  Heward,  David 
Doge,  Eliza.  Plumly,  John  Bell,  Wm. 
Breed. 

LEWIS  BURWELL,  Gent.,  1,600  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  17  Oct.  1650,  p. 
250.  Upon  the  S.  side  of  Potomeck 
Riv.  &  E.  side  of  Machotick  River  alias 
Trent,  beg.  on  the  S.  side  of  a  valley 
or  marsh  dividing  this  from  land  of 
William  Gooch,  up  sd.  river  S.  S.  W. 
to  a  cr.  issuing  out  of  sd.  River  Trent 
dividing  this  from  land  of  Mr.  Richard 
Lee.  Trans,  of  32  pers:  Thomas  Wakin, 
Sam.  Benford  (or  Beuford),  Eliz.  Wat- 
ley,  John  Jackson,  2  Negro  men,  one 
woman,  Geo.  Epherby,  Henry  Wright, 
Phan.  Parney,  Xtopr.  Sadleway,  Sara 
Cowley,  Tho.  Hardy,  Symon  Varly, 
Henry  Sanderson,  John  Roggers,  Eliz. 
Closby,  Grigory  Maine,  Edward  Digby, 
Mary  Farr,  Dyana  Fryth,  Samuell  Mose- 
ley,  Eliz.  Moseley,  Jone  his  daughter, 
Tho.   Broughton,   Ann   Williams,   Edw. 


Dawson,    John    Garner,    James    Parney, 
Tobyas  Cowley. 

WILLIAM  GOOCH,  Gent.,  1050  acs. 
upon  S.  side  of  Potomeck  Riv.  beg.  at  a 
point  on  the  E.  side  &  at  the  mouth  of 
Matchotick  Riv.,  running  to  the  S.  side 
of  a  vallie  which  divides  this  from  land 
of  Mr.  Lewis  Burwell.  18  Oct.  1650,  p. 
251.  Trans,  of  21  pers:  Robert  Crand, 
John  Dome,  Nicho.  Littor,  Jam.  Spear- 
man, Barbara  Hargrave,  Richd.  Lendall, 
Edward  Gold,  Robt.  Beedman,  Wm. 
Steevens,  Hump.  Street,  Richd.  Hunt, 
John  Foules,  Richard  Clarke,  Xpian. 
Johnson,  Mary  Morfey,  Antho.  Jackson, 
John  Wood,  Robt.  Key,  David  Drinck- 
water,  Abra.  Flood. 

JOHN  BROWNE,  350  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  21  June  1650,  p.  252.  At 
Naswattocks  Cr.  in  the  Broad  Cr.,  W. 
upon  land  of  Liveing  Denwood,  &  E. 
upon  Elyas  Taylor's  land.  Trans,  of  7 
pers:  Wm.  Heath,  Amey,  his  wife, 
John  Heath,  John  Browne,  his  wife 
,  Robt.  Salisbury,  Symon  Smith. 

GEORGE  PACE,  1700  acs.  Chas.  City 
Co.,  1  Aug.  1650,  p.  252.  Lyeing  on  S. 
side  of  James  Riv.,  commonly  called 
Matocks,  beg.  at  the  mouth  of  a  little 
swamp  by  the  river  side  where  Peirce 
his  hundred  takes  ending,  running  etc., 
W.  to  a  swamp  which  leads  to  Powells 
Cr.  &  along  the  cr.  to  the  river.  Trans, 
of  34  pers:  Alexander  Nicholson, 
Daniell  Macklesby,  Thomas  Lome,  Tho- 
mas Juston,  Danll.  Thompson,  Thomas 
Wells,  Eliz.  Benson,  Walter  Norrell, 
John  Warren,  Freeman  Anssell  (or 
Aussell),  Wm.  Patridge,  Dick,  Negro, 
John  Heywood,  Tho.  Ridding,  Nicho. 
Hill,  Jam.  Thompson,  Alex.  Maxrell, 
John  Lawmor,  Neale  Montgomery,  Ja. 
Mackery,  Eliza.  Arator,  Tho.  Stroud, 
Benja.  Bourne,  Robert  Dunham,  Wil- 
liam Gryer,  Thomas  Cans  (or  Caus), 
Thomas  Benton,  Andrew  Walker,  Geo. 
Hollid?.y,  Tho.  Scott,  Richd.  Rawlins, 
Prudence  Geby,  Sara  Marke,  John  Light- 
foot. 

JOHN  SENIER,  700  acs.  lyeing  in 
Corotomen  River,  issueing  out  of  the 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  about  12  mi. 
from  the  mouth;    200   acs.   lyes   within 


200 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


the  Bay  of  Cortoman  bounded  W.  N. 
W.  upon  sd.  bay  &  a  little  cr.  dividing 
this  from  land  of  Mr.  Cartar;  500  acs. 
lyeing  upon  the  Westermost  br.  of  sd. 
Carrotomon  Riv.,  bounded  N.  upon 
John  Mangor,  S.  upon  a  cr.  called 
Seneor  &  Ely.  upon  the  river.  9  Aug. 
1650,  p.  253.  Trans,  of  14  pers: 
Arthur  Bradwell,  Joseph  Hunt,  William 
Alcock,  William  Adridge,  John  Preston, 
Jos.  Morton,  Edw.  Milday,  Ann  Ash- 
comb,  Peter  Beaumond,  William  Med- 
ley, John  Axter,  John  Blow,  Eliz. 
Treedle,  Jacob  Jacobson. 

STEPHEN  CHARLTON,  1,000  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  29  Aug.  1650,  p.  253. 
At  Matchepungo  Cr.,  running  Nly. 
along  the  seaboard  side.  Trans,  of  20 
pers:  Patrick  Cugley,  Mich.  Coriott  (or 
Corcott),  John  Steevens,  John  the 
Negro,  John  Pacton,  John  Folland, 
Peter  Dunstan,  Henry  Palmer,  Henry 
Boston,  Barbara  Price,  Charles  Ratch- 
liff,  Eliza.  Pedocke,  John  Howell, 
Hen.  Hayes  (or  Haynes),  Eliz.  a 
Scotchwench,  Jeffery  Jills,  Mary  a 
Scotchwench,  Mary,  S.  woman,  Eliza. 
Bacon,  Tho.  Deanes.  Due  for  James 
Parker. 

RICHARD  DANNING  (Duning), 
732  acs.  lyeing  on  E.  side  of  a  swamp 
which  runneth  into  Cow  Cr.  in  Ware 
River  on  Mockjack  Bay.  2  Oct,  1650, 
p.  254.  Trans,  of  15  pers.,  Richard 
Duning,  Sara  his  wife,  Richard  Feild, 
Eliza.  Hill,  Richard  George,  Eliza. 
Crosse,  Massey  Smith,  Robert  Martin. 
300  acs.  by  assignment  of  rights  from 
Richard  Smith. 

SIR  THOMAS  LUNTSFORD,  Knight 
&  barronett,  3,423  acs.  Lyeing  upon  a 
bay  on  S.  side  Rappa.  Riv.  24  Oct. 
1650,  p.  254.  Trans,  of  65  pers:  Sr. 
Thomas  Luntsford,  Knt.,  The  Lady 
Luntsford,  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Luntsford, 
Mrs.  Phillippa  Luntsford,  Mrs.  Mary 
Luntsford,  Wm.  Luntsford,  Esqr.,  Mr. 
Foster,  Mr.  Henry  Buffkin,  Mr.  Bird, 
Mr.  Cooke,  Mr.  Warren,  Mr.  Cart- 
wright,  Mr.  David  Phillips,  Mr.  Wm. 
Caldwell,  Mrs.  Peirce,  Mrs.  Ann  Brad- 
ley, Mr.  Thomas  Marshall,  James  Ran- 
dall, Robert  Beard,  Edmond  Roberts, 
William    Rush,    Thomas    Aludge     (or 


Alridge),  Thomas  Davis,  Valentine 
Harvey,  Francis  Roberts,  Richd.  Millard, 
Richd.  Greene,  Isabell  Maidstone,  John 
Butcher,  John  Beech,  Nicholas  Menloe, 
John  Madby,  Nicho.  Church,  Antho. 
Griffeth,  Wm.  Fletcher,  Richard  Hold- 
ich,  Cassaiainrus  (?)  Smith,  John  Wil- 
liams, George  Weedon,  Edmond 
Hawkes,  John  Bradbury,  Thomas  Men- 
loe, Thomas  Hodskins,  William  Velley, 
Tho.  Maidstone,  Yarmer  Jones,  Mrs. 
Jones,  Jones  his  child,  Jones  his  child, 
Robert  Hallowes,  Wm.  Griffeth,  Wm. 
Copeland,  Mary  Copeland,  James 
Wheafeby,  Old  Buck,  Wm.  Harpay  (?), 
Christofer  Godson,  Eliza.  Scotchwoman, 
Martha,  Isaac  Cavalier,  Gregory,  Dan- 
dall,  our  (or  one)  Called  the  Indian, 
Penellope  Harris,  Mrs.  Maidstones 
Child. 


MORDECAY  COOKE,  1174  acs. 
lyeing  neare  the  head  of  Ware  Riv.  in 
Mockjack  Bay,  beg.  at  a  point  of  cleared 
land  called  Mordecays  Mount,  running 
up  the  W.  side  of  Cow  Cr.  etc.  2  Oct. 
1650,  p.  255.  Trans,  of  24  pers:  Ed- 
ward Bond,  his  wife,  Wm.  Sawyer, 
Charles  King,  Henry  Corkett  (or 
Cockett),  Bart  Lentill,  Ann  Winn, 
Thomas  Parvoll,  Phillip  Garner,  Mord. 
Cooke,  Richard  Viriam,  Wm.  Geey, 
Wm.  Gillam,  Edward  Attore,  Ja.  Banks, 
twice,  Alexander  Green,  twice,  Jane  his 
wife,  Edward  Greene. 

DAVID  FOX,  372  acs.  lyeing  upon  a 
branch  of  Morrattico  Cr.,  binding  upon 
Edward  Miles.  23  May  1650,  p.  256. 
Trans,  of  7  pers.* 

WILLIAM  PLUMER,  2  Necks  of 
land,  containing  in  all  400  acs.,  200  acs. 
lyeing  upon  Ducking  Pond  Cr.,  pro- 
ceeding from  Mockjack  Bay  by  which  it 
is  bounded  on  the  W.  side.  7  Oct. 
1650,  p.  256.  Part  of  4,000  acs.  granted 
unto  Capt.  Christopher  Wormeley  25 
Oct.  1639,  &  by  Capt.  Ralph  Wormeley, 
Exor.,  assigned  to  sd.  Plumer  together 
with  the  rights.  Due  for  trans,  of  8 
Negroes.* 

EDMOND  KEMP,  Gent.,  500  acs. 
lyeing   on   S.   side  of   Herring  Cr.,   18 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


201 


Oct.  1650,  p.  257.  Trans,  of  10  pers.* 
Note:  "Take  the  rights  from  Mr.  Reads 
Patent  of  2000  acres." 

MR.  JOHN  WESTROPP,  1500  acs. 
Chas.  City  Co.,  30  Aug.  1650,  p.  257. 
Lyeing  about  the  Mill  at  Wards  Cr. 
Trans,  of  30  pers.* 

THOMAS  WILKINSON,  500  acs. 
on  S.  side  of  Potomeck  Riv.  at  the 
mouth  of  Machotick  Riv.  Trans,  of  10 
pers:  4  Indians  trans,  by  Mr.  Gerrard; 
Joan  Williams,  James  Parker  due  to 
Stephen  Clarton  (Charlton  ?)  Mary 
Parker  by  Mr.  Lister;  Judeth  Hollo- 
man,  Ailce  Newman,  Ailce  Thomas. 

GEORGE  LUDLOW,  Esqr.,  1,000 
acs.  Northumberland  Co.,  18  Oct.  1650, 
p.  258.  On  S.  side  of  Potomeck  Riv., 
lyeing  S.  &  S.  W.  upon  Machotick  Cr. 
Trans,  of  20  pers:  Svmon  Land,  Jeles 
Hincastle,  David  Fleetwood,  Joan  Mill- 
ington,  Henry  Rogers,  Ralph  Conte, 
Joan  Evan,  Hen.  Hancklee,  John  Clarke, 
Edward  Spragge,  Nicho.  Beven,  Samll. 
Boswell,  Eliza.  Boswell,  Edward.  Greene, 
John  Forbush,  Joseph  Chipnell,  Hugh 
Forbush,  Wm.  Callender,  Mary  Pickers, 
Robt.  Tustall.  (Note:  It  is  assumed 
this  name  should  be  Tunstall.) 

LAWRENCE  PETERS  (Peeters),  900 
acs.  Nansemond  Co.,  25  Oct.  1650,  p. 
258.  On  the  Swd.  side  of  Indian  Cr., 
a  N.  W.  branch  of  Nansemond  River. 
Trans,  of  18  pers:  Anney  Butcher,  Ann 
Baskfeild,  Mart  Joyce,  James  Hutter, 
Robert  Jenker,  Wm.  Harwood,  Thomas 
Baynebridge,  John  Reaves,  James  Duf- 
fell,  Wm.  Rogers,  Eliza.  Pye,  Henry 
Wilkinson,  Elizabeth  Smith,  Miles 
Trelbeck,  Marg.  Jones,  Andrew 
Boucher,  Mathew  Berry,  Capt.  Thomas 
Drew. 

THOMAS  MULLFORD,  700  acs. 
Nansimond  Co.,  24  Oct.  1650,  p.  259. 
Lyeing  near  the  head  of  the  Swd.  br. 
Nansimund  Riv.,  beg.  nigh  the  branch 
side  &  crossing  a  great  white  marsh. 
Trans,  of  14  pers:  Lyon  Brittin,  Mary 
Jones,  John  Willis,  Mary  Evans,  James 
Stretchleigh,  Edmond  Apps,  Ann 
Rugg,  Samll.  Luddington,  Thomas 
Hues,   Honour  Jones,   Thomas   Thorne, 


John    Lloyd,    Edward    Windell,    James 
Stretcher. 

ANTHONY  FULJAM,  500  acs.  lye- 
ing on  N.  side  Rappa.  Riv.,  next  above 
the  land  of  George  Taylor.  5  Sept. 
1650,  p.  259.  Trans.  10  pers:  Stephen 
Chilton,  Anne  Venicomb,  Hump.  JonesT 
John  Boein,  George  Minery,  Owen 
Middleton,  John  Godwin,  Wm.  Bilby, 
Eliza.  Waters,  Charles  Barcroft,  "the  3d. 
tyme  due  for." 

GEORGE  TAYLOR,  530  acs.  lyeing 
on  N.  side  Rappa.  Riv.  in  Coritomen 
Riv.,  up  the  Eastermost  br.  &  on  the  S. 
side  thereof,  bounded  along  the  land  of 
Henry  Lee.  5  Sept.  1650,  p.  259.  Trans, 
of  11  pers:  George  Gwillin,  Ailce 
Beedle,  John  Greenes  (or  Greeves), 
Thomas  Athanes,  Wm.  Anderson,  Eliza. 
Collison,  Samll.  Alcock,  Richd.  Fidings, 
Tho.  Crucksance,  Eliza.  Firby,  Eliza. 
Potter. 

GEORGE  READ,  Gent.,  500  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  18  Oct.  1650,  p. 
260.  Upon  S.  side  of  Potomeck  Riv.  & 
on  S.  side  of  Herrin  Cr.,  next  adj.  land 
of  Mr.  Robert  Yeo.  Trans,  of  10  pers.* 
Note:  "Take  the  rights  out  a  pattent 
granted  to  the  said  Geo.  Read  for  2000 
acres  in  folio  107  relinquished  by  him." 
(Note:  "Folio  107"  evidently  refers  to 
an  older  book,  of  which  this  volume  is 
a  transcript.) 

SAMUELL  ABBOTT,  of  James  City, 
775  acs.  James  City  Co.,  25  Feb.  1648, 
p.  260.  125  acs.  upon  Checkroes  Cr., 
abutting  Wly.  upon  a  great  deep  swamp 
&  Nly.  upon  sunken  marshes;  &  650 
acs.  neare  unto  the  head  of  Checkroes 
Cr.  in  Chickahominy  Riv.,  Nly.  upon 
land  of  Richard  Bell  "haveing  a  land- 
ing place  and  passage  way  (between) 
the  land  of  Richard  Bell  &  George 
Unwinn  at  a  little  Creek  and  running 
Southerly  into  the  woods  by  the  land  of 
Geo.  Unwin"  etc.  The  sd.  125  acs.  be- 
ing the  one  moiety  or  halfe  of  a  patent 
to  George  Unwinn  25  May  1637  & 
purchased  of  him  by  Robert  Storey,  who 
by  his  last  will  bequeathed  to  Grace  the 
wife  of  Hopkin  Powell  &  likewise  pur- 
chased by  sd.  Powell  for  the  better  con- 
firmation of  sd.  Unwin,  &  by  Powell  & 


202 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


wife  conveyed  unto  Anthony  Elliott  who 
sold  same  to  Abbott.  650  acs.  granted 
unto  Thomas  Wombwell  25  Dec.  1642, 
300  of  which  was  granted  to  Thomas 
Stout  29  Oct.  1639,  &  purchased  by 
Wombwell  of  Stout,  all  of  which  650 
acs.  was  purchased  by  William  Edwards, 
who  sold  to  Robert  Holt,  who  sold  same 
to  sd.  Elliott. 

DAVID  PEOBLES  (Peoples)  833 
acs.  Chas.  City  Co.,  5  Aug.  1650,  p. 
261.  Lyeing  up  Powells  Cr.  at  the  head 
thereof,  bounded  W.  upon  Birthin 
Swamp,  S.  &  W.  upon  land  of  Mr. 
Richard  Tye,  N.  E.  upon  land  of  James 
Ward  &  N.  upon  the  Reedy  Swamp. 
Trans,  of  17  pers:  David  Peibles,  Tho. 
Liddle,  Marg.  Keth,  William  Smith, 
Tho.  Milner,  Antho.  Wright,  Marg. 
Chambers,  Jane  Heyden,  Marg.  Daniel- 
ston,  Barbara  Keth,  Thomas  Biggs, 
Mary  Bagon,  Ailce  Berry,  Wm.  Peirce, 
Hugh  Roger,  Tho.  Paynes,  Jane  Thomp- 
son. 

EDMOND  CHEESMAN,  50  acs.  up- 
on Garden  Patch  Cr.  issueing  from 
Chisapeyak  Bay,  by  which  it  is  bounded 
on  the  E.  &  bounded  upon  a  parcell  of 
land  which  he  bought  of  Peter  Rigby. 
16  Sept.  1650,  p.  262.  Trans,  of:  John 
Tuffnell. 

NICHOLAS  PERKINS,  170  acs. 
Henrico  Co.,  30  Aug.  1650,  p.  262. 
Lying  in  Bermuda  hundred,  beg.  in 
Cole's  Swamp,  running  along  Cunicott 
Path  W.  N.  W.  by  N.,  thence  along 
the  Cart  Path  to  the  head  of  sd.  Swamp. 
Trans,  of  4  pers.:  Mary  Perkins,  Wil- 
liam Owen,  Richard  Hues. 

CAPT.  ICHIELL  (Ishiell)  LINCH, 
600  acs.  upon  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
standing  upon  a  small  gutt  dividing  this 
from  land  of  George  Moseley.  14  Sept. 
1650,  p.  262.  Due  for  his  personal  ad- 
venture &  Blanch  his  wife  &  trans,  of 
10  pers:  Blanch  Grigg,  Jane  Garrett, 
John  Roberts,  Thomas  Westwood,  John 
Coope,  Henry  Bentley,  George  Peirce, 
William  Bira,  John  Gurnett  (or  Gar- 
nett). 

RICHARD  JONES,  Clerk,  950  acs. 
Chas.  City  Co.,  30  Aug.  1650,  p.  263. 


Lyeing  2  mi.  from  the  River  on  the 
back  of  Merchants  Hope,  bounded  N. 
upon  sd.  Merchants  Land,  W.  upon  land 
of  Richard  Craven,  S.  upon  the  ould 
Towne  being  the  land  of  Mr.  Richard 
Tye  &  E.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Thomas 
Wheeler.    Trans,  of  19  pers.* 

SILVESTER  THATCHER  &  THO- 
MAS WHITLOCKE,  1,000  acs.  lyeing 
on  the  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  next 
above  land  of  Mr.  Wm.  Yarrett.  29 
Oct.  1650,  p.  263.  Trans,  of  20  pers: 
William  James,  Anne  Coffine,  Thomas 
Fowler,  Robert  Gilley,  John  Green, 
Thomas  Hodges,  William  Price,  John 
Wheatly,  Ann  Wigg,  Math.  Mithell  (or 
Michell),  John  Matlin,  Dorothy  Clarke, 
Wm.  Gray,  Thomas  Wright,  James  Hall, 
John  Smith,  Richard  Nicolson,  John 
Thorowgood,  Samuell  Nichols,  Jeffery 
Condy. 

EDWARD  KNIGHT,  140  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  25  Sept.  1650,  p.  264.  Lye- 
ing at  the  head  of  Chiskroes  Cr.  on  the 
E.  side  of  Chickahominy  Riv.,  bounded 
N.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Robert  Holt,  S. 
upon  Mr.  Samll.  Abbott,  W.  upon  the 
head  of  the  Cr.  &  E.  upon  Mr.  Robert 
Witherall.  Being  part  of  560  acs. 
granted  to  Mr.  Richard  Bell,  who 
by  will  bequeathed  same  to  his  sonn 
in  Law  Thomas  Morecock,  and 
due  sd.  Knight  by  purchase  from 
Morecock. 

EDWARD  KNIGHT,  400  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  25  Sept.  1650,  p.  264.  Lye- 
ing neare  the  Southermost  br.  of  War- 
reny  Cr.  on  the  E.  side  of  Chicko- 
hamony  Riv.,  beg.  at  the  extreame  of 
Joseph  Knight,  his  father,  running  N. 
thence  E.  to  Richahock  Path.  Trans,  of 
8  pers.* 

JOSEPH  KNIGHT,  1600  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  25  Sept.  1650,  p.  264.  Lyeing 
between  the  branches  of  Jones  Cr.,  Mor- 
gans Cr.  &  Warrany  on  E.  side  of 
Chickohominy  Riv.,  beg.  close  by  Richa- 
hock Path.    Trans,  of  32  pers.* 

EDWARD  OVERMAN,  Gent.,  500 
acs.  James  City  Co.,  18  Dec.  1650,  p. 
265.  Upon  N.  side  of  a  cr.  in  Chico- 
hominy    Riv.,     bounded    W.     upon    a 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


203 


swamp  between  this  &  Cunisbyes  land. 
Formerly  granted  to  Thomas  Ludwell 
16  Jan.  1648  &  purchased  by  Overman 
of  Robert  Wetherall,  Gent.,  Atty.  of  sd. 
Ludwell. 

RALPH  GREEN,  50  acs.  being  a 
neck  of  land  upon  the  N.  side  of  Yorke 
Riv.,  within  Bennetts  Cr.  8  July  1650, 
p.  265.    Trans,  of:    Mary  Gardner. 

SAME.  300  acs.  lyeing  upon  the 
head  of  Jones'  Cr.  8  July  1650,  p.  265. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Gilbert  Mace,  George 
Turner,  Mary  Turner,  Mary  Foster,  Tho- 
mas Williams. 

MR.  STEPHEN  HAMELIN,  1250 
acs.  Chas.  City  Co.,  26  Oct.  1650,  p. 
266.  Lyeing  at  the  head  of  Weyonoke, 
bounded  S.  upon  the  heads  of  Wionoke, 
E.  upon  Matshcoes  (or  Matsrwes  ?)  Cr. 
&  land  of  Mr.  Cantrell,  W.  towards  old 
mans  Cr.  and  Queens  Cr.  Due  sd. 
Hamblin  for  trans,  of  25  pers:  John 
Ray,  Henry  Rice,  Arth.  Chandler,  Wm. 
Pylar,  Wm.  Cheldnedge,  Richard  Arun- 
dell,  Thomas  Mason,  George  Haynes, 
Samll.  Parry,  Thomas  Powell,  Peter 
Mason,  Wm.  Hurt,  Tho.  Howell,  Samll. 
Goodwin,  Thomas  Harris,  Robert  Tay- 
lor, Tho.  up  Richard  (Ap),  Janos  Al- 
pott,  John  Woodson,  Edward  Bucking- 
ham, Robert  Fryth,  Jab.  Robinson,  Cle- 
ment Whidow,  Robert  Crouch,  Edward 
Thurston. 

JOHN  TAYLOR,  150  acs.  on  N.  side 
of  Charles  Riv.,  beg.  at  a  point  of  land 
between  two  creeks.  7  Oct.  1650,  p. 
266.  Formerly  granted  to  John  Joanes 
20  July  1642,  &  by  Edward  William- 
son assigned  unto  James  Johnson,  who 
assigned  same  to  William  Tymon  & 
accrueing  due  unto  sd.  Taylor  by 
intermarriage  with  the  relict  of  sd. 
Tymon. 

JOHN  MAJOR,  400  acs.  Northamp- 
ton Co.,  24  Oct.  1650,  p.  267.  At  great 
Naswattocks  Cr.,  lyeing  on  S.  side  there- 
of, beg.  at  a  little  branch  &  running 
up  the  Cr.  Trans,  of  8  pers: 
Susanah  Smith,  Tho.  Hackerstone,  John 
Cobb,  Stephen  Barnes,  John  Major, 
Eliza.  Phillips,  Mary  Wilson,  Wm. 
Glover. 


HEN.  PEASELEY,  700  acs.,  lyeing 
upon  a  swamp  which  runs  down  Cow 
Cr.  in  Ware  Riv  in  Mockjack,  beg.  at 
marked  beech  of  Joseph  Grigories  on  E. 
side  of  a  branch,  extending  to  Norther- 
most  tree  of  Richd.  Duning.  2  Oct. 
1650,  p.  267.  Trans,  of  14  pers:  Rich- 
ard Tilson,  Richard  Rash,  John  Coates, 
John  Crismass,  Wm.  Bruneall,  Michael 
Peasly,  Henry  Peasly,  Peter  Jemons, 
Susan  Peaseley,  Michaell  Peaseley,  twice, 
Henry  Shoute,  James  Wonell  (or 
Wovell)  Stephen  Jones,  Thomas 
Savidge. 

RICHARD  JACOB,  250  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  4  Oct.  1650,  p.  267.  At 
Naswattocke  Cr.,  bounded  Nly.  by  the 
head  of  the  broad  Cr.,  Wly.  by  former 
devdt.  of  sd.  Jacob,  Sly.  by  the  heads  of 
the  lands  of  Hungar  Cr.  Trans,  of  5 
pers:  Tho.  Clarke,  Andrew  Clavery, 
Thomas  Green,  Fra.  Roberts,  Ann  Wil- 
mott. 

THOMAS  DREW,  Gent.,  490  acs. 
Chas.  City  Co.,  26  Oct.  1650,  p.  268. 
Lyeing  on  N.  side  of  Flower  De  Hun- 
dred Cr.,  bounded  N.  upon  land  pur- 
chased by  Mr.  Pace,  S.  upon  sd.  Cr.  & 
N.  E.  upon  Snow  Cr.  Trans,  of  10 
pers.* 

DANIELL  LUELLIN,  270  acs.  Chas. 
City  Co.,  26  Oct.  1650,  p.  268.  Lyeing 
on  the  head  of  Shirty  (Shirly)  hundred 
commonly  known  by  the  name  of  Rich- 
ard Levell,  bounded  W.  upon  the  head 
of  Shirly  hundred,  E.  by  S.  upon  land 
of  Mr.  Walter  Aston  &  N.  upon  a 
former  devdt.  of  his  own.  Trans,  of  6 
pers:  Edward  Sheppard,  Sam.  Pidiston, 
Edward  Baker,  Fra.  Clarke,  Kath.  Allen, 
Wm.  Breman,  John  Bull,  Wm.  Sucker. 

(Note:    The  last   2   names   enclosed   in 
brackets.) 

JOHN  HOLMSWOOD,  300  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  26  Oct.  1650,  p.  268. 
Lyeing  at  the  head  of  the  Sunken 
Marsh,  bounded  E.  N.  E.  upon  land  of 
Mr.  Webb,  deed.  &  Mr.  William  Ed- 
wards.   Trans,  of  6  pers.* 

FRANCIS  SPIGHT  &  JAMES  AR- 
RORKE,    50   acs.   being   on   the  Nwd. 


204 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


side  of  Nansimond  Riv.,  bounded  on 
one  side  with  sd.  Riv.,  on  the  other 
side  by  250  acs.  taken  by  up  Robert 
Rockhold  &  on  the  other  by  Majors  Cr. 
1  Nov.  1650,  p.  268.  Trans,  of  1  per: 
James  Mawgery  (or  Macogery).  Land 
due  for:  Grace  Heaward  &  Wm. 
Beadle. 

CAPT.  ROBERT  SHEPPARD,  1,000 
acs.  lyeing  upon  the  mayne  black  water. 
8  Oct.  1650,  p.  269-  650  acs.  part 
thereof  by  vertue  of  the  rights  of  a 
patent  for  soe  much  formerly  granted  to 
sd.  Sheppard  &  by  him  relinquished  & 
surrendered  into  the  office  26  July 
1638;  400  acs.  for  trans,  of  8  pers: 
Priscilla,  Dorothy,  Mary  Sheppard, 
Thomas  Harecourt,  Eliz.  Davis,  Jane 
Hemlocke. 

HENRY  ASHWELL,  180  acs.  near 
Queens  Cr.,  on  the  N.  side  thereof, 
bounded  E.  upon  land  of  Edward  Sym- 
son,  N.  upon  Joseph  Croshaw,  W.  upon 
Smauell  Snead  &  S.  upon  Richard 
Major.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  William 
Hill,  John  Dawson  (or  Denoson),  Tho- 
mas Cronall,  Eliz.  Beadman.  4  Nov. 
1650,  p.  269. 

WILLIAM  MORGAN,  300  acs.  lye- 
ing upon  Mockjack  Bay,  by  which  it  is 
bounded  on  the  W.  side  for  the  mile  in 
length,  &  on  S.  side  lyeth  parallel  to 
the  mouth  on  the  N.  side  of  Pepper  Cr., 
for  the  breadth;  bounded  by  a  gutt 
dividing  this  from  land  of  Richard  Hull. 
26  Oct.  1650,  p.  270.  Trans,  of:  Wm. 
Bilbrough,  Robert  Dye,  Henry  Moore 
(or  Moone),  Michaell  White,  Henry 
Hamond,  Robert  Grey. 

CAPT.  CHARLES  LEECH,  1250  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,  7  Nov.  1650,  p.  270.  Upon 
the  head  of  one  of  the  branches  of 
Queens  Cr.  &  the  N.  Eastermost  br.  of 
Powatan,  part  whereof  is  in  Yorke  & 
the  latter  in  James  City  Co.,  bounded 
S.  &  by  W.  upon  the  Horse  Path,  S.  W. 
upon  land  of  Mr.  Richard  Kemp,  Esqr., 
deed.,  N.  N.  E.  upon  land  of  Thomas 
Prise  &  E.  N.  E.  upon  land  of  Capt. 
Richard  Popeley.  Trans,  of  25  pers: 
Nicolas  Brooke,  Senr.,  Nicholas  Brooke, 
Junr.,  Nicholas  Brooke  Nephew  to 
Senr.,  Edward  Evans,  Barnett  Peterson, 


Charles  Leech  himselfe,  Robert  Tiskin 
(or  Tilkin),  Peter  Leech,  Peter  Gar- 
land, Robert  Thompson,  Robert  Smith, 
Thomas  Hanson,  John  South,  Richd. 
Chantry,  Wm.  Leach,  John  Benjon  (or 
Benson),    "by   himselfe." 

BERTRAM  OBERT,  550  acs.  lyeing 
ing  on  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  begin- 
ning at  the  mouth  of  a  little  creek  neare 
above  Nimcock  Cr.,  running  on  the 
Westermost  side  thereof  to  the  head, 
thence  upon  marked  trees  of  John  Pe- 
droes.  16  Nov.  1650,  p.  271.  Trans, 
of  11  pers:  Eliza  Bennett,  Wm.  Wil- 
don,  Jno.  Clarford,  John  Roberts,  Richd. 
Watchshott,  Tho.  Leechman,  Thomas 
Wells,  Ed.  Gresham,  Thomas  Hearne, 
John  Thorpe,  Stephen  Danbury. 

THOMAS  TILSEY,  300  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  13  Dec.  1650,  p.  271.  Lying 
on  the  W.  side  of  Chicohominy  Riv. 
upon  Moses  Run,  bounded  S.  by  W. 
upon  land  of  Mr.  Theodore  Moyses  & 
E.  by  N.  upon  Mr.  Foyes  land.  Trans, 
of  6  pers:  Robert  Arwin,  Milliscent 
Tompson,  Walter  Villecott,  Abraham 
Watson,  Thomas  Sawyer,  Elinor 
Faning. 

WINGFEILD  WEBB  (Webbe),  & 
RICHARD  PATE,  1141  acs.,  lyeing  up- 
on the  N.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.  &  upon 
an  Eastermost  head  branch  of  Poropo- 
tank  River.  12  Dec.  1650,  p.  271. 
Trans,  of  23  pers:  Richard  Pate,  twice; 
John  Kedate,  Wm.  Beate,  Thomas  Stee- 
vens,  Wm.  Harrison,  Winifred  Webb, 
3  times;  Chris.  Gallingson  (or  Calling- 
son),  Ailce  Jones,  Andrew  Sackhill, 
Wm.  Bragg,  Joseph  Amber,  Jno.  Levis- 
ton,  Isaac  Richardson,  Robert  Myles, 
Senr.,  Robert  Myles,  Junr.,  Barbery 
Myles,  Kath.  Myles,  Jane  Perkins, 
Edwd.  Madison,  Tho.  Perkins,  Rose 
Allen,  Wm.  Lamb,  land  due  for  (the 
last  name.) 

RICHARD  SMITH,  500  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  24  Mar.  1650,  p.  272.  At 
the  head  of  Accahannock  Cr.  beg.  above 
the  Indian  Bridge  bounding  on  the 
Southerne  part  of  the  Cr.  Trans,  of  10 
pers:  Eliza.  Bankes,  Kath.  Wood,  Re- 
becca Moore,  Ann  Thrasher,  David 
Williams,      Owin     Williams,      Edward 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


205 


Martin,    Ann    Smith,    Edward    Reeves, 
Eliza.  Jordaines. 

JOHN  GARWOOD,  1,000  acs. 
Nansimund  Co.,  22  Mar.  1650,  p.  272. 
Lyeing  on  the  N.  side  of  the  head  of 
Indian  Cr.,  beg.  at  a  point  by  the  main 
branch.  Trans,  of  20  pers:  John  Gar- 
rett, Eliz.  Palmer,  Edw.  Roberts,  Jno. 
Birkett,  Tho.  Payne,  Alexr.  Frisall,  Ann 
Thompson,  Hump.  Cordwallett,  Wm. 
Balldershell,  Wm.  Hallaway,  Edward 
Hutson,  John  Roberts,  Patience  Hall, 
John  Johnson,  Pat.  Miller,  Thomas 
Mann,  Mary  Davis,  Africa  Rhodes,  John 
Plumer,  Robert  Harnings. 

JAMES  CLOUGHTON,  250  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  20  Dec.  1650,  p. 
273.  On  Cloughtons  Cr.,  beg.  at  the 
head  of  a  little  branch  comeing  out  of 
Monack  branch,  etc.,  along  land  of  Mr. 
George  Higgins,  down  the  branch  come- 
ing out  of  sd.  Cr.,  parting  this  from  the 
Gleab  land.    Trans,  of  5  pers.* 

MRS.  JOANE  POWELL,  288  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  19  Dec.  1650,  p. 
273.  Abutting  Ely.  upon  Potomeck 
River,  Nly.  upon  Matchoux  lower  Cr. 
&  Sly.  upon  land  of  William  Rennolds. 
Trans,  of  6  pers.*  at  the  cost  of  her 
late  husband  Robert  Philpott,  Gent, 
dec'd. 

EDWARD  SANDERSON,  Gent., 
2,200  acs.  in  Chicohominy  Riv.,  20  June 
1650,  p.  273.  500  acs.  lyeing  about  a 
mile  above  a  neck  of  land  commonly 
called  Piny  Point,  about  5  mi.  within 
the  mouth  of  Chicohominy  Riv.  on  the 
E.  side  thereof;  1500  acs.  on  Sander- 
sons Cr.,  W.  upon  Chicohominy  Riv.  & 
S.  towards  land  of  Robt.  Holt;  200  acs. 
upon  the  head  of  Pyny  Point  Cr.,  being 
several  small  islands  lyeing  neare 
Morgans  Islands  reaching  from  Pyny 
Pt.  Cr.  to  the  maine  river.  Due  by 
vertue  of  a  former  patents  &  trans,  of 
44  pers.* 

THOMAS  PRESTON,  100  acs.  Eliz. 
City  Co.,  19  Dec.  1650,  p.  274.  Abutt- 
ing S.  upon  Patch  Tree  Dam  &  N.  to- 
wards the  Long  Pond.  Due  by  assign- 
ment from  John  Atkins  for  the  trans, 
of  2  pers.* 


WILLIAM  ALLINSON,  Senr.,  150 
acs.  Northumberland  Co.,  21  Oct.  1650, 
p.  274.  Abutting  Ely.  upon  Cloughtons 
Cr.,  Nly.  upon  a  branch  of  sd  Cr.  that 
divides  this  from  land  of  George  Crouch 
&  Sly.  upon  a  br.  of  sd.  Cr.  that  divides 
this  from  the  Gleab  land.  Trans,  of  3 
pers.* 

MR.  JOHN  ROSIER  (Roseir),  550 
acs.  Northumberland  Co.,  23  Dec.  1650, 
p.  274.  Abutting  Nly.  upon  the  Bay 
side  that  leads  up  a  creek  called  by  the 
natives  Attapin  Cr.,  and  on  Westermost 
side  of  the  Eastermost  Swamp  next 
Petomeck  River,  etc.  Trans,  of  11  pers: 
Richard  Whitting,  Fra.  Hues,  Tho. 
Deane,  John  Grubb,  Joan  Harvey, 
James  Taylor,  Eliza.  Beale,  Jam.  Tur- 
ner, Mary  Dollar,  Mary  Burgis,  Eliza. 
Rosier. 

HUGH  LEE,  100  acs.  Northumber- 
land Co.,  21  Dec.  1650,  p.  275.  Abutt- 
ing Nly.  upon  his  own  land,  Sly.  upon 
an  ould  Indian  feild  &  Wly.  upon  land 
of  James  Cloughton.  due  for  trans,  of 
2  pers:  "Hugh  Lee  his  Importation 
from  Maryland  to  this  Colony,  Rose 
Stockwell." 

JOHN  TRUSSELL,   Gent.,   200   acs. 

Northumberland  Co.,  7  Mar.  1650,  p. 
275.  Abutting  W.  upon  Chicocone 
Riv.,  N.  E.  upon  a  cr.  dividing  this 
from  land  of  sd.  Trussell,  granted  by 
former  patent.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Mr. 
Robert  Higgin,  twice,  Mary  Trussell, 
Joane  Middleton. 

GERVACE  DODSON,  Gent.,  1600 
acs.  Northumberland  Co.,  1  Feb.  1650, 
p.  275.  Abutting  Ely.  upon  Potomeck 
Riv.,  Sly.  upon  mouth  of  Upper  Macho- 
tiq  Riv.,  etc.  Trans,  of  32  pers:  Wil- 
liam Nutt,  his  wife,  Richard  Nutt,  Tho. 
Phillips,  Jno.  Merey,  Hum.  Cambert  (or 
Lambert),  Amy  Lloyd,  Henry  Buttler, 
Robert  Steeres,  William  Banton,  John 
Hogines,  Richard  Mathewes,  Richard 
Lucas,  James  Cossin,  Lawrence  Davis, 
Bridgett  Kirke,  Xtopr.  Griggs,  Ann 
Stanmer,  John  Huttey  (or  Hattey), 
Marg.  Jordaine,  John  Grimes,  Samll. 
Dukes,  Peter  Leyes,  Anne  Leyes,  John 
Grimes,    Samll.    Dukes,    Hecton    Leyes, 


206 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Amy  Leyes,  George  Woolard,  Ann 
Woolard,  Samll.  Wollard,  Mr.  Gervase 
Dodson. 

CAPT.  RALPH  WORMELEY,  Esqr., 
one  of  his  Majestie's  Councill  of  State, 
1645  acs.,  Yorke  Co.,  2  Oa.  1649,  p. 

276.  1420  acs.  formerly  granted  unto 
Capt.  Christopher  Wormeley  27  Jan. 
1638.  Bounded  on  Eastermost  side  with 
land  then  in  possession  of  Nicholas 
Creeke  (Clarke),  joyning  land  formerly 
belonging  to  Mr.  Lyonell  Rouston 
(Roulston),  crossing  a  ridge  of  land 
and  a  path  that  leads  to  the  New  Poquo- 
son, including  a  small  neck  of  land  adj. 
Nicholas  Jernew;  50  acs.  granted  unto 
Nicholas  Cossin  by  patent  dated  May  9, 
1638,  bounded  on  the  W.  by  land  of 
Nicho.  Clarke  &  on  E.  with  land  of 
Nicholas  Dale;  75  acs.  bounded  on  the 
E.  by  land  late  Robert  Todds,  crossing 
the  Back  Cr.,  which  75  acs.  was  granted 
unto  Nico.  Dale  by  patent  May  8,  1638 
&  by  him  assigned  unto  Capt.  Christo- 
pher Wormeley,  deed.,  as  also  the  50 
acs.  granted  sd.  Cossin  was  assigned 
unto  Robert  NewKerke,  who  assigned 
to  sd.  Christopher  Wormeley;  100  acs. 
abutting  upon  the  mouth  of  Aliens  Cr., 
bounded  on  W.  side  by  land  of  Abra- 
ham English  &  some  of  it  joyning  land 
of  Thomas  Peteete,  which  100  acs.  was 
assigned  by  William  Allen  unto  Ralph 
Read  &  Francis  Carter  &  by  sd.  Read 
to  Robt.  Todd  &  by  sd.  Todd  to 
Ralph  Wormeley.  The  other  1545  acs. 
accrueing  due  to  sd.  Ralph  as  Exor. 
of  the  last  will  of  Capt.  Christo. 
Wormeley,  by  whom  it  was  to  him 
bequeathed. 

JOHN  HULL,  200  acs.  Northumber- 
land Co.,  18  Oa.  1650,  p.  277.  Abutt- 
ing N.  &  Ely.  upon  Potomeck  Riv.  & 
N.  W.  upon  land  of  John  Cute.  Trans, 
of  4  pers:  John  Hull,  twice,  Sarah  his 
wife,  Charles  Parker. 

HENRY  BERKELEY,  Esqr.,  2,400 
acs.  James  City  Co.,   1   Apr.   1651,  p. 

277.  Lyeing  on  N.  side  of  Chicohomyny 
Riv.,  neare  the  head  of  sd.  river,  up  the 
swamp  which  divides  this  and  the  land 
of  Mr.  Thomas  Rolfe.  Trans,  of  48 
pers.* 


SAMUELL  SMITH,  529  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  18  Mar.  1650,  p.  277. 
Abutting  Nly.  upon  the  mouth  of  Poto- 
meck Riv.,  Sly.  upon  Little  Wicka- 
comicoe  Cr.,  Ely.  upon  the  mayne  Bay 
&  Wly.  upon  a  branch  that  divides  this 
from  land  commonly  called  the  Kings 
Neck.  Trans,  of  11  perrs:  Samuell 
Smith,  thrice;  Hannah  Smith  his  wife, 
William  Hill,  Christopher  Biddo,  Henry 
Backham,  Mathew  Rowdon,  Francis 
Boyes,  Samuell  Woodward,  David 
Phillips. 

RICHARD  HAWKINS,  100  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  30  Jan.  1650,  p. 
278.  Upon  the  W.  side  of  Nominy, 
upon  S.  side  of  Potomeck  Riv.,  on  the 
Swd.  side  of  a  br.  which  divides  this 
and  the  land  of  Thomas  Waggett, 
thence  to  a  marked  oake  dividing 
this  &  land  of  Thomas  Ramsey. 
Trans,  of  2  pers:  James  Knott,  Tho- 
mas Jones. 

JOHN  ARMESBEE,  250  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  30  Jan.  1650,  p.  278. 
Upon  S.  side  of  Potomeck  Riv.,  beg.  on 
W.  side  of  a  Cr.  dividing  this  from 
land  of  Mr.  Joseph  Mattrom,  thence 
Wly.  upon  a  small  br.  of  a  Cr.  that 
divides  this  and  land  of  Tho.  Yowell. 
Trans,  of  5  pers:  John  Davis,  James 
Marsh,  John  Yowin,  Will.  Hogg,  John 
Armsbee. 

JOHN  BAYTES,  300  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  30  Jan.  1650,  p.  279-  Adj. 
to  another  parcell  of  land  of  the  sd. 
John  Bakes,  upon  the  Ewd.  side  of 
Capitts  Cr.,  extending  nye  Potomeck 
maine  Riv.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Edward 
James,  Joseph  Benny,  William  Browne, 
William  Margritts,  William  Barnes, 
Thomas  Dunham. 

JEFFERIE  GOOCH,  500  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  30  Jan.  1650,  p.  279. 
Upon  the  S.  side  of  great  Wicocomico 
Riv.,  beg.  on  the  Ewd.  side  of  Venas 
Cr.  Trans,  of  10  pers.*  Note:  This 
due  by  order  from  the  Govr.  &  Coun- 
cill dated  30  Jan.  1651  in  consideration 
of  the  surrender  of  a  patent  granted  him 
at  the  falls  of  James  River. 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


207 


RICHARD  BUDD,  350  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  30  Jan.  1650,  p.  279- 
Abutting  W.  upon  land  of  Mr.  George 
Hatcher,  N.  E.  upon  Dinites  Cr.  which 
divides  this  &  a  tract  surveyed  for  Tho- 
mas Prickett,  E.  against  the  mouth  of 
great  Wickcocomico  Riv.  &  S.  E.  &  S. 
W.  upon  aforesaid  Davites  Cr.  Trans, 
of  7  pers:  Richd.  Budd,  Eliza.  Wilson, 
Budd,  his  wife,  Tho.  Cleake,  Wil- 
liam Harpar,  Henry  Mayes,  Symon 
Boule. 


Bartho.  Bradley,  Kath.  a  French  maid, 
Tho.  Morland,  Leo.  Kingman,  Joseph 
Martin,  Richd.  Hayden,  Antho.  Stillger, 
Edward  Clay,  Thomas  Catchman,  Phil- 
lip Williams,  William  Cornish.  Note: 
the  uppermost  500  acs.  of  this  patent 
lyeing  next  to  the  High  Ponds  is  relin- 
quished by  the  said  John  Hany  as  ap- 
peareth  from  under  his  hand  the  23 
Aug.  1651  &  the  said  rights  to  make 
good  another  patent  for  the  said  Hany. 
Test:    R.  Huberd. 


JOHN  COOKE,  450  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  30  Jan.  1650,  p.  280.  Adj. 
land  of  Mr.  James  &  Capt.  Thomas 
Baldrige,  to  head  of  a  branch  issueing 
from  the  Ewd.  side  of  Hollowes  Cr. 
issueing  upon  the  S.  side  of  Potomeck 
Riv.  Trans,  of  9  pers:  Edmond  Townd, 
Mary  Hogges,  Elizab.  Bridges,  George 
Whittecur,  Morris  Oger,  Edward  Fro- 
well,  James  Dennett,  Isaac  Bratt,  James 
Johnson. 


JOHN  HOLLOWES,  Gent.,  600  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  30  Jan.  1650,  p. 
281.  Upon  S.  side  of  Potomeck  Riv., 
upon  E.  side  of  Hollowes  Cr.,  against 
a  point  called  the  Wadeing  place. 
Trans,  of  12  pers:  John  Thomlinson, 
Richd.  Willis,  John  Symson,  James 
Balleroe,  Mary  King,  Restitute  Hol- 
lowes, Senr.,  Wm.  Freake,  John  Tew 
(?),  John  Knott,  John  Hawoes,  Resti- 
tute Hollowes,  Junr.,  Dan.  Moore. 


THOMAS  BLAGG,  500  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  30  Jan.  1650,  p.  280. 
Upon  S.  side  of  Potomeck  Riv.  abutting 
S.  &  S.  W.  upon  Mattchotick  Cr.  Trans, 
of  10  pers:  James  Wilkinson,  John 
Davis,  William  Brice,  Edward  Thomas, 
John  James,  William  Lewis,  David 
Bennett,  James  Alcocke,  Nicholas 
Ketthin,   (or  Ketchin),  Marke  Sillis. 

JOHN  ESSIX,  500  acs.  Northumber- 
land Co.,  30  Jan.  1650,  p.  281.  Abutt- 
ing W.  upon  a  branch  of  Fishing  Cr., 
which  issues  from  the  S.  side  of  great 
Wickcocamaco  Riv.  Trans,  of  10  pers: 
John  Hunt,  Richard  Floyd,  Tho. 
Williams,  John  James,  William 
Browne,  George  Williams,  Joseph 
Pagg,  John  Dinty,  William  Jones,  John 
Henly. 

JOHN  HANY,  950  acs.  Northumber- 
land Co.,  30  Jan.  1650,  p.  281.  Upon 
the  N.  side  of  the  Dividing  Cr.,  abutt- 
ing Wly.  thereon,  continued  with  a 
swamp  at  the  head  of  land  of  George 
Waterman  &  James  Willis.  Trans,  of 
19  pers:  Jo.  Hanes,  Eliza.  Newman, 
Peter  White,  Edward  A  Cooper,  (a 
cooper  ?)  Xtopr.  Sarslett,  Wm.  Browne- 
ing,    Edwd.    Whitway,    Thomas    Miles, 


JOHN  HOLLOWES,  Gent.,  1600 
acs.  Northumberland  Co.,  30  Jan.  1650, 
p.  282.  Beg.  on  the  W.  side  of  a  cr. 
&  extending  nigh  Potomeck  Riv.,  to  an- 
other tract,  surveyed  for  sd.  Hollowes 
upon  the  head  of  Canawoman  Cr.  Trans, 
of  32  pers:  Robert  Street,  Edwd.  Fryer, 
John  Hanch,  Wm.  Weathers,  And. 
Quinbrough,  Mary  Gray,  Ailce  Gray, 
Edwd.  Tomson,  Jane  Tomson,  Tho. 
Butler,  Xtopr.  Butler,  Wm.  Butler, 
John  Butler,  Nath.  Butler,  John  Hol- 
lowes, John  Tero  (?),  Wm.  Freake, 
Robt.  Street,  Ann  Marrowe,  Tho. 
Yowill,  Tho.  Yowill,  Junr.,  Ann 
Yowill,  Junr.,  Wm.  Yowill,  Restitute 
Hollowes,  Res.  Hollowes,  Junr.,  John 
Knott,  Edward  Fryer. 

SAME.  200  acs.  Northumberland 
Co.,  30  Jan.  1650,  p.  283.  Beg.  on 
Wwd.  side  of  a  marsh  &  swamp  which 
divides  this  from  land  of  Mr.  Thomas 
Speake,  N.  W.  next  to  another  parcell 
of  sd.  Hollowes.    Trans,  of  4  pers.* 

NATHANIELL  JONES,  600  acs 
Northumberland  Co.,  30  Jan.  1650,  p 
283.  Upon  S.  side  of  Potomeck  Riv. 
abutting  Ely.  &  Sly.  upon  Upper  Matt 
chotick  Cr.  &  N.  W.  upon  a  small  cr 


208 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


which  divides  this  from  land  of  Mr. 
Hoccaday.  Trans,  of  12  pers:  James 
Williams,  Thomas  Brett,  James  Davis, 
William  Long,  Henry  Bennett,  William 
Harper,  John  James,  Daniell  Gillins, 
John  Brice,  Andrew  James,  John 
Thorpe,  John  Blagg. 

THOMAS  VAUS,  Gent.,  500  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  18  Oct.  1650,  p. 
283.  On  the  S.  side  of  Potomeck  Riv., 
beg.  at  the  mouth  of  a  cr.  that  issueth 
out  of  Nomeny  Riv.  on  the  E.  side, 
which  divides  this  from  land  of  John 
Tacker,  N.  &  by  E.  to  Nomeny  Riv. 
Trans,  of  10  pers:  Phillip  Foster,  Hugh 
Say,  Hump.  Denison,  Eliza.  Cordevar, 
Susanna  Mayne,  Symon  Bargine,  Tymo- 
thy  Clewmore,  George  Barnes,  George 
Enhaynby   (?),  Hugh  Marsh. 

MR.   ANTHONY   ELLYOTT,    1150 

acs.  lyeing  on  the  N.  W.  side  of  the 
North  Riv.  in  Mockjack  Bay  beg.  on 
the  N.  E.  side  of  a  cr.  which  divides 
this  from  the  land  of  Thomas  Chap- 
mans,  running  up  the  cr.  N.  W.  by  N., 
thence  N.  E.  by  E.,  S.  E.  by  S.  to  Mr. 
Holden's  lands.  20  Mar.  1650,  p.  284. 
Trans,  of  23  pers:  William  Loe,  Pet. 
Dowland,  Tho.  Peare,  Richd.  Nevil, 
Tho.  Jarvis,  Tho.  Hensett,  Jno.  Ber- 
tram, Xtopr.  Hughes,  John  Steed,  Bryan 
Skarfe,  Ralph  Mines  (or  Mimes)  Ann 
Masie,  Ailce  Toomes,  Mary  Cartar, 
Wm.   Carney,   Wm.   Baskett. 

SAME.  100  acs:  lyeing  on  N.  W. 
side  of  the  North  Riv.  in  Mockjack 
Bay,  running  along  markt  trees  dividing 
this  from  land  of  Abraham  Iveson.  20 
Mar.  1650,  p.  284.  Trans,  of  2  pers: 
Overner  Shadwell,  Edward  Skinner. 

GEORGE  GILL,  700  acs.  Yorke  Co., 
21  Jan.  1650,  p.  285.  Lyeing  upon 
Yorke  Riv.  in  the  narrows,  N.  W.  upon 
land  of  John  Pounsey  &  S.  E.  upon 
Thomas  Gibson  etc.,  being  the  first  red 
clift  up  the  narrowes  of  said  river. 
Trans,  of  14  pers:  Thomas  Hackett, 
Math.  Benstead,  Robert  Hudson,  Jno. 
Seacraft. 

MRS.      FRANCIS     TOWNSHEND, 

Widdow,    2,200    acs.    Northumberland 


Co.,  7  Feb.  1650,  p.  285.  Upon  S.  side 
of  Potomeck  Riv.,  on  E.  side  of  Che- 
tanck  &  W.  side  of  upper  Mattchotick 
Neck,  extending  S.  W.  neare  the  Ewd. 
side  of  Chetank  Towne.  Trans,  of  44 
pers:  Thomas  Beddus,  Jacob  Hill,  Jno. 
Perchin,  Nico.  Davis,  Luke  Haynes, 
Tho.  Dunne,  Tho.  Austine,  Walter 
Baker,  Jno.  Williams,  Wm.  Best, 
Lyonell  Reale  (or  Beale),  Nico.  Lesley, 
Richard  Adson,  Tho.  Browne,  Law. 
Atherfold,  Henry  Hower,  Nicho.  Tur- 
ner, John  Galy,  Moyses  Hoppards,  John 
Budway,  John  Lynas  (?),  John  Wil- 
liams, William  Smith,  Thomas  Hill, 
John  Corkeley,  Eliza.  Harrison,  Joseph 
Forrest,  Richard  Wells,  John  Hudson, 
Wm.  Lewis,  James  Austin,  William 
Fauster,  Francis  Symons,  William  Jones, 
Tymothy  Wilcocke,  John  Obed,  Robert 
Butcher,  Edward  Barnes,  William  Tul- 
lenson,  George  Werden,  Thomas  Gard- 
ner, William  Taylor,  James  Browning, 
Sarah  &  Susan,  Negroes. 

BENEDICK  BARBAR,  Gent.,  186 
acs.,  6  Mar.  1650,  p.  286.  Lyeing  in 
Peanketank  River,  beg.  on  the  S.  side  of 
a  neck  extending  W.  S.  W.  upon  the 
river,  etc.  to  Mat.  Creeke,  to  the  head 
of  Uteys  Cr.  and  crossing  the  neck  S. 
by  E.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Benedick  Bar- 
ber, Anthony  Willinger,  John  Cornish- 
by,  Robert  Butterfield. 

JOHN  TACKER,  300  acs.  S.  side 
Potomeck  Riv.,  &  upon  E.  side  of 
Nomeny  Riv.,  butting  N.  E.  upon  a 
small  cr.  issueing  out  of  sd.  Riv.  which 
divides  this  from  land  of  Thomas 
Yowill,  S.  W.  upon  another  small  cr. 
which  divides  this  from  a  parcell  of 
land  called  Rich  Neck.  This  tract  being 
called  Locust  Neck.  18  Oct.  1650,  p. 
286.  Trans.  of  6  pers:  William 
Clowdley,  Robt.  Fits  John,  Thomas 
Holliday,  John  Davis,  Alexr.  Stronge, 
Jane  Say. 

LEWIS  BURWELL,  Gent.,  500  acs. 
on  S.  side  of  Potomeck  Riv.,  upon  W. 
side  of  Nomeny  Riv.,  beg.  at  br.  of  a 
cr.  dividing  this  from  land  of  James 
Hare,  etc.  18  Oct.  1650,  p.  286.  Trans, 
of  10  pers:  Richard  Bayly,  Henry 
Bayly,    George    Cooper,    Fran.    Snowe, 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


209 


Mary  Snowe,  Alex.  Fry,  Barna.  Cobley, 
Jane  Smith,  Grigory  Cordon,  Timo. 
Selikley. 

SAME.  500  acs.  beg.  at  a  point 
which  divides  this  from  another  patent 
of  sd.  Burwell,  &  running  to  the  head 
of  Nomeny  River,  etc.  18  Oct.  1650,  p. 
287.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Henry  Gray, 
Edward  Digg,  Samll.  Digg,  Richard 
Gunther  (or  Guntler),  Laves  Mawfler, 
Walter  Stroule,  Jane  his  wife,  Jane  his 
daughter,  Silvester  George,  Eman.  Cow- 
den. 

JAMES  HURD  (Heard),  500  acs.  on 
S.  side  of  Potomeck  Riv.,  beg.  at  the 
mouth  of  Hurds  Cr.  neare  to  Matchotiq 
Cr.  18  Oct.  1650,  p.  287.  Trans,  of 
10  pers:  James  Hurd,  Ann  his  wife, 
Richd.  Symons,  George  Poole,  Tho. 
Hunckle,  John  Stogdell,  George  Hobbs, 
Miles  Mills,  Wm.  Middlewood,  Thomas 
Smith. 

SYMON  THOROWGOOD,  Eliz. 
City  Co.,  10  Mar.  1650,  p.  288.  Lye- 
ing  Sly.  upon  the  heads  of  the  Long 
Ponds,  Wly.  upon  Swanes  Dames 
(Damms),  Nly.  upon  land  granted  to 
Toby  Smith.  Trans,  of  Jane  Lewis. 
(The  marginal  reference  gives  this  as 
50  acs.  in  the  name  of  Saml.  Thorow- 
good.) 

THOMAS  POWELL,  500  acs.  on  N. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  about  3  mi.  above 
Mr.  Eatons  Plantation,  being  a  neck  of 
land  commonly  called  Powells  Quarter, 
bounded  on  the  westermost  side  with  a 
cr.  dividing  this  from  land  of  Edward 
Mihill  &  on  the  Eastermost  with  Deep 
Cr.  24  Oct.  1650,  p.  288.  Trans,  of 
10    pers:    Leonnidon   Tucker,    his   wife 

,     Elizabeth     Wms.      (Williams), 

Andrew  Harman,  Ann  Linford,  Thomas 
Ryland,  Natha.  Browne,  John  Sinycott, 
Thomas  Bramley,  George  Velsey. 

CAPT.  RALPH  WORMELEY,  Esq., 
237  acs.  upon  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
beg.  at  the  mouth  of  Nimcock  Cr.  23 
Mar.  1650,  p.  288.    Trans,  of  5  pers.* 

THOMAS  PARKER,  380  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  18  Mar.  1650,  p.  289.  Beg. 


at  a  point  of  land  called  the  Island 
neare  Tapscers  Cr.,  running  S.  W.  Wly. 
to  corner  tree  of  Mr.  Norsworthyes 
miles  end.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Thomas 
Parker,  John  Mason,  Sarah  his  wife, 
Joane,  Elizabeth,  Thomas,  Francis,  chil- 
dren; Mary  Daulding. 

CAPT.  RICHARD  BOND,  950  acs. 
Chas.  City  Co.,  10  Jan.  1650,  p.  289. 
Lyeing  neare  the  head  of  Wards  Cr., 
along  land  of  Edward  Cawly.  Trans. 
of  19  pers:  Mary  Alice,  Lewis  Wil- 
liams, Ann  Sanders,  Ann  Green,  Henry 
Cole,  William  Ricketts,  James  Barnes, 
Arnoll  Mouse,  Antho.  Little,  Lach. 
Little,  John  Right,  Tho.  Richards,  Mary 
Jefferyes,  Wm.  Butler,  John  Feild,  Ann 
Rennolds,  Henry  Offeild,  Richard  Han- 
cock, John  Steevens. 

MR.  THOMAS  MANNING  (Man- 
ninge),  150  acs.  Warwick  Co.,  1  Apr. 
1651,  p.  289.  Lyeing  near  Waters  Cr., 
bounded  S.  E.  along  the  river,  to  land 
of  Mr.  Thomas  Davis,  etc.  to  along 
land  of  Thomas  Glascock.  Said  land 
granted  unto  Mr.  William  Whitby  by 
order  of  the  Govr.  &  Councill  11  Apr. 
1649  &  due  unto  him  for  trans,  of  3 
pers:  (&  by  sd.  Whiteby  assigned  unto 
sd.  Manning.)  Sarah  Powell,  Tho. 
Browne,   Richard  Dibbins. 

THOMAS  ORLEY,  100  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  1  Apr.  1651,  p.  300. 
Abutting  N.  E.  upon  Potomeck  Riv., 
and  S.  E.  upon  land  of  William  Med- 
calfe.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  John  Hawkers, 
Henry  Wickers. 

ROBERT  NEWMAN,  814  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  1  Apr.  1651,  p. 
300.  Abutting  Nly.  upon  Potomeck 
Riv.,  Ely.  upon  a  cr.  dividing  this  from 
land  of  Hugh  Finch  &  Wlv.  upon  a  cr. 
dividing  this  from  land  of  William 
Presly.  Trans,  of  16  pers:  Marke 
Prous,  Giles  Tavernour,  John  Strathen 
(or  Stratlen),  Michaell  Bemon,  Peter 
Speed,  Nicola  Hana,  Hen.  Robinson, 
Wm.  Bolton,  Marg.  Wood,  Edw. 
Bowies,  Jno.  Lawren,  Robt.  Moreley, 
Marg.  Robinson,  Hump.  Meares,  Ann 
Meares,  Coningham  Banton. 


210 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


SAME.  550  acs.  in  same  county, 
date  and  page.  Abutting  Ely.  upon  the 
Gleab  Land,  and  Nly.  upon  the  head  of 
Mattapony  Riv.  Trans,  of  11  pers: 
Richard  Pitts,  5  Negroes;  John  Lee, 
Geo.  Rush,  Joane  Cooke,  Xtopr.  Hard, 
(or  Hare),  John  Mare. 

(Note:  Error  in  pagination  by  the 
person  who  transcribed  this  old  volume.) 

JOHN  PERINES  (Perins)  400  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,  3  Apr.  1651,  p.  301.  Upon 
N.  side  of  Charles  Riv.,  abutting  N.  W. 
by  N.  upon  Perins  Cr.  which  divides 
this  and  the  land  of  Ashwell  Battin, 
adj.  N.  E.  &  E.  upon  land  of  Thomas 
Bell.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Capt.  Rob. 
Felgate,  his  son  Erasmus,  his  wife 
Sibbella,  3  Negroes.  Assigned  him  by 
Abraham  Moone,  assignee  of  Capt. 
Nicolas  Marteaw,  whoe  marryed  the 
Exix.  of  Capt.  Robt.  Felgate.  (Note: 
The  3  names  mentioned  are  in 
brackets,  outside  of  which  is  the  word 
"twice.") 

RICHARD  WOOTON,  300  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  1  Apr.  1651,  p. 
301.  Sly.  upon  an  Island  of  firme  land 
in  a  marsh  towards  the  head  of  the 
upper  river.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Oliver 
Vanche,  Kath.  Vanche  (or  Vauche), 
Peter  Vankes  (or  Vaukes),  Will. 
Whitselwhite,  John  Turner,  John  Wase. 

CHRISTOPHER  BOYCE,  1,250  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  1  Apr.  1651,  p. 
301.  Abutting  Nly.  upon  Chotank  Cr., 
&  N.  W.  upon  Potomeck  Riv.  Due  by 
virtue  of  the  rights  of  a  patent  formerly 
granted  him  which  land  was  since  seated 
and  granted  to  the  Indyans. 

PALMER  HINTON,  300  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  25  Mar.  1651,  p.  301. 
Upon  upper  Mattchotiq  Riv.,  &  Ely.  up- 
on land  of  Peter  Phipound  (?).  Due  by 
order  of  the  Govr.  &c.  29  Oct.  1650  & 
alsoe  for  trans,  of  6  pers:  Palmer 
Hinton,  Thomas  Hinton,  Ann  Chadwell, 
Mary  Smith. 

WILLIAM  HOCCADAY,  Gent., 
1,000  acs.  Northumberland  Co.,  3  Apr. 
1651,    p.    302.     Upon   the   S.    side   of 


Potomeck  Riv.,  abutting  N.  &  N.  E. 
upon  Matchotiq  Cr.  &  opposite  to  land 
of  George  Ludlow,  Esq.  &  E.  S.  E. 
towards  land  of  Nicholas  Jernew.  Due 
by  virtue  of  part  of  the  rights  of  a 
former  patent  granted  to  him  for  2,000 
acs.  in  Peganketanke  and  since  granted 
to  the  Indians.  Renewed  in  the  name 
of  Wm.  Hoccaday  14  Mar.  1653. 

THOMAS  BELL,  200  acs.  York  Co., 
3  Apr.  1651,  p.  302.  Upon  the  N.  side 
of  Charles  Riv.,  abutting  E.  upon  land 
of  Joseph  Hayes,  W.  &  N.  W.  upon 
land  of  John  Perin.  Due  by  virtue  of 
the  rights  of  a  patent  of  2,000  acs. 
granted  to  William  Hoccaday  &  since 
granted  to  the  Indians  &  by  said  Hocca- 
day assigned  to  sd.  Bell. 

JOHN  STRATTON,  150  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  27  Mar.  1651,  p.  302.  Lye- 
ing  between  the  E.  &  S.  bayes  which 
belong  to  Stratons  Cr.  Trans,  of  3 
pers:  John  Franklin,  Margarett  Heath, 
Patience  Thomlins. 

WILLIAM  VINCENT,  640  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  3  Apr.  1651,  p. 
303.  Upon  the  N.  side  of  Dividing 
Cr.,  abutting  Ely.  upon  the  Bay,  S.  upon 
sd.  Cr.  &  Wly.  upon  a  small  Cr.  which 
towards  the  head  divideth  itselfe  into 
two  branches  &  devides  this  &  the  land 
of  James  Willis,  and  Nly.  upon  land 
of  John  Waddy.  Trans,  of  13  pers: 
Wm.  Jones,  Jno.  Tresh,  Alexand. 
Smith,  James  Hewitt,  William  Large, 
Wm.  Downinge,  John  Weavor,  James 
Smith. 

GEORGE  COLCLOUGH,  Gent.  500 
acs.  Northumberland  Co.,  3  Apr.  1651, 
p.  303.  Upon  the  S.  side  of  Deviding 
Cr.,  abutting  E.  upon  sd.  Cr.,  S.  S.  W. 
along  the  land  of  Richard  Jones,  Gent., 
W.  upon  the  Mountaynes  &  N.  N.  E. 
upon  the  land  of  Abraham  Moone. 
Trans,  of  10  pers:  James  Davis,  Wil- 
liam Brent,  John  Lacke,  William  Den- 
nis, James  Loen,  John  Curr,  William 
Hunt,  John  Trenor   (or  Trevor.) 

THOMAS  GIBSON,  900  acs.  Yorke 
Co.,  3  Apr.  1651,  p.  304.  About  5  mi. 
up  the  narrowes  of  Yorke  Riv.,  upon 
a  branch  of  a  swamp  called  Queens  Cr. 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


211 


includeing  some  Indian  feilds,  etc.  Due 
by  virtue  of  the  rights  of  a  patent 
granted  to  the  sd.  Gibson  for  600  acs., 
16  Aug.  1647  &  by  him  surrendered 
into  the  office.  300  acs.  for  residue  for 
trans,  of  6  pers.* 

ROBERT  TAYLOR,  500  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  10  Apr.  1651,  p.  304.  Lyeing 
W.  upon  Chipoakes,  beg.  at  Swann  Bay, 
&  N.  towards  the  river  mouth.  Former- 
ly granted  to  Jeremy  Dickinson  by 
patent  dated  6  May  1638  &  granted  to 
sd.  Taylor  by  order  of  the  Govr.  & 
Councill  24  Oct.  1650  in  the  right  of 
his  wife  the  daughter  in  law  of  the  sd. 
Dickinson. 

JOSEPH  HAYES,  Gent,  300  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,  3  Apr.  1651,  p.  304.  Up- 
on the  N.  side  of  Yorke  Riv,  beg.  on 
Wwd.  side  of  Bennets  Cr.  dividing 
this  &  the  land  of  John  Bennet  &  Tho- 
mas Litchman,  running  to  head  of  sd. 
Cr,  thence  W.  S.  W.  to  an  oake  divid- 
ing this  &  the  land  of  Thomas  Bell, 
from  thence  S.  S.  E.  upon  land  of  John 
King.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Henry  Newby, 
Tho.  Allen,  James  Miller,  Sarah  Lee- 
man,  Richard  Goode,  Walter  Olives. 
Note:  Assigned  him  by  Bra.  (Abra.) 
Moone,  assignee  of  Tho.  Bourne. 

DAVID  PHILLIPS,  400  acs.  North- 
umberland Co,  3  Apr.  1651,  p.  305. 
300  acs.  thereof  abutting  upon  the  land 
of  Henry  Brooke,  S.  E.  upon  Fishing 
Cr;  &  100  acs.  upon  the  Ewd.  side  of 
Fishing  Cr.    Trans,  of  8  pers.* 

HUGH  FOUCH  &  JAMES  MAGRE- 
GORY,  800  acs.  Northumberland  Co, 
3  Apr.  1651,  p.  305.  Abutting  E.  along 
another  tract  of  sd.  Fouch  &  Magregory, 
W.  upon  the  highlands  &  a  br.  of 
Chetanck  Riv.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  James 
Morrice,  Wm.  Evans,  John  Marogan, 
Wm.  Jones,  John  Mathew,  William 
Long. 

HENRY  HUST,  350  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co,  3  Apr.  1651,  p.  305. 
Abutting  N.  E.  E.  upon  great  Wickco- 
comico  Riv,  S.  upon  an  Island,  &  upon 
a  cr.  which  divides  this  and  the  land  of 
Thomas   Brickett,    otherwise   called   the 


Devells  Neck,  Nly.  upon  another  cr. 
which  divides  this  &  land  of  Nicholas 
Morris.    Trans,  of  7  pers.* 

JOHN  GAMLIN  &  ISAAC  WEA- 
VOR,  150  acs,  on  the  Wwd.  side  of 
Dennises  Cr.  which  issues  forth  upon 
the  S.  side  of  Wicocomico  and  divides 
this  and  the  land  of  John  Dennis.  3 
Apr.  1651,  p.  306.    Trans,  of  3  pers.* 

Note:  (The  compiler  believes  the  first 
mentioned  name  should  be  HAMLIN, 
as  this  spelling  is  used  in  the  latter  part 
of  the  patent  herein  abstracted,  although 
when  compared  with  the  county  index 
the  name  is  entered  as  first  given  here- 
in.) 

MRS.  ANNA  BERNARD,  1,000  acs. 
Northumberland  Co,  3  Apr.  1651,  p. 
306.  Upon  S.  side  of  Potomeck  Riv, 
beg.  on  the  S.  side  of  a  marsh  & 
small  cr.  upon  the  Ewd.  side  of  the 
Upper  Matchotiq  River,  adj.  land  called 
Thomas  Peabes  (or  Peakes)  land. 
Trans,  of  20  pers:  Mr.  Richard  Ber- 
nard, Mrs.  Anna  Bernard,  Mrs.  Elinor 
Corderoy,  Eliza.  Barnett,  Cordery  Bar- 
nett,  Richard  Barnett,  William  Cordery, 
Edward  Cordery,  Wm.  Ironmonger,  Fra. 
Ironmonger,  Eliza.  Ironmonger,  Eliza. 
Percy  (or  Perry),  Eliza.  Ashton,  John 
Smith,  Thomas  Sheld,  Joseph  Bacon, 
Ann  Whitlock,  John  Fuller,  Leonard 
Lett,  Henry  Fabitt. 

JAMES  BALDRIGE  &  CAPT.  THO- 
MAS BALDRIDGE,  840  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co,  3  Apr.  1651,  p.  307.  Up- 
on S.  side  of  Potomeck  Riv,  beg.  on 
the  Ewd.  side  of  the  mouth  of  Hollys 
Cr,  S.  E.  nigh  with  the  main  river 
course  to  a  white  oake  which  divides 
this  and  the  land  of  Hercules  Bridges, 
extending  to  the  head  of  a  small  branch 
which  divides  this  and  the  land  of  John 
Cooke.  Trans,  of  17  pers:  Tho. 
Baldridge,  James  Baldridge,  Bartho. 
Lewis,  Robt.  Mathew,  Tho.  Langford, 
Lorida  Baldridge,  Mary  Baldridge, 
Edwd.  Ryall,  Robert  Hutson,  Grace 
Boman,  Sarah  Boman,  William  Bald- 
ridge, Wm.  Humpheryes. 

PHILLIP  CHARLES,  450  acs.  James 
City,  7  Feb.  1650,  p.  307.  On  W.  side 
of  Chickahominy  Riv.  upon  Moses  Run 


212 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


next  above  Thomas  Tilsey,  and  bounded 
W.  upon  land  of  Capt.  Marshall.  Trans, 
of  9  pers:  John  Bowles,  Wm.  Berrick, 
Dorothy  Sternes,  Martha  Young,  John 
Chaplin,  Wm.  Butler,  Mary  Smith. 

EDWARD  GRIMES,  150  acs.,  a  neck 
of  land  called  Quiocomack  lyeing  at  the 
head  of  Corytomon  Riv.  in  Rappa- 
hanock,  &  lyeing  S.  E.  upon  sd.  river 
mouth.  23  Mar.  1650,  p.  308.  Trans. 
of  3  pers:  Thomas  Atwell,  his  first 
wife,  Susan  Skery. 

SAME.  80  acs.,  being  a  neck  of  land, 
lyeing  in  Curytomon  Riv.,  S.  E.  from 
Indian  Spring  to  Narrow  Neck  Creekes 
mouth.  23  Mar.  1650,  p.  308. 
Trans,  of  2  pers:  Robert  Ellyott,  Dan. 
Doller. 

THOMAS  BREEMAN,  500  acs.  lye- 
ing on  the  S.  side  of  a  run  which  falls 
into  Crany  Cr.  in  Ware  Riv.  in  Mock- 
jack  Bav.  23  Mar.  1650,  p.  308.  Due 
by  purchase  from  Richard  Kemp,  Esqr., 
dec'd.  &  alsoe  for  trans,  of  10  pers.* 
"The  rights  wch.  belong  to  this  patent 
is  in  the  old  Booke  in  folio  236." 
(This  book  is  not  believed  to  be  ex- 
tant.) 

RICHARD  DYER,  1,050  acs.  about 
5  mi.  up  Pamunkee  Riv.,  23  Mar.  1650, 
p.  309.  Frt>m  the  bounds  of  Mr.  Fran- 
cis Floods  land  upon  Broughtons  Cr., 
extending  along  marked  trees  of  Mr. 
Broach,  etc.  Granted  unto  Thomas 
Broughton  by  patent  dated  18  Apr. 
1648  &  by  him  assigned  to  Arthur 
Price,  who  assigned  to  sd.  Dyer. 

ROBERT  ABRALL,  300  acs.  Yorke 
Co.,  3  Apr.  1651,  p.  309.  Upon  Wwd. 
side  of  Mattapony  Riv.,  S.  W.  upon  a 
branch  issueing  from  sd.  riv.  which 
divides  this  &  land  of  Capt.  John  West, 
Esqr.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Richard  Riser, 
Richd.  Smith,  Thomas  Gordiane,  Wm. 
Fish,  Joane  Everett,  Math.  Cripps. 

ROBERT  ABRALL,  200  acs.  Yorke 
Co.,  3  Apr.  1651,  p.  309.  Upon  S.  side 
of  Charles  Riv.,  N.  W.  &  N.  E.  upon 
the  head  of  a  cr.  dividing  this  &  the 
late  land  of  Mr.  John  Broach.    Trans. 


of  4  pers:  Ann  More,  Eliza.  Hayes, 
Joseph  Woodrow,  Thomas  Minnes. 

SAME.  900  acs.  Yorke  Co.,  3  Apr. 
1651,  p.  310.  Upon  S.  side  of  Chas. 
Riv.,  abutting  N.  &  N.  E.  upon  the 
Mountaynes,  E.  &  S.  E.  upon  land  of 
Mr.  Mannaring  Hamond  &  N.  W.  upon 
the  main  swamp  of  Black  Cr.  Trans, 
of  18  pers:  John  Steevens,  John  John- 
son, Thomas  Drone  (or  Drove),  Wil- 
liam Home,  Eliza.  Richards,  Elizabeth 
Walters,  Robt.  Breight,  Thomas  Weekes, 
Richard  Bell,  James  Williams,  Henry 
Walker,  Joseph  Grigory,  Ann  Steevens, 
Robt.  Adkinson. 

WILLIAM  GINSEY  (GUINSEY), 
300  acs.  Yorke  Co.,   3   Apr.   1651,  p. 

310.  Upon  Swd.  side  of  Mattapony 
Riv.,  which  tract  is  about  10  mi.  up 
the  river.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Wm. 
Guinsey,  Geo.  Talker,  Thomas  Ander- 
son, Ben.  Dudley. 

ROBERT  SORRELL,  800  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  10  Apr.  1651,  p.  310.  Being 
an  island  within  Warrany  Cr.,  bounded 
S.  by  E.  towards  land  of  Edward  Cole, 
N.  towards  Joyners  Neck,  S.  towards 
the  mouth  of  sd.  creek  &  E.  towards 
the  land  of  Mr.  Bennett  Freeman. 
Trans,  of  2  pers.*  "Vid  County  Court 
Booke." 

THOMAS  THORNBROUJH,  700 
acs.  Northumberland  Co.,  25  Mar.  1651, 
p.  311.  Abutting  Sly.  upon  a  branch 
issueing  out  of  Nomeny  Riv.,  Ely.  upon 
a  small  br.  of  sd.  Riv.  towards  the  land 
of  James  Hare.  Trans,  of  14  pers: 
William  Clayton,  Richd.  Knott,  Geo. 
Heigham,  Wm.  Knight,  Danll.  Pred- 
dery,  Daniell  Moore,  Ralph  Mooreton, 
Elizabeth  Brewer,  Jane  Davis,  Barton 
Reigner,  Ailce  Sadler,  Maurice  Baker, 
Peter  Smith,  Mary  Blyth. 

THOMAS  WATTS,  Junr,  200  acs. 
Northumberland   Co.,    1   Apr.    1651,   p. 

311.  Abutting  Sly.  upon  the  land  of 
Thomas  Kedby,  &  Wly.  upon  a  cr. 
issueing  out  of  great  Wicocomico  Riv. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  Susan  Watts,  Eliza. 
Watts,  Margarett  Sproud,  Senr.  (or 
Sprond),   Margarett  Sproud,   Junr. 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


213 


WILLIAM  HAMPTON,  700  acs.  lye- 
ing  on  the  E.  side  of  the  Easternmost 
river  in  Mockjack  Bay,  beg.  on  the  S. 
side  of  a  creeke.  25  Mar.  1651,  p.  311. 
Trans,  of  14  pers:  Thomas  Smith, 
Richard  Cary,  Hugh  Bromly,  Wm.  Bore- 
man,  Jeremy  Edes,  Philad.  Hampton, 
John  Ash,  John  Longford,  Wm.  Yate- 
man,  Wm.  Davis,  Symon  Vaughan, 
Wm.  Boreman,  John  Wattkins,  Ailce 
Walker. 

HENRY  SINGLETON,  320  acs.  on 
the  E.  side  of  the  Eastermost  Riv.  in 
Mockjack  Bay,  beg.  at  Mr.  Hampton's 
land.  No.  date.  Page  312.  Trans,  of 
6  pers:  John  Hilliard,  Marke 
Nethrock,  Thomas  Newman,  Susanna 
his   wife,   Anne  Newman,   Susan  New- 


RICHARD  WALKER,  200  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  6  May  1651,  p. 
312.  Abutting  Nly.  upon  a  br.  of 
Mattapony  Riv.,  Sly.  upon  a  br.  of  sd. 
river  which  divides  this  from  the  land 
of  Jane  Parry,  Widdow.  Trans,  of  4 
pers:  Richard  White,  Mary  White, 
Joseph  White,  John  White. 

WILLIAM  RENNOLDS,  650  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  6  May  1651,  p. 
312.  Abutting  Ely.  upon  Potomeck 
Riv.,  &  Sly.  upon  land  of  Phillip  Sil- 
vester. Trans,  of  13  pers:  Wm.  Ren- 
nolds,  Ann  Rennolds,  Wm.  Jones,  James 
Harry,  Thomas  Williams,  William 
Robert,  Ann  Mason,  Robt.  Harrison, 
Richard  Evans,  Thomas  Steed,  Jone 
Smith,  Ann  Palmer,  Henry  Thucker  (or 
Thacker.) 

CAPT.  JOHN  WEST,  Esqr.,  1550 
acs.  Yorke  Co.,  6  May  1651,  p.  313. 
Lyeing  about  6  mi.  up  Yorke  Riv.  up 
the  fort  (or  fork)  on  the  S.  side  of  the 
river,  bounded  W.  upon  Mattadequain 
Cr.,  E.  S.  E.  upon  black  cr.  &  S.  W. 
upon  the  Mts.  Trans,  of  31  pers: 
Capt.  John  West,  Esqr.,  4  tymes,  Mrs. 
Anne  West,  twice,  John  West,  Junr., 
Cheny,  a  maide  Servant,  Joseph  Gard- 
ner,   Francis    ,    5    Negroes;    Eliza. 

Coope,    Richard    Taylor,    Joane    Royly, 

John  Royly,  Ailce  ,  Edward  , 

Henry     Millett,     Wm.     Parnell,     Jno. 


Haninge  (or  Haninye,)  Law.  Triggs, 
Heebert  Millen,  Xtopr.  Alwine,  "one 
that  dyed  at  Sea,"  Elinor  Adkins 
Francis  Millet. 

RICHARD  COLEMAN,  320  acs.  up- 
on the  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  upon 
the  side  of  a  marsh  near  land  of  Wil- 
liam Nusum,  &  running  parallel  with 
the  river  to  a  cr.  that  divides  this  from 
land  now  in  possession  of  Rice  Jones, 
etc.  6  May  1651,  p.  313.  Trans,  of  7 
pers:  Thomas  Hansworth,  John  Smith, 
William  Thomas,  Thomas  John,  John 
Chapman,  Wm.  Goodman,  Andrew 
Carelesse. 

CAPT.  STEPHEN  GILL,  900  Acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  6  May  1651,  p. 
314.  Upon  the  Nwd.  part  of  Fleets 
Bay,  abutting  N.  N.  E.  upon  Gills  Cr., 
N.  W.  upon  the  head  branch  of  sd.  Cr. 
dividing  this  from  land  of  Lewis  Bur- 
well.  Due  for  trans,  of  9  pers:  John 
Davis,  Jno.  Williams,  Henry  Hackett, 
Davy  Perkins,  Adam  Thornton,  Wm. 
Roberts,  Thomas  Hart,  Grace  Davis, 
James  Hall,  Alex.  Smith,  Tho.  Brooke, 
Richd.  Sewell,  Robert  Chapman,  Edward 
Walden,  Tho.  Graves,  Thomas  Symson, 
Peter  Richardson,  Elyas  Vincent. 

WILLIAM  TAYLOR,  600  acs. 
Northamton  Co.,  21  May  1651,  p.  314. 
Being  a  neck  of  land  scituate  at  Occa- 
haincock  Cr.,  bounded  on  N.  W.  part 
with  a  branch  called  the  Lesser  Otter- 
dams,  &  on  S.  W.  with  a  branch  called 
the  great  Otterdams.  Trans,  of  12  pers: 
Mathew  Stone,  John  Stringer,  Mary 
Feild,  Maugeby  Huges,  John  Pratt, 
Thorn.  Meller,  Richd.  Partigg,  Wm. 
Wilton,  George  Hardest,  Mary  Leeke, 
Robert  Kinver  (or  Skinner),  Edward 
Holt.    Renewed  20  Oct.  1661. 

COLL.  RICHARD  LEE,  Esqr.,  Secre- 
tary of  State,  550  acs.  on  N.  side  of 
Yorke  Riv.,  350  acs.  thereof  bounded 
towards  the  head  and  S.  E.  side  of  a  cr. 
which  is  the  Wwd.  bounds  of  another 
tract  of  land  of  sd.  Lee.  200  acs. 
standing  on  the  Wwd.  side  of  a  branch 
of  Bennetts  Cr.  21  May  1651,  p.  314. 
Trans,   of   11    pers.* 


214 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


GEORGE  LUDLOW,  Esqr.,  one  of 
his  Majestie's  Councill  of  State,  1,000 
acs.  in  Rappa.  Riv.  on  the  S.  side,  beg. 
on  the  Swd.  side  of  the  mouth  of  Sandy 
Point  Cr.,  adj.  land  of  Randall  Cam- 
blett  &  James  Arrock.  22  May  1651,  p. 
315.  Trans,  of  20  pers:  John  Baxter, 
Edmond  Stratchy,  Fra.  Higgins,  Tho. 
Sabin,  Tho.  Cody,  Robert  Rundsay, 
Joane  Walbrooke,  Joane  Shagbrough, 
Mary  Dickors,  Wm.  Callender,  Hugh 
Furbush,  (or  Farbush),  &  7  Negroes: 
Robin,  Stephen,  James,  Will,  Mall, 
Susan  &  Joane. 

EDWARD  DIGGS,  Esqr.,  1200  acs. 
in  Hampton  Parish,  Yorke  Co.,  6  May 
1651,  p.  316.  Upon  S.  side  of  Yorke 
Riv.,  beg.  on  a  point  at  the  mouth  & 
Ewd.  side  of  Wests  Cr.,  E.  &  S.  to 
point  on  Wwd.  side  of  Millers  Cr.,  S. 
E.  to  Morgans  Cr.  which  divides  this 
&  land  of  Fra.  Morgan,  Gent.,  running 
S.  W.  then  N.  W.  upon  land  of  Wil- 
liam Sawyer  over  a  swamp  leading  to 
the  Indian  Bridge.  Due  by  purchase 
from  Capt.  John  West  &  Ann  his  wife, 
11  Dec.  1650,  &  also  for  trans,  of  24 
pers:  Owen  Maker,  David  Owen,  Wm. 
Hunter,  Fra.  Millett,  Dosabell  Peach, 
Prist  .Green,  Hum.  Sayle,  Tho.  Avery, 
Ro.  Bulliford,  Henry  Barnes,  Chr.  Allen, 
Nico.  Connaway,  John  Clarke,  John 
Scales,  John  Pouncy,  Geo.  Sweetaple, 
Wm.  Thomas,  Wm.  White,  Ben. 
Roberts,  Isaac  Jones,  Harbert  Judd, 
Henry  Adkins,  Eliza.  Pye,  Joane 
Hutton. 

WILLIAM  BARBER  (Barbar),  50 
acs.  in  Hampton  Parish,  abutting  on 
land  of  Thomas  Bourne,  now  in  posses- 
sion of  Richard  Jones,  adj.  2  tracts 
formerly  granted  unto  sd.  Barbar  &  Nly. 
upon  late  in  possession  of  William 
Cainhoe.  6  May  1651,  p.  316.  Trans, 
of  Mary  Huses. 

MR.  ARTHUR  PRISE  (Price),  1700 
acs.  Yorke  Co.,  6  May,  1651,  p.  317. 
On  S.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.  &  on  N.  side 
of  Skimeno  Cr.  800  acs.  purchased  by 
sd.  Price  from  Mr.  Robert  Booth,  & 
being  joined  together  &  bounded  E.  N. 
E.  upon  the  river,  W.  S.  W.  upon  head 
of  sd.  Cr.  &  S.  by  E.  upon  Kimeno  &. 


N.  W.  upon  the  river  towards  land  of 
John  King.  Trans,  of  34  pers:  John 
Williams,  Richard  Thomas,  William 
Jones,  John  Freame,  Edward  Moore, 
Richard  Mosse,  Wm.  Davis,  Henry 
Arnold,  Wm.  Fryse,  Thomas  Parr, 
Elizabeth  Hughes,  Grace  Parsons,  Tho. 
Holland,  Richard  Kerby.  "One  Thou- 
sand Acres  more  for  his  Patent  for  Land 
in  Payanketank  Called  in  by  Act  the 
rights  being  still  due." 

JOHN  ADLESTON,  500  acs.,  19 
May  1651,  p.  317.  Beg.  at  tree  of 
George  Ludlow,  Esqr.,  on  S.  side  of 
Severne  in  Mockjack  Bay,  running  N.  E. 
to  land  of  Francis  Ceely.  Trans,  of  10 
pers:  William  Scott,  Tho.  Ridley,  Ed. 
Emerson,  Thomas  Cheverell  (or  Chen- 
erell),  Patt.  Omallin,  Edw.  Thomas, 
Richard  Rilly  (or  Riley),  Richard  Kirke, 
Richard  Smith,  John  Cooke. 

JOHN  INGRAM  &  RICHARD 
FLINT,  406  acs.  Northumberland  Co., 
15  Apr.  1651,  p.  317.  Abutting  Sly. 
&  Wly.  upon  the  Deviding  Cr.  upon 
land  of  Wm.  Vincent  &  Nly.  upon  land 
of  John  Waddy.    Trans,  of  8  pers.* 

JOHN  HULL,  500  acs.  Northumber- 
land Co.,  5  June  1651,  p.  318.  Upon 
S.  side  of  the  Deviding  Cr.,  abutting  S. 
upon  land  of  Geo.  Colclough.  Trans,  of 
10  pers:  Francis  Wheeler,  Elinor 
Wheeler,  John  Mocoy,  Fra.  Hall,  Robt. 
Timkins,  John  Martin,  John  Shresser, 
(or  Shreffer),  Wm.  Surtue,  Tho. 
Machin,  John  Turke. 

FRANCIS  FLOOD,  300  acs.  in 
Yorke  Riv.  on  the  S.  side,  about  7  mi. 
up  the  Narrowes,  running  along  land 
of  Mr.  Thomas  Vaus,  Mr.  Lewis  Bur- 
well  &  Mr.  Thomas  Broughton.  Form- 
erly granted  sd.  Flood  19  Apr  1648  & 
for  trans,  of  6  pers.*  1  Apr.  1651,  p. 
318. 

GEORGE  EATON,  360  acs.,  being  a 
neck  of  land  between  two  creeks,  lyeing 
on  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  at 
Eastermost  Cr.  dividing  this  from  land 
of  David  Fox.  18  June  1651,  p.  318. 
Trans,     of     7     pers:    Robert     Spencer, 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


215 


Henry  Hayler,  Richard  Jenings,  Eliza. 
Staples,  Kath.  Piller,  Fra.  Bishell,  Geo. 
Eaton. 

SAME.  304  acs.  upon  S.  side  of 
Rappa.  River,  beg.  at  a  swamp  dividing 
this  from  land  of  John  Catlet  &  Ralph 
Rouzey,  &  E.  S.  E.  to  land  of  George 
Avery.  18  June  1651,  p.  319.  Trans, 
of  6  pers:  John  Eaton,  James  Riddle, 
Robt.  Burrell,  John  Fookes,  Peter 
Wood,  Cor.  Goverson,  Note:  "Wm. 
Harmans,  Mary  O  Aver"  "Land  due 
for." 

ROWLAND  BURNHAM,  Gent., 
850  acs.  lying  on  S.  side  Rappa.  Riv., 
24  June  1651,  p.  319.  500  acs.  part 
thereof  bounded  S.  upon  land  of  Coll. 
Wormeley,  N.  upon  Abraham  English, 
&  E.  upon  the  river;  350  acs.  bounded 
N.  N.  W.  upon  Worster  Cr.,  &  S.  S.  E. 
upon  Coll.  Ralph  Wormeley.  500  acs. 
formerly  granted  him  by  patent  16 
Nov.  1649  &  due  for  trans,  of  10  pers., 
&  350  acs.  for  trans,  of  7  pers.* 
(Negroes.) 

JAMES  ROE  &  PETER  RICHESON, 
1500  acs.  Gloster  Co.,  21  May  1651,  p. 
320.  Upon  N.  side  of  Yorke  Riv., 
bounded  along  another  devdt.  of  Capt. 
Stephen  Gill  lyeing  bet.  Rosewell  Cr. 
S.  E.  and  by  S.  till  it  come  to  the  land 
of  Mr.  Lewis  Burwell.  1150  acs.  by 
vertue  of  patent  granted  to  Stephen  Gill 
30  Apr.  1649,  by  him  assigned  unto  sd. 
Roe,  and  the  moiety  thereof  by  Roe  as- 
signed to  sd.  Richeson;  &  350  acs.  the 
residue  for  trans,  of  7  pers.* 

ROBERT  HOLT,  1560  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  20  Jan.  1650,  p.  320.  Lying 
upon  the  head  of  Checkros  Cr.  on  the 
E.  side  of  Chicohamy  Riv.,  near  land  of 
Sir  William  Berkeley,  N.  towards  land 
of  Edmond  Sanderson  &  W.  upon  land 
belonging  to  the  estate  of  Mr.  William 
Felgate  of  London,  Merchant,  dec'd. 
700  acs.  due  by  former  patent  to  him 
dated  3  July  1640,  &  560  acs.  being 
granted  unto  Richard  Bell,  10  Apr. 
1642  &  by  John  Waddington  whoe  pur- 
chased it  of  John  Allison  &  Dorothy 
his  wife,  sold  unto  sd.  Holt,  "reference 
being   had    to    the    said    writeing   from 


Alison  to  Wadilow  and  from  Waddilow 
to  sd.  Holt."  300  acs.  the  residue  for 
trans,  of  6  pers:  Ailce  Holt,  Wm. 
Smith,    Joane    Watson,    Thomas    Cobb, 

(or     Cable),     Edward     ,     Charles 

Binion. 

MR.  ROBERT  HOLT,  470  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  20  Jan.  1651,  p.  321.  Lyeing 
betwixt  the  two  westermost  branches  of 
Jones  Cr.  on  the  E.  side  of  Chicohominy 
Riv.,  beg.  at  the  devision  of  sd.  branches, 
up  the  mayne  branch  N.  E.  by  E,  along 
Ricahoc  path.  Trans,  of  10  pers: 
Alexander  Budle,  Richard  Godson,  Wm. 
Allen,  John  Neane  (or  Weave),  John 
Burgis,  John  Hambleton  (or  Hample- 
ton),  Daniel  Clarke,  Geo.  Woolaston, 
Gabriell  Terry,  Anne  Danne,  Hugh 
Michalla,  Richard  Smith,  Hen.  Barr- 
ier, Rob.  Rowlinson.  "Land  due  for 
four." 

JAMES  DAVIS,  250  acs.  Northamp- 
ton Co.,  21  May  1651,  p.  321.  At 
Occahanock  Cr.,  abutting  on  the  land 
of  William  Taylor,  bounded  on  the 
Southern  part  with  a  branch  parting 
this  from  land  of  sd.  Taylor,  on  the 
N.  W.  by  another  branch  parting  this 
from  land  of  Richard  Smith.  Trans,  of 
5  pers:  Peirce  Neale,  Richd.  White, 
Ben.  Home  (or  Home),  Wm.  Harvis 
(or  Hawis),  Mary  Davis. 

EDWARD  BOSSE  (or  Besse),  189 
acs.  running  E.  from  the  Creeke  into 
the  woods  along  by  Phillip  Chesly,  to  a 
creek  known  by  the  Indian  name 
Chipeaks  neare  Mr.  Felgates  land  on 
the  S.  side  of  Chickahominy  Riv.  7 
Apr.  1651,  p.  321.  Trans,  of  4 
pers.* 

WILLIAM  NEWMAN  &  JOHN 
MEEKES,  1,000  acs.  Northumberland 
Co.,  6  May  1651,  p.  322.  Upon  the 
Ewd.  side  of  Yeococomico  Riv.,  oppo- 
site to  the  mouth  of  a  swamp  at  the 
head  of  the  sd.  river.  Trans,  of  20 
pers.* 

EDWARD  GRIMES  (Grymes),  240 
acs.,  21  May  1651,  p.  322.  On  the  N. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  abutting  N.  upon 
land  of  David  Fox,  E.  upon  another 
tract    of   sd.    Grymes,    &    S.    &    S.    W. 


216 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


upon  a  Cr.  which  divides  this  from 
land  of  Thomas  Harwood.  Trans,  of 
5  pers.* 

MR.  ANTHO.  STEEVENS,  500  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  26  Mar.  1651,  p. 

322.  Lyeing  on  the  N.  side  of  Rappa. 
Riv.  upon  Deep  Cr.,  running  down  a 
branch  that  parts  this  &  land  of  John 
Place.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Tho.  Taylor, 
Wm.  Todd,  Stephen  Read,  Tho.  Har- 
bert,  Fra.  Holland,  Richard  Pagget, 
Eliza.  Cooes,  John  Barnes,  Mich.  Dun- 
ington,  William  Brown. 

MR.  JOHN  BISHOP,  300  acs,  lye- 
ing upon  the  S.  side  of  Upper  Chipoaks 
Cr.,  commonly  called  by  the  name  of 
Swan  Bay.  Due  sd.  Bishopp  for  trans, 
of  6  pers:  John  Bishopp,  Eliza.  Bis- 
hopp, Mary  Bishop,  1  Negro  wench, 
Ann  Ingleton,  Jno.  Bishop,  Junr.  9 
Apr.  1651,  p.  323. 

JAMES  WARD,  150  acs.  Charles 
City  Co,  7  June  1651,  p.  323.  Lyeing 
up  Powells  Cr.  upon  reedy  swamp,  is- 
sueing  out  of  sd.  Cr,  bounded  S.  &  W. 
upon  land  of  Mr.  David  Peobles.  Trans, 
of  3  pers:  Ann  Ward,  James  Wallis, 
John  Cheetwood. 

ROBERT  VAUS  (or  Vans),  Gent, 
150  acs.  Yorke  Co,   10  July   1651,   p. 

323.  Upon  S.  side  of  Queens  Cr,  adj. 
another  tract  of  sd.  Vaus,  along  the 
land  of  Capt.  Taylor,  S.  &  by  W.  lead- 
ing along  the  Ewd.  side  of  the  Labor 
in  Vain  Spring  upon  the  land  of  Rich- 
ard Jones,  thence  W.  &  by  N.  to  the 
Maiden  Swamp.  Trans,  of  3  pers: 
Mary  Chubb,  Ann  Chamby  (or  Cham- 
bly),  William  North. 

ASHWELL  BATTIN,  1,000  acs. 
Yorke  Co,  3  Apr.  1651,  p.  324.  Upon 
N.  side  of  Yorke  Riv,  extending  alongst 
Perints  Cr.  dividing  this  &  land  of  John 
Perrine.  Trans,  of  20  pers:  Tho.  Wil- 
liams, Mar.  Williams,  Judeth  Green- 
wood, Law.  Long,  Gilbert  Fabin,  Richd. 
Woodford,  Fayth  Webb,  Jno.  Owme 
(?),  Tho.  Dane,  George  Lock,  Geo. 
Chiles,  Edward  Cocks,  Edwd.  Hancock, 
Wm.  Winifield,  Richd.  Trayillis,  James 
Clarke,  John  Bell,  John  Bard,  Tho. 
Nurdon,  John  Johnson. 


RICHARD  SMITH,  500  acs.  North- 
ampton Co,  24  July  1651,  p.  324.  At 
Accohanock  Cr,  bounded  on  Easterne 
part  by  the  land  of  James  Davis  &  on 
S.  by  the  mayne  cr.  Trans,  of  10  pers: 
Eliza.  Ball,  Kath.  Wood,  Rebecca  Moore, 
Ann  Thresher,  David  Williams,  Owen 
Williams,  Edwd.  Martin,  Ann  Smith, 
Edwd.  Reeves,  Eliza.  Jordain. 

EDWARD  SYMPSON,  100  acs. 
Gloster  Co,  2  Dec.  1651,  p.  324.  Up- 
on S.  E.  side  of  Mattapony  Riv.  2  mi. 
up  the  river.  Due  sd.  Symson  for  trans, 
of  2  pers:  Margarett  Takes,  Ursula 
Perine. 

EDMOND  WELCH,  400  acs.  lyeing 
on  the  N.  side  of  the  North  Riv.  in 
Mockjack  Bay,  beg.  at  Saies  point  & 
running  up  sd.  river  Wly.  to  mouth  of 
Wrights  Cr,  due  N.  &  E.  to  Curtis' 
branch,  &  down  black  water  Cr.  unto 
sd.  point.  10  Oct.  1651,  p.  325.  Trans, 
of  8  pers:  Fran.  Carr,  1  Negro,  John 
Steward,  Aug.  (or  Ang.)  Hart,  John 
Pate,  Jno.  Salvadge,  Natha.  Parker, 
Char.  Riggan  (or  Kiggan). 

JAMES  ALLEN,  300  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co,  20  June  1651,  p.  325. 
Abutting  Ely.  upon  Wiccocomico  Cr, 
&  Sly.  upon  a  branch  of  sd.  Cr.  Trans. 
of  6  pers:  Andrew  Brownes,  John 
Selly,  James  Allin,  Elizabeth  Manger, 
Walter  Copsas,  Mathew  Hinderson. 

ANTHONY  JOHNSON,  250  acs. 
Northampton  Co,  24  July  1651,  p.  326. 
At  great  Naswattock  Cr,  being  a  neck 
of  land  bounded  on  the  S.  W.  by  the 
maine  Cr.  &  on  S.  E.  &  N.  W.  by  two 
small  branches  issueing  out  of  the  mayne 
Cr.  Trans,  of  5  pers:  Tho.  Bemrose, 
Peter  Bughby,  Antho.  Cripps,  Jno. 
Gesorroro   (?),  Richard  Johnson. 

ROGER  JOHNS,  300  acs.  Northamp- 
ton Co,  24  July  1651,  p.  326.  At 
Occahannock  Cr,  beg.  on  the  Easter- 
most  part  of  Alexander  Addisons  land, 
extending  up  the  mayne  Cr.  &  bounded 
on  the  Northerne  part  therewith.  Trans, 
of  6  pers:  James  Barnaby,  Sara  Barna- 
by,  Edmd.  Mathews,  Eliza.  Harris, 
Richard  Clements,  Giles  Harris. 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


217 


TOBY  NORTON,  500  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  24  July  1651,  p.  326.  At 
Corratock  Cr.,  &  bounded  on  the 
Southern  part  by  sd.  Cr.  &  land  of 
Richard  Bayley.  Trans.  10  pers:  Mathew 
Pett,  Ann  Bashaw,  John  Barbar,  Mary 
Harloe,  John  Harloe,  Ann  his  wife, 
David  Wheatley,  Step.  Harloe,  Edwd. 
Smith,   Fra.   Lyne. 

GEORGE  TRUHETT,  200  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  24  July  1651,  p.  327. 
Neare  the  old  plantation  Cr.,  bounded 
on  the  W.  by  the  mayne  bay,  on  the  S. 
by  land  of  Jonathan  Gills  &  on  the  N. 
by  land  of  Geo.  Smith.  Trans,  of  4 
pers:  Richard  Cainhoe,  Fran.  Jefferys, 
Wm.  Deaton,  Richard  Cox. 

MR.  ABRAHAM  IVESON,  655  acs. 
lyeing  on  the  S.  W.  side  of  the  North 
river  in  Mockjack  Bay,  beg.  at  a  white 
oak  which  divides  this  from  the  land 
of  Thomas  Chapman,  along  the  river 
side  to  marked  trees  dividing  same  from 
land  of  George  Levitt,  dec'd.  250  acs. 
part  thereof  due  by  patent  dated  15 
Aug.  1642  &  surrendered;  200  acs.  by 
assignment  from  Richd.  Bayley  &  Tho- 
mas Wright  &  205  acs.  for  trans,  of 
5  pers.*     10  June  1651,  p.  327. 

JONAS  JACKSON,  300  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  24  July  1651,  p.  328.  At 
Occahannock  Cr.,  bounded  on  the  W. 
by  a  little  branch  parting  this  from  the 
land  of  William  Mereday.  Trans,  of  6 
pers:  Phillip  Jackson,  Morris  Mathews, 
Francis  Stockley,  Katherine  Abbott,  John 
Stockley,  Xpian.  Folly. 

RICHARD  KELLUM,  300  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  24  July  1651,  p.  328. 
At  Occahannock  Cr.,  being  a  neck  of 
land,  bounded  on  the  S.  by  the  mayne 
Cr.,  etc.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Sara  Ainsly, 
Ann  Corbett,  Mary  King,  John  Tomp- 
son,  Henry  Worsley,  Isaac  Emersley. 

GEORGE  TRUHETT  &  HENRY 
EDWARDS,  300  acs.  Northampton  Co., 
24  July  1651,  p.  328.  At  Occahannock 
Cr.,  bounded  on  the  Eastern  part  by  the 
first  branch,  and  on  the  W.  by  the  main 
bay.    Due  for  trans,  of  6  pers:    Henry 


Edwards,  John  Allen,  John  Elinge, 
Mich.  Clarke,  Robert  Powell,  Robt. 
Blacke. 

RICHARD  VAUGHAN,  350  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  24  July  1651,  p.  329. 
At  Occahannock  Cr.,  beg.  at  the  Easter- 
most  part  of  his  former  devdt.  & 
bounded  on  the  W.  part  therewith,  on 
the  S.  by  the  main  creek  &  on  the  E. 
by  the  land  of  John  Waltham.  Trans. 
of  7  pers:  Rowland  Evans,  Edward 
Salmon,  Tho.  Musgrave,  Andrew  Henry, 
William  Abdell,  John  Wand,  David 
Reed. 

THOMAS  CLIFTON,  400  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  24  July  1651,  p.  329- 
At  Nuswattock  Cr.,  abutting  Wly.  upon 
a  branch  of  sd.  creek,  bounded  on  the 
N.  by  a  small  branch  parting  this  from 
land  of  Henry  Pedenden,  and  on  the  S. 
by  another  branch  parting  this  from 
land  of  William  Berriman.  300  acs. 
part  hereof  formerly  granted  to  Francis 
Martin  &  by  him  assigned  to  sd.  Clif- 
ton; &  100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers: 
Francis  Lee,  Virgill  Thuck. 

MR.  TOBY  SMITH,  350  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  7  June  1651,  p.  329.  Lyeing 
on  the  W.  side  of  Chicohamony  River 
neare  unto  Mattahunck,  commonly  called 
Wickwa  bridge,  bounded  N.  E.  by  N. 
upon  land  of  Mr.  Chassey,  S.  E.  upon 
Weeks  Cr.  &  N.  W.  upon  Muttnate  (or 
Muttuate)   run.    Trans,  of  7  pers.* 

MR.  ROWLAND  LAWSON,  1300 
acs.  situated  in  Rappa.  Riv.,  on  the 
Nwd.  side,  beg.  on  the  Ewd.  side  of 
the  mouth  of  Cherry  Point  Cr.,  &  adj. 
land  of  Richard  Jones.  20  June  1651, 
p.  330.  900  acs.  part  formerly  granted 
unto  Epaphrd.  Lawson  &  by  him  relin- 
quished and  the  rights  assigned  unto  his 
brother,  &  the  residue  for  trans,  of  8 
pers:  Tho.  Neegle,  Richard  Ball,  James 
Fixer,  Xpo.  Dennis,  John  Copeland, 
Richard  Jenkinson,  Robert  Smith,  James 
Jacobson. 

PHILLIP  HUNLEY,  613  acs.,  lyeing 
on  the  Ewd.  side  of  the  Eastermost  river 
in  Mockjack  Bay;  beg.  at  a  small  creek 
within   Budden   Cr.    29   June    1651,   p. 


218 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


330.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  James  Steward, 
Thomas  Jones,  Ann  Perry,  Mary  Hall, 
William  Wells,  John  Owen,  Henry 
Edwards,  Tho.  Dyer,  Danll.  Forrest, 
Jno.  Huningford,  Tho.  Guige,  Marg. 
Brookes.  Note:  "These  rights  belongs 
to  Armisteads  patent  following." 

MR.  WILLIAM  ARMESTEAD,  600 
acs.  lyeing  on  the  Ewd.  side  of  the 
Eastermost  river  in  Mockjack  Bay;  beg. 
above  Pudden  Cr.  1  July  1651,  p.  331. 
Trans,  of  12  pers:  Elizabeth  Hunly, 
Eliz.  Bacon,  James  Beck,  Flor.  Jones, 
Charles  Spratt,  Matt.  Lee,  Thorn.  Bacon, 
Thorn.  Clapps,  Jane  Davis,  Mary  Blive 
(or  Blith),  Sil.  Marston,  Ralph  Marton. 
Note:  "These  rights  belonged  to  Phillip 
Hunlys  patent  aforegoing." 

WILLIAM  ARMESTEAD,  1213  acs. 
at  the  head  of  the  Eastermost  river  in 
Mockjack  Bay.  1  July  1651,  p.  331. 
Trans,  of  24  pers:  Elizabeth  Price,  John 
Crists,  John  Lanclott,  Richard  Gold, 
Robert  Hunly,  Wm.  Frasey,  Barbara 
Frasey,  Edward  Morgan,  Theo.  Frasey, 
John  Frasey,  Jose.  Brewster,  William 
Smith,  Mary  Rekey,  Kath.  Ayres,  John 
Paptast,  James  Kittenue,  Roger  Paynter, 
Katherine  Teye,  Thomas  Hudson,  Wil- 
liam Taylor. 

JAMES  FOSTER,  250  acs.  Nanse- 
mond  Co.,  18  July  1651,  p.  332.  On 
the  Swd.  side  of  a  branch  of  the  Wwd. 
branch  of  Nansemond  Riv.,  called  the 
Indian  Cr.,  beg.  by  the  branch  side  & 
running  S.  by  W.  by  the  land  of  John 
Layden,  &  S.  S.  E.  by  the  land  of  Tho- 
mas Babb.  Trans,  of  5  pers:  James 
Bee,  John  Pee,  Anna  Thorne,  Tho. 
Snowe,  John  Taylor. 

AUDERY  (or  Andery),  BUNNEY, 
700  acs.  Nansemond  Co.,  18  July  1651, 
p.  332.  Lyeing  at  the  head  of  Indian 
Cr.,  beg.  at  a  poynt  by  the  branch  side, 
running  S.  by  W.  &  adj.  land  of 
Samuell  Firment.  Trans,  of  14  pers: 
Jane  Rice,  James  Kirtam,  John  Bishoop, 
Jane  Wearott,  Ringer  English,  Mathew 
Costons,  Peter  Rice,  James  Dicke,  Mary 
Lisman,  Seth  Symson,  Peter  Vicaris, 
Eliz.  Sumner,  Elinor  Robinson,  Edward 
Glowers  (or  Glovers)  (John  Collis, 
and  Tho.  Glover,  Land  due  for.) 


RICHARD  TURNEY,  2,109  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  8  July  1651,  p. 
333.  Abutting  Sly.  upon  Potomeck 
Riv.,  Ely.  upon  a  great  marsh,  Wly.  up- 
on a  bay,  &  Nly.  upon  a  creek  issueing 
out  of  sd.  bay.  This  sd.  tract  of  land 
being  comonly  called  or  known  by  the 
name  of  the  Doggs  Island.  Trans,  of 
42  pers:  Percy  Hamor,  Tho.  Pluckett, 
Tho.  Phillips,  Tho.  Griffeth,  John 
Blitto,  Samll.  Welding,  Thomas  Jones, 
John  Quesenbury,  Elizabeth  Wooton, 
Syon  the  Turke,  Manuell  the  Negro, 
Joane  the  Negro.  (Note:  No  other 
names  appear  under  this  record.) 

JOHN  ROOKWOOD,  Gent.,  708 
acs.  Northumberland  Co.,  20  Aug.  1651, 
p.  333.  Abutting  N.  E.  upon  Potomeck 
Riv.,  N.  W.  upon  land  of  Col.  Giles 
Brent,  S.  E.  upon  Potomeck  Cr.  &  S. 
W.  upon  a  branch  issueing  out  of  sd. 
creek.  Trans,  of  14  pers:  Daniell 
Gardner,  Barbara  Hayles,  Morris  Owen, 
Xtopr.  Gouch,  William  Milton,  Jno. 
Fredricke,  William  Williams,  Dorothy 
Lewis,  Henrry  Biggs,  Edwd.  Huntless, 
Grace  Browne,  John  Raven,  Richard  a 

Welchman,  Joane .  Marginal  Note: 

"Jno.  Rookwood  being  dead  the  Land 
is  granted  by  Order  of  Court  to  Lt. 
Collo.  Giles  Brent  and  the  rights  are 
due  to  him  as  Administr." 

LIEUT.  COL.  GILES  BRENT,  768 
acs.  Northumberland  Co.,  20  Aug.  1651, 
p.  333.  Abutting  N.  E.  upon  Potomeck 
Riv.,  S.  W.  upon  a  branch  of  Potomeck 
Cr.,  &  Nly.  upon  Ocquiah  river.  Trans. 
of  15  pers:  Dorothy  Bottomly,  Ellinor 
Colt,  Marga.  Carkawdy,  Cor.  an  Ish- 
man,  Kath.  his  wife,  John  Hutchinson, 
Wm.  Cooper,  1  Negrowoman,  Mr.  John 
Underhill,  Henry  Jones,  Giles  Wright, 

Joseph  Randall,  Staynes  ,  Clement 

Stell,  Sanders  Udday. 

MR.  HENRY  LEE,  126  acs.  York 
Co.,  12  Sept.  1651,  p.  334.  Opposite 
to  the  late  land  of  Mr.  William  Pryon 
(Pryor)  deceased;  beg.  on  the  Swd. 
side  of  the  horse  path.  Trans,  of  3 
pers.* 

THOMAS  BRIDGE,  100  acs.  Lower 
Norf.  Co.,  12  Aug.  1651,  p.  334.    Lye- 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


219 


ing  on  Nwd.  side  of  the  mouth  of 
Daniell  Tanners  Cr.  Trans,  of  2  pers: 
Mathew  Phillips,  Ann  Phillips. 

HENRY  HACKERY,  300  acs.  1 
Sept.  1651,  p.  335.  Upon  the  Wwd. 
side  of  Corotomon  Riv.,  which  issueth 
forth  upon  the  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
abutting  S.  S.  W.  upon  land  of  David 
Fox  &  W.  upon  Moratico  path.  Trans. 
6  pers:  Samuell  Churchwell,  William 
Smith,  Xtopher  Byrd,  Francis  Compton, 
Edward  Beddins,  Richard  Quick. 

WILLIAM  GAPEING,  250  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  6  Dec.  1651,  p.  335. 
Lyeing  on  the  S.  side  of  Burcher 
Swamp  on  S.  side  of  Upper  Chipokes 
Cr.,  along  William  Symonds  land. 
Trans,  of  5  pers.*  Note:  "Certificate 
in  County  Court  book." 

WILLIAM  BETTS,  100  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  12  Sept.  1651,  p.  335. 
Beg.  on  Ewd.  side  of  a  branch  of  a 
creek  that  issueth  out  of  great  Wicoco- 
mico  river,  sd.  creek  dividing  this  and 
a  parcell  called  by  the  name  of  Capt. 
Clayborns  Land.  Trans,  of  2  servants: 
Will  Betts,  Robert  Castleton. 

RICHARD  GRIGSON,  300  acs.  at 
Mockjack  Bay  on  the  E.  side  of  the 
mouth  of  Pepper  Cr.    13  Sept.  1651,  p. 

336.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Florentine 
Paine,  John  Grinfield,  Rob.  Gilford, 
Fra.  Smith,  Marg.  Hasledine,  Grace 
Lovell. 

SAME.  150  acs.  Same  location,  date 
and  page.  Trans.  3  pers:  Thomas  Todd, 
Joane  Backer,  Richard  Ford. 

THOMAS  SPEAKE,  1,000  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,   16  Sept.  1651,  p. 

337.  Upon  N.  W.  side  of  Nomini  Riv. 
including  Sedar  Island,  bounding  S.  W. 
upon  land  of  Mr.  Lewis  Burwell  &  N. 
W.  upon  land  of  William  Harding. 
600  acs.  due  by  former  patent  &  400 
acs.  for  trans,  of  8  pers.* 

SAME.  Same  county,  date  and  page. 
900  acs.,  lyeing  upon  N.  W.  side  of 
a  creek  which  divides  this  and  land  of 
Mr.  Walter  Broadhurst,  abutting  N.  W. 
upon  a  creek  &  swamp  upon  the  land 


of  Mr.  John  Followes  &  N.  E.  upon 
Con  woman  Bay.  400  acs.  due  by  virtue 
of  the  rights  of  a  former  patent  &  500 
acs.  for  trans,  of  10  pers.* 

THOMAS  YOWELL,  300  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  16  Sept.  1651,  p. 
338.  On  the  S.  side  of  Potomeck  Riv., 
abutting  Wly.  upon  Nomeny  Bay,  & 
Nly.  upon  a  creek  which  divides  this 
and  the  land  of  John  Armsby.  Due  for 
trans,  of  6  pers.* 

BARTHO.  HOSKINS,  1350  acs.  on 
the  Swd.  side  of  Rappa.  River.  12  Aug. 
1651,  p.  338.  Due  by  vertue  of  the 
rights  of  a  former  patent  for  trans,  of 
27  pers.* 

COL.  RICHARD  LEE,  Esqr.,  500 
acres,  Glocester  Co.,  18  Oct.  1651,  p. 
338.  Upon  the  head  branches  of  Poro- 
potank  Swamp  &  upon  the  S.  &  N.  side 
of  Mattapony  Path,  bounded  E.  S.  E. 
by  a  swamp  and  valley  called  the  Spring 
Valley.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Mathew 
Peacock,  Eliza.  Hurrs  (?),  Roger  Ash- 
by,  Robt.  Kemp,  John  Gray,  John  Smith, 
John  Bright,  William  Mathews,  Edward 
Haward,  John  Charles. 

THOMAS  HALES  &  THOMAS 
SHEPPARD,  300  acs.  in  Northumber- 
land Co.  16  Sept.  1651,  p.  339.  Upon 
the  S.  side  of  Potomeck  Riv.  about  1^4 
mi.  from  the  Ewd.  side  Cappitts  Cr., 
beg.  on  the  S.  E.  side  of  a  pond,  ex- 
tending along  Potomeck  maine  River 
course,  S.  E.  to  another  pond  &  S.  W. 
neare  Hering  Cr.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
John  Haies,  William  James,  John  El- 
cock,  Fra.  Barnes,  Henry  Grey,  Tho. 
Morecock. 

MR.  ROWLAND  BURNHAM,  1400 
acs.  lyeing  on  the  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
about  20  miles  up  the  same,  bounded 
with  Sunderland  Cr.  on  the  S.  E.  & 
S.  W.  &  W.  upon  another  devdt.  of  sd. 
Burnham's.  9  Jan.  1651,  p.  339.  Trans, 
of  28  pers:  Rich.  Wright,  Owen  Davis, 
Timo.  Dover,  Step.  Webb,  Jno.  Ander- 
ton,  Nicho.  Lurks  (?),  Mr.  Rowld. 
Burnham,  Mrs.  Alice  Burnham,  Joan 
Welch,  Jno.  Welch,  Sus.  Burnham, 
Enoch  Downing,   Dinah  Perkins,  Wm. 


220 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Hughs,  Hen.  Jones,  Jno.  Huchins; 
Kate,  Mary,  Tom,  Negros;  Anne  Quim- 
bee,  Ja.  Land,  Giles  Mabor,  Sa.  Stoppee, 
Rt.  Luellin,  Anne  Bore,  Wm.  Bernard, 
Ja.  Harding  (or  Farding),  Jno.  Davis, 
Henry  Gestee. 

COL.  GUY  MOLSWORTH,  750  acs., 
20  Oct.  1651,  p.  340.  350  acs.  being 
part  of'  a  patent  of  650  acs.  granted 
unto  David  Jones  ,20  Nov.  1646,  beg. 
at  David  Jones  his  creek  and  from 
thence  upwards;  and  400  acs.  lyeing  at 
the  head  of  the  former  devdt.,  running 
along  the  same  from  the  land  formerly 
Mr.  John  Bishopps.  The  first  mentioned 
350  acs.  being  purchased  of  David 
Jones  by  Roger  Lucas  &  of  sd.  Lucas 
together  with  the  residue  by  sd.  Moles- 
worth,  it  being  due  sd.  Lucas  for  trans, 
of  8  pers:  Roger  Lucas,  Jone  Lucas, 
William  North,  Isaac  Hobbs,  James 
Arenden,  Edward  Salter,  Marg.  Cane, 
Elinor  Thorowgd.  (Thorowgood.) 

RICHARD    HANSFORD,    22    Dec. 

1651,  p.  340.  In  Chickyack,  Charles 
River  Co.  Abutting  upon  a  branch  of 
Capt.  West's  Cr.  Wly.,  bounded  on  N. 
side  with  the  land  of  the  Widdowe 
Downe,  &  on  the  S.  side  with  the  land 
of  Thomas  Weston.  Containing  in 
breadth  75 Vz  po.  &  extending  S.  200  po. 
Trans,  of  2  pers:  John  Hansford,  Eliza. 
Hansford. 

ROBT.  BRADSHAW,  400  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  18  Oct.  1651,  p. 
341.  Abutting  N.  E.  upon  Mattapony 
Riv.,  &  S.  E.  upon  land  of  John  Ben- 
nett. Trans,  of  8  pers:  Nicolas  Brown, 
his  wife,  Kath.  Browne,  Robt.  Peirce, 
Elizabeth  Sanders,  Ellinor  Mathews, 
Richd.  Steven,  Richd.  Sharpe. 

LANCASTER  LOVETT,  200  acs.  in 
Linhaven  Parish,  Lower  Norf.  Co.,  21 
Oct.  1651,  p.  341.  Beg.  at  a  marsh 
joyneing  upon  his  former  land,  running 
by  Bennett  Cr.,  South  to  corner  tree  of 
Halls  Land,  etc.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
James  Flaharty,  Sara  Thompson,  John 
Kirke,   Garratt  Barry. 

ABRAHAM  MOONE,  &  THOMAS 
GRIFFIN,  1400  acs  .Lancaster  Co.,  16 


Sept.  1651,  p.  341.  Upon  S.  side  of 
Rappa.  Riv.,  opposite  to  late  land  of 
Capt.  Ralph  Wormeley,  deed.,  beg.  on 
the  S.  side  of  a  branch  of  Peanketank  & 
N.  N.  W.  upon  Nymcock  Cr.  Trans,  of 
28  pers:  James  North,  Jacob  Gunter, 
Naul  (or  Paul)  Fringworth,  Samll. 
Hand,  Fra.  Sym.  Tho.  Scape,  Christopr. 
Eley,  Samll.  Mugg,  James  Brock,  Phill. 
Tennian,  Edward  Dawber,  Grigo.  Pewer 
(or  Peaver),  Tho.  Reymor,  Dorcas 
Moore,  Richard  Chandler,  Lodwick  Car- 
mew,  Henry  Cooke,  John  Mary,  Francis 
Death,  Cuthbert  Chumer,  Robt.  Bel- 
mom,  Grace  Sarah,  Marg.  Hunt.  Note: 
"The  Remayner  being  by  assignmt.  from 
William  Hoccaday  of  soe  much  rights 
due  to  him  by  Vertue  of  a  Patent  of 
Land  granted  him  and  regranted  to  the 
King  of  Chickyake." 

THOMAS  KEELING,  700  acs.  in 
Linhaven  Parish,  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  25 
Oct.  1651,  p.  342.  Beg.  on  Oliver  Van 
Hicks  Cr.,  towards  the  head  of  the 
maine  branch  of  Linhaven  river.  Trans, 
of  14  pers:  James  Lincey,  Henry  Bond, 
Robt.  Sorrell,  Fra.  Seere,  Eliza.  Billings, 
Jane  Latham,  Ann  White,  Edward 
Nicholson,  John  Davis,  John  Moby, 
John  Potter,  John  Read,  Bridgett  Hamp- 
son,  Nich.  Bray. 

JOHN  MARTIN  &  LANCASTER 
LOVETT,  600  acs.  in  Linhaven  Parish, 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  21  Oct.  1651,  p.  343. 
Beg.  at  a  Piny  Point  at  the  mouth  of 
the  Eastern  branch  which  is  at  the  head 
of  Bennets  Cr.  Trans,  of  12  pers: 
Thomas  Moore,  Luke  Levereman,  James 
Stuard,  Eliza.  Brooker,  John  Bonering, 
Tho.  Boxford,  Job.  Chandler,  Alex. 
Symcocks,  Danll.  Gordan,  Arch.  Wahop, 
Rose  Spring,  Hum.  Twilly.  Note: 
"These  six  last  was  assigned  by  Mr. 
Job.  Chandler." 

JOHN  THOMAS,  450  acs.  Gloster 
Co.,  6  Nov.  1651,  p.  343.  Upon  W. 
N.  W.  side  of  Poropotank  Cr.,  about 
3  mi.  up  the  same,  along  the  Cr.  side 
opposite  to  land  of  Mr.  Nicho.  Jernew. 
Trans,  of  9  pers:  Edward  Hide,  Kath. 
Thomas,  James  Thomas,  John  Richards, 
George  Locke,  Wm.  Peale,  Abigale 
Longdale,  John  Brocas,  Grace  Mus- 
grove. 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


221 


MAJOR  WILLIAM  BELLEW,  406 
acs.  Henrico  Co.,  1  Oct.  1651,  p.  344. 
On  the  N.  side  of  Appomattock  Riv. 
neare  the  falls,  alongst  Mr.  Ridleys 
land.    Trans,  of  8  pers.* 

CAPT.  GEORGE  READ,  600  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  22  Oct.  1651,  p.  344. 
Upon  the  N.  side  of  Peanketank  Riv., 
beg.  at  the  mouth  of  a  small  creek 
which  divides  this  from  the  land  of 
Perrigrins  Bland,  W.  S.  W.  along  sd. 
river  to  marked  trees  on  the  W.  side  of 
a  small  marsh  dividing  this  &  the  Gleab 
land.  Trans,  of  12  pers:  Capt.  Nico. 
Marleaw,  Mrs.  Jane  Marleaw,  Eliza. 
Mar  haw,  Jane  Bartlett,  George  Brookes, 
Eliza.  Sharplesse  Robt.  Browne,  Robt. 
Ashly,  John  Felton,  Wm.  Gallipin,  John 
Booth,  1  Negro.  Note:  "These  by  as- 
signment from  Capt.  Nico.  Marleaw." 
(The  name  Marleaw  should  undoubtedly 
be  Marteaw.) 

JOHN  KING,  200  acs.  Gloster  Co., 
10  Oct.  1651,  p.  345.  Upon  the  N.  W. 
side  of  Poropotank  Cr.  &  upon  the  N. 
W.  side  &  towards  the  head  of  Bennets 
Cr.,  extending  E.  by  N.  along  a  small 
swamp  leading  along  upon  the  land  of 
Thomas  Litchman  &  John  Bennett. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  Ailce  Kelley,  Welts 
(or  Wells)  Mander,  Francis  Williams, 
James  Town. 

JAMES  THELABALL,  380  acs.  in 
Linhaven  Parish,  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  15 
Oct.  1651,  p.  345.  Adj.  to  a  place 
called  Woolfs  Neck,  beg.  at  Henry 
Hawkins  his  Easterly  Marked  tree,  etc., 
W.  S.  W.  &c.  Trans.  8  pers:  John 
Aris,  Robert  Winter,  Willm.  Armiger, 
Alexander  Masse,  Barah  Pincher,  John 
Glover,  Ann  Neale,  John  Melleger, 
Antho.  Wilkinson,  Alex.  Mause.  Note: 
Two  last  due  for. 

JOHN  SENIOR,  1200  acs.  on  N. 
side  Peanketank  Riv.,  beg.  at  Mattrums 
Cr.,  along  the  Westermost  branch  there- 
of N.  by  E.,  thence  E.  by  S.  towards  the 
Gleab  Land  Cr.  Trans.  24  pers.*  13 
Oct.  1651,  p.  346.  The  rights  being  as- 
signed unto  sd.  Senior  by  George  Hardy 
&  Thomas  Wombwell  &  inserted  under 
a  patent  granted   them   3  July   1648  & 


by  them  relinquished  and  taken  up  by 
new  rights,  their  patent  being  for  1100 
acs.  Ut  Vid  fol.  89.  Test:  R.  Huberd. 
The  following  names  appear  under  this 
record:    Mary  Glass,  John  Taylor. 

GILES  LAWRENCE  &  JOHN  TUR- 
NER, 200  acs.  Nansemond  Co.,  6  Nov. 
1651,  p.  346.  Lyeing  on  the  Wwd.  side 
of  the  maine  head  branch  of  Chuckatuck 
Riv.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Benja.  Hill, 
Oliver  Sharpe,  Giles  Lawrence,  Joane 
Bates. 

CHRISTOPHER  BURROUGHS,  354 
acs.  in  Linhaven  Parish,  Low.  Norf.  Co., 
7  Nov.  1651,  p.  347.  Beg.  on  his  land 
neare  a  marsh,  running  N.  E.  towards 
land  of  Thomas  Davis,  N.  W.  Nly.  to 
land  of  Mary  Googins,  and  W.  Sly.  to 
land  of  Mr.  Thomas  Lambert.  Trans, 
of  7  pers:  John  Hungerton,  Ferd  Fan- 
tres,  Richd.  Castleford,  Henrry  Halsteed, 
Mary  Tyler,  John  Townsend,  Elizabeth 
Chuchett. 

SAME.  150  acs.  7  Nov.  1651,  p. 
347.  Same  parish  &  county.  Bounded 
on  the  N.  with  Adam  Thorogoods  Tim- 
ber Necke,  beg.  near  a  branch  runing 
W.  by  sd.  Thorogoods  land,  thence  S. 
&  E.  Trans.  3  pers:  Thomas  Lowton. 
Other  names  not  given. 

ROWLAND  MORGAN,  100  acs. 
Linhaven  Parish,  (Low.  Norf.  Co.)  in 
the  Dam.  Neck,  8  Nov.  1651,  p.  348. 
Bounded  on  the  Western  side  with  land 
of  Nathaniell  Hayes,  on  S.  side  with 
the  Beaver  Dam,  &  thence  runing  N.  E. 
by  E.  etc.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Henry 
Merritt,  Mary  Roggers. 

THOMAS  WILSFORD,  Gent.,  210 
acs.  lyeing  upon  a  creek  now  called 
Perrys  Cr.,  beg.  thereon  &  runing  N.  E. 
to  the  head  of  the  branch  parting  this 
from  the  land  now  in  possession  of 
Richard  White,  Carpenter.  Due  by  pur- 
chase of  Hugh  Lee,  Overseer  of  the 
Orphts.  of  Jane  Perry,  dec'd.  &  also  for 
trans,  of  5  pers:  John  Brown,  Jacob 
Napleton,  Isaac  Harrison,  Thomas  Rul- 
ford,  Joseph  Calfe.  10  Nov.  1649,  p. 
348. 

WILLIAM  PARRY,  550  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  11  Nov.  1651,  p.  349. 


222 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Abutting  upon  Potomeck  Riv.,  &  Wly. 
upon  land  of  George  Fauster,  Gent. 
Trans,  of  11  pers:  Thomas  Graves, 
Katherine  his  wife,  John  Graves,  Tho- 
mas Edge,  Thomas  Graves,  Junr.,  Henry 
Singleton,  Robert  Phillips,  Ailce  Grin- 
der, John  Peck,  Francis  White,  William 
Onesby  (or  Onesly). 

EDWARD  GREENWOOD,  281  acs. 
James  (City)  Co.,  19  Nov.  1651,  p. 
349.  Lyeing  on  N.  side  of  Upper 
Chipoaks  Cr.  against  Swann  Bay.  Trans, 
of  6  pers:  George  Price,  Mary  his  wife, 
Dorothy  Morgan,  Paule  Bennett,  Jennett 
Forth,  Elizabeth  Calcott. 

RICHARD  WHITEHURST,  700  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  22  Nov.  1651,  p.  350. 
At  the  head  of  the  Indian  Cr.,  beg. 
neare  a  great  swamp,  runing  N.  by  W., 
thence  W.  by  S.  by  Lintons  land  &  cross 
the  Indian  Cr.  by  a  small  branch  thence 
S.  by  E.  towards  the  great  swamp. 
Trans,  of  14  pers:  Arghil  Comoron, 
David  Murrowes,  Thomas  Sanderson, 
William  Castle,  Barth.  Ward,  Mathew 
Mathias,  Ann  Lovell,  John  Bradwell, 
John  Hebden,  Wm.  Burgisse,  Joseph 
Miller,  Richard  Tinley,  Robert  Tinley, 
Debora  Crostlewell. 

DAVID  MURRAY,  300  acs.  in  Lin- 
haven  Parish,  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  22  Nov. 
1651,  p.  350.  On  the  Easterne  branch 
of  Elizabeth  Riv.  at  the  head  of  Wil- 
sons Cr.,  beg.  on  the  edge  of  a  swamp. 
Trans,  of  6  pers.*  Note:  "Vide  Mr. 
Bridges  Certificate  in  August  last  out  of 
which  take  the  rights." 

HENRY  NICHOLLS,  100  acs.  in 
Lynhaven  Parish,  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  22 
Nov.  1651,  p.  351.  On  the  head  of  the 
Mile  of  Goldsmiths  land.  Trans,  of  2 
pers:    Henry  Nicols,  Ann  Harding. 

HENRY  SOANE,  297  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  24  Nov.  1651,  p.  351.  Lyeing 
on  the  E.  side  of  Chicohominy  Riv., 
comonly  known  &  called  Hoggs  Land, 
Tras.  6  pers:  Henry  Soane,  Senr.,  Henry 
Soane,  Junr.,  Judeth  Soane,  Senr.,  Judeth 
Soane,  Junr.,  John  Soane,  Eliza. 
Soane. 

JOSEPH  CROSHAW,  750  acs.  Yorke 
Co.,  10  Dec.  1651,  p.  352.    Upon  the 


S.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.  whereof  there  hath 
been  granted  by  patent  300  acs.,  23 
March  1638;  also  450  acs.  by  another 
patent,  dated  1637,  which  sd.  tract  is 
bounded  as  followeth:  Beg.  at  a  marked 
oake  which  divides  this  and  the  land  of 
James  Harris,  extending  E.  S.  E.  upon 
land  of  Tho.  Pointer,  from  thence  S.  E. 
to  land  of  Mr.  Vans  (or  Vaus),  thence 
E.  Nly.  &  E.  Sly.  upon  land  of  John 
Davis,  thence  to  the  head  of  Salvadge 
Cr.,  N.  E.  upon  Yorke  Riv.  &  N.  W. 
upon  a  Cr.  called  Croshaws  Desire 
dividing  this  land  from  the  Poplar  Neck 
etc.  Trans,  of  15  pers:  Richard  Spen- 
cer, Mary  Fitch,  Richard  Stratton,  John 

Mould,  Alexander  ,  Wm.  Sparkes, 

Jos.  Hetherson,  Wm.  Ebnes  (or  Elves), 
James  Newton,  Wm.  Asby,  John  Rosh, 
Jno.  Shepping,  Fra.  Croxon,  Thomas 
Grande,   William  . 

SAME.  1,000  acs.  Yorke  Co.,  10 
Dec.  1651,  p.  352.  Upon  S.  side  of 
Yorke  Riv.,  comonly  known  by  the  name 
of  the  Poplar  Neck,  abutting  N.  W.  up- 
on the  mouth  of  St.  Andrews  Cr.,  N.  E. 
upon  sd.  Riv.  &  S.  E.  upon  Croshaw 
Desire  Cr.,  dividing  this  from  land  now 
in  possession  of  Richard  Croshaw.,  S. 
W.  along  the  Indian  feild  upon  land  of 
James  Harris  &  W.  by  N.  upon  land  of 
Samuell  Snead.  Trans,  of  20  pers: 
Thomas  Smith,  William  Grinshaw,  Robt. 
Burton,  William  Small,  John  Mouson 
(or  Monson),  Robt.  Pead,  Edwd.  Nor- 
man, James  Bateman,  John  Clare,  Tho- 
mas Cater,  Francis  Newball,  Mary  Letts, 
John  Nurte,  John  Letts,  Abra.  Armston, 
John  Walker,  Isaac  Fletcher,  James 
Williams,  Eliza.  Hendworth. 

ROBERT  CADE,  300  acs.  lyeing  on 
the  W.  side  of  a  branch  which  falleth 
into  Cow  Cr.  into  Ware  River  in  Mock 
jack  Bay.  9  Jan.  1651,  p.  353.  Trans, 
of  6  pers:  Margarett  Griff  eth,  Henry 
Freeman,  Tho.  Freeman,  Samll.  Walton, 
Phillip  Nicholson,  James  Chovell. 

THOMAS  BREMO,  1500  acs.  Gloster 
Co.,  9  Jan.  1651,  p.  353.  In  Mockjack 
Bay,  being  a  neck  of  land  bounded  with 
Crany  Cr.,  continued  with  a  run  & 
swamp  &  on  the  N.  E.  side  with  Ware 
Riv.  Due  by  purchase  from  Richard 
Kemp,  Esqr.,  dec'd.,  as  by  deed  of  sale 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


223 


upon  record  in  the  Secretarys  office  may 
appeare. 

HUMPHRY  TABB,  1,000  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  9  Jan.  1651,  p.  354.  In 
Fleets  Bay  abutting  N.  upon  Haddaways 
Cr.  dividing  this  &  land  of  Abraham 
Moone,  W.  Nly  .along  sd.  Cr.,  S.  upon 
another  Cr.  about  4  mi.  from  land  of 
George  Taylor,  Ely.  down  sd.  Cr.  to 
the  maine  bay.  Trans,  of  20  pers: 
Robert  Frank,  Elizabeth  Woodbridge, 
Giles  Sallett,  John  Patriack,  Glogs 
Bayes,  John  Guy,  Thomas  Parteete,  John 
Fisher,  Thomas  Maw,  Wm.  Angell, 
Richd.  Norton,  Edward  Barnes,  Richd. 
Dobbins,  Abra.  Paternoster  (?),  Kath. 
Siliston,  Richd.  Albett,  Wm.  Benley, 
Henry  Belling,  Andrew  Felton,  Thomas 
Minstrill.  Note:  This  patent  renewed 
22  Mar.  1694. 

CAPT.  THOMAS  DAVIS,  600  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,   26  Jan.   1651,  p. 

354.  Abutting  N.  E.  upon  upper  Matt- 
chotiqs  Riv.,  N.  W.  upon  upper  Mat- 
chotiqs  Town.  Trans,  of  12  pers:  Capt. 
Tho.  Davis,  Susan  Sheeres,  Jacob  Port, 
Fra.  Armes,  Edward  Harris,  Ann  Aker- 
hill,  And.  Graham,  John  Rapwell,  Ann 
Turner,  Walter  Busby,  Richard  Parker, 
Walt.  Belcher,  Jno.  Treveman,  John 
Cooke. 

THOMAS  FOOTE  &  JOHN  BAR- 
HAM,  200  acs.  lyeing  on  the  Swd.  side 
of  Home  Harbor  Cr.    26  Jan.  1651,  p. 

355.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Hump.  Kirby, 
Ailce  his  wife,  James  Kirby.  Note:  "50 
acres  assigned  him  by  Richd.  Hall  out 
of  his  relinquished  patent" 

RICHARD  HULL,  250  acs.  lyeing  on 
the  N.  side  of  Peper  Cr.  in  Mockjack 
Bay,  beg.  at  the  mouth  of  sd.  Cr.  run- 
ning N.  by  E.  Nly.,  E.  N.  Ely.  to  Tho- 
mas Footes  marked  trees.  26  Jan.  1651, 
p.  355.  Due  by  vertue  of  the  rights  of 
a  patent  of  300  acs.  granted  to  him  13 
Aug.  1650  and  surrendered  into  the 
office.  (Note:  This  name  has  been  al- 
tered &  appears  to  have  been  written 
Hall.) 

WINIFRID  MORRISON,  400  acs. 
on  the  Swd.  side  of  Home  Harbor  Cr., 
26   Jan.    1651,    p.    356.    300   acs.   pan 


thereof  due  by  vertue  of  the  rights  of 
a  patent  granted  her,  13  Aug.  1651,  & 
100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Major 
Richard  Morrison,  Ann  White. 

MR.  JOHN  WALKER,  1000  acs. 
lyeing  on  the  Ewd.  side  of  a  runn  fall- 
ing into  Ware  Riv.,  beg.  at  a  marked 
tree  of  Mr.  Mordecay  Cooks.  29  Jan. 
1651,  p.  356.  Due  by  vertue  of  the 
rights  of  a  patent  of  1,000  acs.  granted 
unto  Jno.  Chew,  10  Feb.  1641,  by  him 
assigned  unto  sd.  Walker  &  by  him  sur- 
rendered into  the  office. 

SAME.  150  acs.  lyeing  in  Ware 
River  in  Mockjack  Bay,  beg.  on  the 
Ewd.  side  of  Deep  Cr.  &  running  Wly. 
up  the  creek  to  marked  tree  of  George 
Beenes  (or  Beeues)  land.  29  Jan.  1651, 
p.  357.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Joseph 
Blaiton,  Leonard  Ambrose,  Henry  Clarke. 

RICHARD  BAYLY,  400  acs.  lyeing 
towards  the  head  of  the  North  River  in 
Mockjack  Bay,  beg.  at  a  marked  tree  of 
William  Debnams  land.  29  Jan.  1651, 
p.  357.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Richard 
Richards,  Peter  Baker,  Richard  Newill, 
Hen.  Burnett.  "200  acres  being  granted 
unto  the  said  Bayly  by  patt.  dated  8 
June  1643." 

RICHARD  RIPLEY,  400  acs.,  29  Jan. 
1651,  p.  357.  Beg.  at  the  head  of  a 
branch  in  Winter  Harbor  neare  New 
Point  Comfort  &  running  to  the  bay 
side.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Mr.  John  Wal- 
ker,    twice,     Josias     Lackly,     Katherine 

,    Danll.    Tacker,    John    Singleton, 

Elizabeth  Elderwell,  John  Golding, 
"These  by  assignmt.  from  Mr.  Jno. 
Walker." 

LIEUT.  COL.  ANTHONY  EL- 
LIOTT, 200  acs.  lyeing  at  Ware  point 
in  Mockjack  Bay,  beg.  at  Mr.  Boswells 
&  running  to  marked  tree  of  William 
Dudley,  to  the  river  side,  thence  to 
Ware  point,  includeing  all  the  marshes. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  Barnaby,  Andrew 
Frimer,  Wm.  Morgan,  Henry  Pawlett. 
29  Jan.  1651,  p.  358. 

COL.  WILLIAM  CLAYBORNE, 
Esqr.,  5,000  acs.  lyeing  between  Great 
Wicomico  Riv.  &  Little  Wicomico  Riv., 


224 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


aboute  a  quarter  of  a  mi.  to  the  Wwd. 
of  the  Danceing  place.  Trans.  100 
pers.*    5  Jan.   1651,  p.  358. 

SAMUEL  SALLATE  &  ROBERT 
TROLIVER,  800  acs.  Gloster  Co.,  12 
Feb.  1651,  p.  359.  200  acs.  upon  the 
S.  E.  side  of  Poropotanke  Cr.  &  upon 
the  N.  E.  towards  the  head  of  Attopoto- 
moyes  Cr.  next  &  adj.  upon  land  of 
Oliver  Green.  The  other  600  acs.  upon 
the  S.  W.  side  of  a  branch  or  swamp 
of  the  sd.  Cr.,  upon  the  head  thereof, 
extending  itself  along  the  swamp  which 
divides  this  and  the  land  of  Isaac 
Richardson  (Richeson).  Trans,  of  16 
pers.* 

LIEUT.  COL.  GILES  BRENT,  1,040 
acs.  Northumberland  Co.,  20  Aug.  1651, 
p.  359.  Abutting  Ely.  upon  Potomeck 
Riv.,  Southerly  towards  the  house  of 
the  sd.  Brent.  Trans,  of  21  pers: 
Danll.  Gardner,  Barbara  Hales,  Mories 
Owin,  Oplier  Gouch,  Wm,  Milton,  Jno. 
Frederick,  Wm.  Williams,  Dorothy 
Lewis,  Henry  Biggs,  Edw.  Huntley, 
Grace    Browne,    John    Raven,    Richd.    a 

Welchman,   Joice  ,   Do.   Bottomly, 

Elinor  Colt,  Mary  Cureday,  Con:  an 
irishman,  Kath.  his  wife,  John  Hutchin- 
son. Note:  "This  patent  was  renewed 
on  the  25th  May  1657  and  joyned  to 
another  tract  of  300  acres  Land." 

NICHOLAS  BROOKE,  the  younger, 
Merchant,  500  acs.  Yorke  Co.,  13  Aug. 
1646,  p.  360.  Commonly  called  by  the 
name  of  the  Middle  plantation,  bounded 
S.  W.  upon  the  Pallisadoes,  N.  E.  into 
the  forrest,  S.  W.  upon  land  formerly 
belonging  unto  Thomas  Lucas,  &  N.  W. 
upon  the  great  swamp.  The  said  500 
acs.  being  formerly  granted  unto  Capt. 
Richard  Popely  for  his  first  seating  there 
&  confirmed  by  order  of  Court  6  June 
1639,  &  due  unto  Henry  Brooke, 
Younger,  Merchant,  by  bill  of  sale  un- 
der the  hand  and  seale  of  the  said  Capt. 
Popely  bearing  date  16  Mar.  1643, 
which  deed  remaineth  upon  record  at 
James  City,  &  since  conveyed  by  the  sd. 
Henry  unto  the  sd.  Nicholas  Brooke  by 
Bargain  &  Seale  dated  3  Mar.  1645, 
which  deed  of  sale  remaineth  upon  re- 
cord under  this  patent. 


Wittness  these  presents  that  I  Nicho- 
las Brooke  Junr.  for  a  Valueable  Con- 
sideration to  mee  in  hand  paid  before 
the  date  hereof  of  Mr.  Nicholas  Brooke 
Senr.  my  father  doe  bargaine  sell,  assign 
and  sett  over  the  within  mentioned 
patent  and  the  Land  therein  bounded 
being  called  the  Middle  Plantation  to 
my  said  father  his  heires  or  assignes 
for  ever,  with  Warrantee  against  all 
persons  that  shall  lay  any  Claime  to  the 
premises.  Wittness  my  hand  this  12th 
of  July  1649.  Nicho.  Brooke  Junr. 
Witnessed  by:  Robert  Huberd,  Mathew 
Huberd. 

ALICE  SNEAD,  200  acs.,  19  Mar. 
1643,  p.  361.  Record  incomplete.  Men- 
tions her  husband  Saml.  Snead. 

CAPT.  BRIDGES  FREEMAN,  400 
acs.  lying  at  the  mouth  of  Chikahomony. 
Mar.  1643,  p.  361.    Record  incomplete. 

BENJ.  HARRISON,  500  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  21  Mar.  1643,  p.  362.  In- 
complete. 

THO.  LOVING,  1500  acs.  Incom- 
plete. Page  362.  Mentions  Martins 
hundred,  Bedfords  land,  etc.  Due  for 
trans,  of  30  pers.*  &  by  order  of  Ct. 
dated  5  Oct.  1638. 

EDWARD  TRAVIS,  1,080  acs. 
(James  City  Co.)  upon  Pease  Hill  Cr., 
27  Feb.  1643,  p.  363.  Mentions  land  of 
Mr.  William  Parre  and  Pease  Hill 
Creek.  300  acs.  by  vertue  of  a  patent 
dated   1   April   1639  granted  unto  John 

Robins  &  by  him  (assigned)    unto 

sd.  Travis  &  800  acs.  by  patent  dated 
25  Apr.  1639,  20  acs.  still  due.  In- 
complete. 

CAPT.  LEONARD  YEO,  350  acs. 
Eliz.  City  Co.,  dated  1644,  p.  363.  At 
the  head  of  Southampton  Riv.,  abutting 
on  a  creek  parting  the  same  from  land 

of  Capt.  Thorowgood,  deed,  now 

in  the  occupation  of  Tho.  Oxley.  Part 
of  this  patent  was  formerly  granted  to 
Maurice  Thompson.    Incomplete. 

OBEDIENCE  ROBINS,  Gent.,  500 
acs.  Northampton  Co.,  25  Mar.  1643,  p. 
364.    This  land  is  in  two  parcels:   one 


Patent  Book  No.  2 


225 


tract  containing  292  acs.,  bounded  on 
the  Northern  part  of  the  land  of  Tho- 
mas Powell  and  a  branch  of  Cherri- 
stones  Cr.,  on  the  Eastern  by  the  said 
branch  which  divides  this  from  land  of 
Mr.  Taylor,  on  the  Southern  by  land  of 
Mr.  John  Wilkins,  on  the  Western  by 
a  former  devdt.  of  sd.  Robins.  The 
other  parcel  containing  208  acs.  bounded 
on  the  N.  W.  by  sd.  292  acs.,  on  N. 
by  Mr.  Taylor  &  W.  by  Mr.  Wilkins. 
Due  by  order  of  court  dated  22  Mar. 
1638,  as  also  for  trans,  of  10  pers:  Mr. 
Obedience  Robins,  Mrs.  Grace  Robins, 
Mary  Sayer,  Gregory  Sage  (or  Sayer), 
James  Austice  (?),  Richd.  Jones,  Margt. 
Waters,  Wm.  Brookes,  Jonathan  Voyce, 
Walter  Vinquit. 


365.  At  Maggetty  Bay,  beg.  at  a 
marked  cedar  tree  parting  this  from  the 
devdt.  of  Edmd.  Scarburgh,  thence  run- 
ning Wly.  along  Craduck  Cr.  unto  the 
main  Bay,  bounded  on  the  W.  by  sd. 
bay,  on  the  N.  by  the  now  claimed  land 
of  Peter  Walker  &  finally  on  the  E.  by 
land  of  sd.  Scarburgh  &  a  former  devdt. 
of  sd.  Neale.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Tho. 
Daniel,  Richd.  Miller,  Fra.  Carter, 
Tho.  Perkins,  Edward  Ellis,  Saml. 
Johnson. 

JOHN  SENIOR,  150  acs.  James  City 
Co.,  1  Ja.  1643,  p.  366.  Westermost 
side  of  Smiths  fort  Cr.,  adj.  land  of 
John  Backmastr.  (?)  &  John  Huck. 
Incomplete. 


SAME.  450  acs.  Northampton  Co., 
22  Mar.  1643,  p.  364.  Bounded  by  a 
former  devdt.  of  sd.  Robins  on  the  S. 
Trans,  of  9  pers:  Jno.  Coleman,  Hen. 
Edwards.  Arth.  Whitehead,  Nicho. 
Every,  Jno.  Ellis,  Hen.  Baston,  Step. 
Horse,  Tho.  Chapman,  Jno.  Carter. 


CAPT.  THOMAS  PETTUS,  450  acs., 
1  Jan.  1643,  p.  366.  Due  by  order  of 
court  &  for  trans,  of  10  pers:  John 
Fickling,  Edwd.  Wright,  Tho.  Sidley, 
Peter  Talbott,  Tho.  Pettus,  Junr.,  Geo. 
Codd,  Tobias  Cook,  John  Vaine,  Cath. 
Barker.    Incomplete. 


MR.  EDMOND  SCARBURGH,  1,050 
acs.  Northampton  Co.,  10  Apr.  1694, 
p.  365.  300  acs.  lyeth  on  the  Bay  side 
bounding  this  land  on  the  W.,  DroKee 
land  on  the  North,  the  now  inhabited1 
land  of  sd.  Scarburgh  on  the  S.  &  the 
main  woods  on  the  E.  50  acs.  lying  on 
the  Bay^  bounded  on  the  W.  therewith, 
on  the  E.  by  land  formerly  belonging 
unto  John  Neale  &  on  the  N.  by  a 
former  grant  of  sd.  Scarburgh;  400  acs. 
on  the  Seaboard  side;  250  acs.  on  Sea- 
board side,  part  whereof  is  called  the 
long  point,  the  other  part  bounded  on 
the  S.  by  Craducks  Cr.,  on  the  N.  by 
land  formerly  belonging  unto  John 
Neale;  50  acs.  being  a  sandy  Island 
bounded  on  the  E.  by  Smith  Island 
River  on  the  S.  by  Maggetty  bay  Cr.  & 
on  the  S.  W.  by  another  Cr.  600  acs. 
due  by  patent  dated  3  Aug.  1640  & 
450  acs.  for  trans,  of  9  pers:  John 
Trewet,  Hugh  Stanly,  Richd.  Tengood, 
John  Dobby,  Jos.  Marton,  John 
Crew,  John  Booth,  Tho.  Young,  Geo. 
Bordin. 

JOHN  NEALE,  Gent.,  300  acs. 
Northampton    Co.,    10    Apr.    1643,    p. 


WILLIAM  DA  VIES,  1200  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  27  Mar.  1644,  p.  367.  Lying 
near  the  head  of  Archers  Hope  Cr., 
neare  the  horse  path,  W.  &  down  a 
swamp  parallel  to  Tuttyes  neck,  unto 
marked  trees  dividing  this  from  the  land 
of  Mr.  Richard  Brewster,  unto  a  branch 
near  the  head  of  Ware  Cr.  This  tract 
runneth  E.  upon  Deer  bone  Vally.  Due 
by  purchase  of  Capt.  Francis  Pott, 
brother  &  heire  of  Dr.  John  Pott,  & 
due  sd.  Dr.  Pott  by  act  of  court  dated 

6  1632  &  confirmed  to  sd.  Capt. 

(Francis  Pott) — by  act  of  court,  13  June 
1642.    Incomplete. 

CAPT.  WILLIAM  PIERCE,  Esqr., 
one  of  the  Councellors   of  State,    1170 

acs.,    James    City    Co.,    19    Mar.    

Page  367.  Trans,  of  24  pers.*  "Twen- 
ty four  names  enter'd  but  very  few  to 
be  read.''    Incomplete. 

THOMAS  FAULKNER,  of  Warwick 
Co.,  300  acs.  beyond  Nutmeg  Quarter 
between  the  swamp  and  the  Dam,  com- 
monly known  by  the  name  of  Reedy 
Dam,  lying  Wly.  towards  the  planta- 
tion of  Joseph  Stratton.    Due  by  vertue 


226  Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


of  a  former  patent  dated  5  June  1639.  Alphabet   to  the  same  written  by  Mr. 

Page   368.    12    Feb.    1642.    Incomplete.  Edward  Chilton  formerly  Clerk  to  this 

office,  Vizt: 

ANTHONY  LA-FURREER,  300  acs.  acres       fol. 

Upper  Norf.  Co.,  1  Apr.  1641,  p.  368.  Samuell  Abbott 25  po.  80 

Upon    the    W.    branch    of    Nansamond  Thomas    Cawsey.  .  .  .    100....  20 

Riv.,   some  9  mi.   up  the  branch,   run-  Edward  Douglas.  ...  1100.  ..  .20 

ning  by  &  on  the  side  of  a  parcell  of  Thomas  Home 100.  ..  .    5 

land  of  Mr.  Lawrence  Peters.    Due  by  John  Watkins 200.  ...   5 

assignment   from    Mr.   John   Hill    of   a  John  Yartes 250....    5 

patent  dated  11  Oct.  1640.  Sq  much  ^^  of  tfae  fest  a$  k  ^ 

««Tk/TT7A/rrvD  A\m  "    /-    nsr\\  possible   to   read   is   faithfully  recorded 

MEMORAND:       (p.  369)  £nd  examined  this  22th  day  yof  Septem. 

"There   are   three   Leaves   not   to   be  er           ' 

found   on  which   I   find   entered  by  an  By  me    R  BEVERLEY    C.  Sec.  Off." 


By  the  Governour  and  Capt.  Genii,  of  Virginia. 

To  all  to  whom  these  presents  shall  come  etc  Greeting  in  our  Lord  God 
Everlasting.  Know  yee  that  I  George  Yardley  Knight,  Governor  and  Capt.  Genii, 
of  Virginia  etc.  by  vertue  of  the  great  Charter  of  orders  and  lawes  concluded  on  in 
a  great  and  Genii.  Quarter  Court  by  the  Treasurer  Councill  and  Company  of 
Adventurers  and  planters  for  this  first  Southern  Colony  of  Virginia  (according  to 
the  authority  granted  them  by  his  Majtie.  under  the  great  Seal)  and  by  them  dated 
at  London  the  Sixteenth  of  November  1618  and  directed  to  myself  and  the  Councill 
of  Estate  here  resident,  do  with  the  approbation  and  consent  of  the  same  Councill 
who  are  joyned  in  Condicon  with  mee  Give  and  grant  to  Samuel  Jourdan  of  Charles 
Citty  in  Virga.  Gent,  an  ancient  planter  who  hath  abode  ten  years  Compleat  in  this 
Colony  and  performed  all  services  to  the  Colony  that  might  any  way  concern  him 
etc  and  to  his  heirs  and  assignes  for  ever  for  part  of  his  first  genii,  dividend  to  be 
augmented  &c,  450  acs.  in  his  own  personall  right  etc.,  and  out  of  the  rules  of 
Justice,  equity  and  reason  and  because  the  Company  themselves  have  given  us 
president  in  the  like  kind  in  the  personall  claim  of  Cecily  his  wife  an  ancient 
planter  also  of  nine  years  continuance,  one  hundred  acres  more  and  the  other  250 
acs.  in  recompence  of  his  trans,  out  of  England  at  his  own  charges  of  five  servants, 
namely,  John  Davies,  who  arrived  in  1617  for  whose  passage  the  sd.  Samuel  hath 
paid  to  the  Cape  Mercht.,  Thomas  Matterdy  bound  apprentice  to  sd.  Samuel  by 
indenture  in  England  dated  8  Oct.  1617;  Robert  Marshall  brought  out  of  England 
by  Capt.  Bargrave  in  May  1619,  at  the  costs  of  sd.  Samuel;  Alice  Wad  the  same 
year  in  the  George;  etc.,  &  Thomas  Steed  in  the  Faulcon  in  July  1620;  and  maketh 

choice  in  3  severall  places:  one  house  &  50  acs.  called  ilies  Point  in  Charles 

hundred,  bordering  E.  upon  the  gr.  river,  W.  upon  the  main  land,  S.  upon  John 
Rolfe  &  N.  upon  land  of  Capt.  John  Wardeefe;  2ndly,  1  tenement  containing  12 
acs?  etc.,  encompassed  on  the  W.  by  Martins  Hope,  now  in  tenure  of  Capt.  John 
Martin,  Master  of  the  Ordinance;  &  388  acs.  in  or  near  upon  Sandys  his  hundred, 
towards  land  of  Temperance  Baley,  W.  upon  Capt.  Woodlief  etc.  To  have  &c. 
Yeilding  &  paying  to  the  sd.  Treasurer  &  Company  &c.  Provided  &c.  Given  at 
James  City  10  Dec.  1620  &c.  Signed,  George  Yardley.  Fr.  Pory,  Seer.  This 
patent  certified  to  the  Treasurer.  Lawr.  Hulett.  At  a  Genii.  Ct.  held  at  James 
Citty  Oct.  20,  1690,  Present:  The  Right  Honble.  Francis  Nicholson,  their  Maj.  Lt. 
Govr.  &  Councill.  The  foregoing  patent  admitted  to  record  at  the  request  of  Mr. 
Richard  Bland,  the  patent  being  for  450  acs.  in  Chas.  Citty  Co.  granted  to  Mr. 
Samuel  Jordan  in  1620,  which  is  truely  recorded.  Test:  R.  Beverley,  by  W. 
Sowards,  CI.  Genii.  Ct.    P.  B.  No.  8,  p.  125. 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


By  Richard  Bennet,  Esqr.  &c. 


ROBERT  TOMLIN,  528  acs.  13  Dec. 
1653,  p.  1.  Lying  upon  S.  side  of 
Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  upon  a  Cr.  that  divides 
it  from  an  Island,  extending  S.  S.  W., 
then  W.  N.  W.  Nly.  to  towards  Mat- 
turn  Sarkin  (or  Larkin),  parallel  to  the 
Cr.  &  River  &c.  Trans,  of  11  pers: 
Giles  Webb,  twice,  Geo.  Reignolds 
(Reynolds  ?)  twice,  Wm,  Eles,  Tho. 
Coale,  Eliz.  Whitewell,  Kath.  Rice, 
Ann  Harris,  Wm.  Thompson,  Symon 
Hunt,  22  acs.  due  on  the  last. 

JOHN  COX,  1,150  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  2  Feb.  1653,  p.  1.  Upon  S.  side 
of  Rappa.  Riv.,  on  N.  W.  side  of  Pus- 
cation  Cr.,  100  acs.  being  marsh  land. 
The  other  1,050  acs.  beg.  on  a  point  of 
a  peninsula  commonly  called  Coxes  Is- 
land, lying  at  the  mouth  of  the  aforesd. 
Cr.,  running  by  the  river  side  to  N.  W. 
side  of  Hodskins  Cr.,  running  S.  W.  & 
S.  E.  &c.  to  the  mouth  of  a  branch 
dividing  this  &  the  land  of  William 
Johnson.  1,000  acs.  due  by  former 
patent  of  sd.  Cox,  dated  22  May  1650, 
&  50  acs.  found  to  be  wanting  by  virtue 
of  resurvey  of  sd.  land  &  100  acs.  for 
trans,  of  2  pers:  Judith  Hollaman, 
Eliz.  Newsam. 

ROGER  WALTER,  600  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  31  Dec.  1653,  p.  1.  On 
the  N.  side  of  great  Wiccocomico  Riv., 
at  the  head  of  Thomas  Saffrons  land, 
bounding  Wly.  upon  a  swamp  near  the 
head  of  a  creek  which  runneth  into  sd. 
river,  above  a  point  commonly  called 
Perrots  Point,  over  the  head  of  another 
Cr.  between  the  lands  of  Wm.  Thomas 
&  sd.  Saffron  &c.  Trans,  of  12  pers: 
Nath.  Shepherd,  Robt.  Tracy,  Jon. 
Parris,  Jon.  Foulsham,  Robt.  Paine,  Jon. 
Clerke,  Richd.  Bradford,  Fra.  Gagen, 
Jon.  Alexander,  Edmd.  Cuspe,  Wm. 
Usklye,  Jon.  Sheeles. 


MR.  JOSEPH  CROSHAW,  700  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,  2  Mar.  1653,  p.  1.  Upon 
the  S.  &  N.  side  of  the  old  mill, 
bounded  N.  by  E.  along  land  of  Thomas 
Pankman  to  Ricohock  path,  S.  E.  and 
N.  E.  upon  land  of  Thomas  Price. 
Trans,  of  14  pers.* 

JOHN  WHITE,  100  acs.  lying  on 
the  head  of  the  Upright  Cr.  of  the 
Eastermost  river  in  Mob  jack  Bay,  beg. 
at  marked  white  oake  of  Wm.  Armi- 
stead's  land  &c.  Trans,  of  2  pers.*  25 
Nov.  1653,  p.  1. 

THOMAS  MORRIS,  400  acs.  upon 
the  branch  of  Milford  Haven,  beg.  at  a 
tree  of  Richard  Longs,  running  to  the 
head  of  the  green  branch  &c.  25  Nov. 
1653,  p.  1.    Trans,  of  8  pers.* 

JOAN  CARELESSE,  450  acs.  lying 
at  the  head  of  the  North  Riv.  in  Mob- 
jack  Bay,  beg.  on  the  E.  side  of  the 
Dammes  &  the  N.  side  of  a  run  which 
devides  this  &  the  land  of  Richard 
Tompkins,  etc.  25  Nov.  1653,  p.  2. 
Trans,  of  9  pers.* 

GEORGE  BILLOPS,  750  acs.  lying 
upon  the  branch  of  Milford  Haven,  beg. 
at  a  deviding  point,  &  running  up  a 
Cr.  which  devides  this  from  the  land  of 
John  Lillies,  etc.  25  Nov.  1653,  p.  2, 
Trans,  of  15  pers.* 

SAME.  100  acs.  upon  the  branches 
of  Milford  Haven,  beg.  at  Peach  Point 
&  running  up  a  Cr.  Sly.  to  marked  tree 
of  Richard  Longs  land,  etc.  Same  date 
&  page.    Trans,  of  2  pers.* 

CAPT.  AUGUSTINE  WARNER,  80 
acs.  lying  on  the  S.  side  of  a  run  fall- 
ing into  the  head  of  Severne  in  Mob- 
jack  Bay  &  beg.  at  his  former  devdt., 
etc.  6  Oct.  1653,  p.  2.  Trans,  of  2 
pers:    John  Haward,  Mary  Gragg. 


228 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


JOHN  DEBAR  (DeBarr),  200  acs. 
in  the  Western  branch  of  Elizabeth  Riv. 
on  the  N.  side  of  a  branch,  beg.  at  a 
point  by  a  small  creek  side,  running 
N.  W.  &  joining  to  Thomas  Wrights 
land,  etc.,  and  up  Broad  Cr.  to  the  land 
of  Richard  Starlinge.    6  Nov.   1653,  p. 

2.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Hen.  Clarke,  Fra. 
Peircey,  Ann  Archer,  James  Roe. 

JOHN  EDWARDS,  350  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co.,  19  Oct.  1653,  p.  2.  Upon  the 
N.    side    of   the   Eastermost    side   of    a 

branch    of  (blank)    river,    which 

devides  this  &  the  land  of  Elias  Ed- 
monds. Trans,  of  7  pers:  Wm.  Clarke, 
Morris  Wms.  (Williams),  Natha. 
Wellington,  Fra.  Johnson,  Geo.  Hold- 
inge,  Wm.  Preston,  Jon.  "his  sirname 
not  in  the  Cert." 

WILLIAM  DITTYE,  203  acs.,  Chas. 
City  Co.,  7  Oct.  1653,  p.  2.  Lying  at 
the  head  of  his  own  land  which  he 
bought  of  James  Warrandine,  common- 
ly called  by  the  name  of  High  Peake,  on 
the  S.  side  of  Baylies  Cr.,  running  S. 
by  E.  by  Mr.  Jon.  George,  his  land,  etc. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  Wm.  Ditty,  Jon. 
Ladd,  Law.  Biggens,  Mary  Pratt. 

JOHN  BENNET,  of  Nomany,  Car- 
penter, 150  acs.  Northumberland  Co.,  1 
Aug.  1653,  p.  3.  On  the  E.  side  of 
Nomany  Riv.,  bounding  N.  N.  W.  upon 
sd.  Riv.,  E.  N.  E.  upon  land  of  Rice 
Maddocks,  W.  S.  W.  upon  a  small  Cr. 
dividing  it  from  the  land  of  Goodman 
Tasker,  &c.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Wm. 
Spence,  Eliz.  Bennet. 

ANTHONY  LENTON,  1,025  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,   1   Aug.   1653,  p. 

3.  Bounding  Ely.  upon  land  of  John 
Meeks  &  William  Newman,  Nly.  upon 
Yeocomico  Riv.,  Sly.  upon  Broad  Cr. 
Trans,  of  21  pers:  Roger  Pullin,  Tho. 
Jolly,  Jam.  Jolly,  Jon.  Hudson,  Francis 
Baxter,  Wm.  Howed  (?),  Dor.  Terry, 
Wm.  Lafland,  Francis  Landye. 

JOHN  WOOD,  600  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  1  Aug.  1653,  p.  3.  Beg. 
where  the  land  patented  by  Tho.  Phil- 
lips ends  upon  a  branch  of  Nomany  Riv. 
opposite  to  Mr.  Rossiers  land,  etc. 
Trans,  of  12  pers.* 


NATHANIEL  HICKMAN,  450  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,   1   Aug.   1653,  p. 

3.  Bounding  N.  E.  upon  Matapony  Riv., 
N.  W.  upon  land  of  John  Bennet  & 
S.  E.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Newman,  etc. 
Trans,  of  9  pers:  Natha.  Hickman  & 
his  wife,  Wm.  Smith,  John  Eusworth 
(or  Ensworth),  Fra.  Bittle,  Jane  Crowell. 

RICHARD  WELLS,  500  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  1  Aug.  1653,  p.  3.  On 
the  S.  side  of  Armeslies  Cr.,  bounding 
N.  by  E.  towards  the  head  of  same  & 
W.  by  N.  upon  a  branch  of  the  same. 
300  acs.  thereof  formerly  granted  unto 
Wm.  Loueden  16  Sept.  1651  &  assigned 
unto  sd.  Wells  by  George  Day,  Admr. 
of  sd.  Loueden  (or  Loveden),  8  June 
1653,  &  200  acs.  for  trans,  of  4  pers: 
Jon.  Hughes,  Jon.  Hawkins,  Simon 
Morris,  Ellen  Wilson. 

JOHN  FINCH,  480  acs.  lying  upon 
the  Westermost  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.  up- 
on Muddy  Cr.,  running  along  marked 
trees  of  Tho.  Sparrow,  S.  E.  to  the 
main  swamp,  along  same  to  the  head  of 
a  reedy  branch  that  runs  N.  W.  to  the 
River  &  along  same  N.  N.  E.,  etc.  1 
Oct.    1652,   p.    3.    Trans,   of   10   pers.* 

JOHN  FLOOD,  1  Mar.  1652,  p.  3. 
"A  lease  was  granted  unto  John  Flood 
for  blank  acres  of  land  bounded  vizt: 
Beginning  at  the  round  Meadow  Spring 
East  joining  to  Richard  Egglestones 
South  East  joining  to  that  which  was 
Daniel  Lyles  West  joining  to  that  wch. 
was  John  Floods  North  West  joining 
upon  the  End  of  the  Green  Swamp 
North  joining  out  of  the  woods  towards 
Pohatan  Bridge  North  East." 

WILLIAM  WALKER,  639  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,   19  Oct.   1653,  p. 

4.  Abutting  S.  E.  upon  Yeocomico  Riv. 
&  S.  W.  upon  land  of  Robert  Smith, 
etc.  Trans,  of  13  pers:  Edmd.  Peters, 
Jon.  Stubberd,  Jon.  Haman,  Tho.  Bur- 
badge,  Tho.  Placenett,  Peircey  Hamon, 
Modlin  Burford,  <  Wm.  Wood,  Wm. 
Finch,  Susan  Collins,  Eliz.  Smith,  Geo. 
Court.  Note:  "36  acres  the  overplus 
is  in  Jarnew's  Pat." 

ROBERT  PRIDDY,  377  acs.  York 
Co.,  1  July  1653,  p.  4.    In  the  narrows, 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


229 


running  S.  W.  by  land  of  George  Chap- 
man, S.  E.  by  E.  to  lands  of  Wm.  Cox 
&  land  of  Jon.  Hope,  etc.  Trans,  of 
8  pers.* 

WILLIAM  WYAT,  400  acs.  Gloces- 
ter  Co.,  27  Apr.  1653,  p.  4.  Upon  S.  E. 
side  of  Matapony  Riv.,  about  2  mi. 
above  the  Indian  Ferry,  bounding  W. 
N.  W.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Richard  Barne- 
house,  etc.  Trans  of  8  pers:  Wm. 
Wyat,  Wm.  Stone,  Wm.  Spicer,  Trevor 
Floyd,  James  Kent,  Fran.  Bush,  Step. 
Gardner,  Richard  Hodges. 

RICHARD  HARGROVE,  250  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  11  Mar.  1652,  p.  4. 
150  acs.  lying  on  the  Nwd.  side  of  a 
branch  of  the  Ewd.  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv. 
called  Broad  Cr.  etc.  100  acs.  on  said 
creek  &  adj.  marked  trees  of  his  former 
land.  150  acs.  part  granted  to  Jon. 
Watkins,  31  May  1644  &  by  him  as- 
signed to  sd.  Hargrove  17  Oct.  1646, 
&  100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers.* 

MR.  JON.  LEWIS,  250  acs.  at  the 
head  of  a  branch  belonging  to  Poropo- 
tanke  Cr.  called  Lewis  Cr.,  but  formerly 
Totopotomoys  Cr.,  in  Glocester  County, 
1  July  1653,  p.  4.  Running  N.  E.  by 
N.  by  land  of  Capt.  Francis  Morgan, 
etc.  and  S.  E.  by  E.  by  land  of  Saml. 
Sally,  &c.  Trans,  of  5  pers:  Jon.  Lewis, 
Lidia  Lewis,  Wm.  Lewis,  Edwd.  Lewis, 
Jon.  Lewis,  Junr. 

THOMAS  WILSFORD,  26  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  1  Aug.  1653,  p.  4. 
Beg.  upon  a  small  swamp  where  his 
other  land  ends  &  running  past  the  head 
of  sd.  swamp.    Trans,  of  1  per.* 

MR.  WILLIAM  WHITBYE  (Whit- 
by), 1,800  acs.  Northumberland  Co.,  13 
July  1653,  p.  5.  Ely.  upon  Potomack 
Riv.  &  the  mouth  of  Pasbytanzy  Cr.  & 
Nly.  upon  Potomack  Cr.,  etc.  Due  by 
virtue  of  an  agreement  made  with  the 
Lady  Elizabeth  Lunsford  in  the  presence 
of  Sir  William  Berkeley  and  Col.  Lud- 
low Esq.,  &  alsoe  for  trans,  of  36  pers.* 

JOSEPH  KNIGHT,  2,000  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  1  July  1653,  p.  5.  On  the  E. 
side  of  Chickahominy  Riv.;  1600  acs. 
lying  between  the  branches  of  Jones  Cr., 


Morgans  Cr.  &  Warrany;  beg.  close  by 
Ricohoake  path;  the  remainder  lying 
neere  the  southermost  branch  of  War- 
rany Cr.,  beg.  at  the  extreame  of  a 
former  devdt.,  running  to  Rickohoake 
path.  1600  acs.  formerly  granted  to  said 
Knight,  25  Sept.  1650;  400  granted  to 
Edward  Knight  by  patent  of  same  date, 
and  assigned  by  him  unto  Joseph  Knight. 

THOMAS  DUNKETON,  50  acs. 
York  County,  in  Blissland  Parish,  13 
Oct.  1653,  p.  5.  Running  from  Mr. 
Barnehouse  markt  tree  in  Matchemeed 
Swamp,  E.  S.  E.  by  a  br.  of  the  sd. 
swamp  to  the  top  of  the  hill,  thence  W. 
by  North  to  the  land  of  Mr.  Barnehouse, 
thence  N.  N.  E.,  etc.    Trans,  of  1  per.* 

JOHN  NICHOLS,  50  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  19  Oct.  1653,  p.  5.  On  the  West- 
ermost  side  of  Corotoman  Riv.,  abutting 
N.  E.  upon  his  own  land.  Trans,  of 
1  pers.* 

GREGORY  PERROT,  150  acs.  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  12  Oct.  1653,  p.  5.  With 
the  main  river  on  the  N.,  land  of  Ed- 
ward Jones  on  the  S.,  Walter  Heard  on 
the  E.  side  &  Thomas  Greenwood  on 
the  W.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Richd. 
Wmson.  (Williamson)  twice,  Wm. 
Thomas,  by  assignment  from  the  sd. 
Williamson. 

RICHARD  CAREY,  350  acs.  on 
Wwd.  side  of  the  Eastermost  river  in 
Mobjack  Bay,  beg.  at  marked  tree  of 
Wm.  Armisteads,  running  N.  W.  &c. 
13  Oct.  1653,  p.  5.  Trans,  of  7  pers: 
Sanders  Mackell,  Jon.  Burlier,  Lewis 
Burlier,  Geo.  Adams,  Hen.  Sudwell, 
Tho.  Scarburgh,  Derrick  Henn 

RICHARD  CAREY,  1000  acs.  upon 
the  Swd.  side  of  Queens  Cr.  in  Pyanke- 
tanck  Riv.,  13  Oct.  1653,  p.  5.  Beg. 
on  the  mouth  of  sd.  Cr.  &  running  Sly. 
up  the  same  which  divides  this  and  the 
land  of  Congdells,  thence  W.  by  S.  &c. 
Trans,  of  20  pers:  Fra.  Hayes,  Eliz. 
Smith,  Geo.  Baines,  Wm.  Wood,  Jon. 
Brown,  Derman  Tahall,  Mary  Pomroy, 
Jerem.  Coot  (or  Cook),  Robt.  Sorrel, 
Mary  Rafe  (or  Rose),  Wm.  Mackery, 
Mary  Jefferson,  Moses  Scarfe,  Mary 
Bland,  Tho.  Edge,  Gilbert  Williams, 
Wm.  Carey. 


230 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


THOMAS  DAVIS,  Gent.,  100  acs. 
Nanzemond  Co.,  16  Nov.  1653,  p.  6. 
Bounded  with  land  of  Robert  Cliff 
Easterly,  Rice  Younge  Wly.,  Mr.  Robert 
Pitt  Nly.  &  with  New  Towne  Haven 
Riv.  Sly.  The  sd.  land  formerly  taken 
up  by  Richard  Preston  &  adjudged  de- 
serted &  granted  to  sd.  Davis  by  of  the 

Quarter  Court,  of  Nov.  1653,  as 

alsoe  for  trans,  of  2  pers:    Wm.  Home, 
Tho.  Manser. 

RICHARD  LAKE,  950  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  23  Jan.  1653,  p.  6.  Upon  the  N. 
side  of  Pyanketanke  Riv.,  beg.  at  a  point 
opposite  to  Hoccadaies  Cr.,  running  N. 
W.  by  W.  &c.  600  acs.  part  formerly 
granted  to  John  Mottrom,  Jr.,  26  Sept. 
1651  &  assigned  to  George  Colclough, 
by  whom  it  was  assigned  to  sd.  Lake; 
350  acs.  due  for  trans,  of  7  pers: 
Patrick  White,  Richd.  Dixon,  John  a 
Moor,  Danll.  Daniels,  Eliz.  Wood, 
Millicent  a  Maid  servant,  Robert  Bennet. 

DENNIS  COMERS,  1,000  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  26  Feb.  1653,  p.  6.  700  acs. 
On  the  N.  side  Pyanketanke  Riv.  from 
a  marked  oake  which  standeth  on  the 
S.  E.  side  of  a  valley  neer  an  old  Indian 
Quarter  beneath  an  upper  tract  of  land 
of  Mrs.  Ellinor  Brocas,  extending  S.  E. 
along  the  river  &c.  300  acs.  towards 
the  head  of  sd.  river,  adj.  Mrs.  Brocas 
&  extending  N.  W.  upon  land  of 
Abraham  Moon  &  the  great  swamp. 
700  acs.  by  former  patent  dated  18  Nov. 
1653  &  residue  for  trans,  of  6  pers.* 

WILLIAM  TIDNER,  650  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  26  Feb.  1653,  p.  6.  Upon 
S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  bounded  from  a 
point  on  the  S.  S.  E.  side  of  Tidners  Cr. 
which  divides  this  &  another  tract  in 
possession  of  sd.  Tidner,  extending  S. 
S.  E.  along  Dales  land  &c.  Due  for 
trans,  of  13  pers:  Jon.  Mansel,  Jon. 
Felix,  Jon.  Nicholas,  Tho.  Harebridge, 
Robt.  Dale,  Wm.  White,  Kath.  Trayton, 
Neale  Peterson,  Tho.  Powel,  Fra.  Ser- 
jeant, Geo.  Scoggin,  Fra.  Thrush,  Tho. 
Granger. 

HEN.  FILMORE,  1,000  James  City 
Co.,  6  Feb.  1653,  p.  6.  Upon  Chicka- 
hominy  Riv.,  a  mile  from  the  hither 
side  of  Warrany  landing  place;  300  acs. 
part  hereof  bounded  N.  upon  land  of 


Jon.  White.  350  acs.  pan  formerly 
granted  to  Jon.  Orchard  15  Aug.  1637; 
350  acs.  to  John  White  29  April  1639, 
&  300  acs.  to  Thomas  Stout  10  Apr. 
1639  &  purchased  by  sd.  Filmore  of 
the  sd.  parties. 

RICHARD  FOARD,  679  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  last  Nov.  1653,  p.  7.  Lying 
upon  a  N.  E.  branch  of  Powhetan 
Swamp,  beg.  neer  the  swamp,  running 
N.  N.  E.,  thence  W.  by  N.  unto  the 
land  of  Sir  Wm.  Berkeley  &c.  200  acs. 
purchased  of  Richard  Vardy  (or  Hardy) 
&  John  Barker;  167  acs.  lately  granted 
to  him  by  patent  dated  8  Nov.  1653  & 
312  acs.  for  trans,  of  12  pers.* 

RICHARD  SMITH,  450  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  24  Jan.  1653,  p.  7.  250 
acs.  part  at  Ocahannock  Cr.,  butting  on 
land  of  Wm.  Taylor  &  bounded  on  the 
southern  part  by  a  branch  parting  this 
from  land  of  sd.  Taylor  &c,  and  on  N. 
by  another  branch  parting  this  &  his 
own  land,  etc.,  200  acs.  at  the  head  of 
Occahanocke  Cr.  called  Capt.  Thomas 
his  necke  &c,  &  bounded  on  land  that 
was  James  Davies.  250  acs.  formerly 
granted  unto  James  Davis  21  May  1651, 
&  assigned  unto  sd.  Smith,  &  200  acs. 
for  trans,  of  4  pers:  Joseph  Harrison, 
Kath.  Harris,  John  Thomas,  Hen.  Scott. 

CAPT.  THOMAS  STEGG,  son  & 
heir  of  Thos.  Stegg,  Esq.,  dec'd.,  1698 
acs.  Chas.  City  Co.,  24  Nov.  1653,  p.  7. 
1,000  acs.  part  thereof  being  a  neck  of 
land  lying  upon  the  N.  side  of  the  old 
man's  Cr.  &  upon  Queens  Cr.  &  698 
acs.  at  the  head  of  Queens  Cr.  between 
Seder  (or  Seller)  Run  &  Fishing  Run. 
1,000  acs.  formerly  granted  unto  his 
deceased  father  &  descended  unto  him 
as  sonn  &  heir,  &  the  residue  by  order 
of  the  Quarter  Court  (blank)  as  alsoe 
for  trans,  of  14  pers.* 

WILLIAM  HAWARD,  400  acs. 
Glocester  Co.,  5  June  1654,  p.  7.  Beg. 
by  a  little  branch  of  Bennets  Cr.,  run- 
ning W.  by  N.  to  Mobjack  path,  thence 
S.  W.  &  N.  W.  by  W.  by  fouer  small 
springs,  thence  N.  by  W.  200  acs.  by 
purchase  from  Col.  Richard  Lee,  Esq., 
21  Oct.  1653;  &  200  acs.  for  trans,  of 
fouer    pers:    Anne    Excell    (or    Exall), 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


231 


Antho.    Haines,    Alex.    Kimrose,    John 
Page. 

THOMAS  BINNS,  343  acs.  Surry 
Co.,  25  Feb.  1653,  p.  8.  On  the  S. 
side  of  James  Riv.,  viz:  from  Mr.  Bis- 
hops cor.  tree  N.  W.  along  his  marked 
trees,  thence  N.  N.  E.  thence  N.  thence 
W.  N.  W.  thence  W.  S.  W.  &  thence 
S.  E.  bounding  Nly.  on  John  Bishops 
land,  Nly.  &  Wly.  upon  the  head  of 
the  reedy  swamp  &  Sly.  on  Mr.  Edwards 
land.  The  said  land  being  formerly  de- 
serted &  ordered  to  be  patterned  in  the 
name  of  sd.  Binns  &  due  for  trans,  of 
7  pers:  Alex.  Hayes,  Alex.  Rose,  Dan. 
Newel,  Nic.  Barber,  Rich.  Jarrel  (or 
Jarret),  Arche  Mullekin,  Step.  Lyonel. 

MAJOR  ROBERT  HOLT,  1550  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  6  Apr.  1654,  p.  8.  On 
the  E.  side  of  Chickahominy  Riv., 
bounding  upon  the  first  westermost 
branch  of  Jones  Cr.  &  running  from  the 
second  S.  S.  E.  &c.  to  the  main  branch 
opposite  to  the  land  of  Sir  Wm.  Berke- 
ley, thence  along  the  main  swamp  to 
the  fourth  little  branch  &  along  same 
N.  to  the  head  of  a  Spring,  thence  to 
Rickohauke  path  N.  E.,  along  same  N. 
by  W.  &  down  the  branch  S.  W.  by  S. 
470  acs.  granted  sd.  Holt  30  Jan.  1650 
&  1,080  acs.  for  trans,  of  22  pers:  Jon. 
Somerton,  Antho.  Wade,  Phill.  Cheslye, 
Tho.  Moor,  Tho.  Bush,  Jon.  Wilson, 
Edwd.  Jordan,  Tho.  Stephens,  Herbert 
Judd,  Wm.  Hudson,  Jon.  Chambers, 
Tho.  Williams,  Jon.  Hawkins,  Tho. 
Moor,  Charles  Cain,  Sam.  Paine,  Hen. 
Williams,  Richd.  Anderson,  Tho.  Keys, 
Jon.  Phipps,  Wm.  Court,  Jon.  Brown. 

RICHARD  MAJOR,  1,000  acs. 
Glocester  Co.,  20  Mar.  1653,  p.  8. 
400  acs.  upon  the  N.  side  of  Charles 
Riv.,  abutting  N.  W.  by  N.  upon 
Perringes  Cr.  which  divides  this  &  the 
land  of  Ashwell  Batten,  N.  E.  &  E.  up- 
on land  of  Thomas  Bell.  600  acs.  upon 
the  head  of  another  devdt.  of  sd.  Major's 
&  bounded  on  the  N.  W.  side  with  a 
swamp  upon  the  head  of  Perrins  Cr. 
&  from  the  S.  E.  side  of  a  branch  of  sd. 
swamp  extending  S.  E.  neer  a  branch  of 
Poropotancke  Cr.,  S.  W.  upon  land  of 
John  Major,  &  from  thence  N.  W.  upon 
the  swamp   upon   the   head   of   sd.   Cr. 


which  divides  this  and  land  of  James 
Holdinge.  400  acs.  granted  unto  John 
Perrin  3  Apr.  1651  &  assigned  unto  sd. 
Richard  Major;  &  150  acs.  by  vertue  of 
the  rights  of  so  much  in  a  patent  of 
350  acs.  granted  17  Jan.  1642  to  sd. 
Major;  &  450  acs.  for  trans,  of  9  pers: 
Tho.  Parker,  Robt.  Wherry,  Jon.  Garret, 
Jane  Bowden,  Jane  Moss,  Ann  Hinshaw, 
Richd.  Tidderson,  Kath.  Goodman,  Mary 
Hinshaw. 

MR.  EDWARD  TRAVIS,  326  acs. 
James  City  Island,  near  Black  Point, 
10  Mar.  1653,  p.  8.  196  acs.  N.  upon 
the  back  river,  E.  upon  the  same,  S. 
upon  land  of  Mr.  Chiles  &  Goose  Hill 
marsh  &  W.  upon  land  of  David  Ellis 
&  Mr.  Crosbies  land;  &  130  acs.,  more 
or  less,  being  marsh  land  lying  Sly. 
from  his  now  dwelling  house  &  devdt. 
of  high  land  bounded  by  Parsimores  Cr. 
&  Cocketts  neck;  the  remainder  being 
high  land  lying  Wly.  from  his  house  & 
devdt.  &  bounded  on  the  westermost 
side  with  land  of  Lancelot  Elay,  Nly. 
with  a  swamp  &  Ely.  with  former  devdt. 
of  sd.  Travis;  196  acs.  part  granted  sd. 
Travis  10  Mar.  1652  &  due  by  assign- 
ment of  several  persons;  &  130  acs.  for 
trans,  of  3  pers.* 

CAPT.     RICHARD     BARNHOUSE, 

250  acs.  James  City  Co.,  20  Mar.  1653, 
p.  9.  Butting  upon  a  dry  gutt  or  deep 
hollow  swamp  to  the  Swd.  of  Wm. 
Berries  house  &  from  the  path  at  the 
head  of  the  dry  gutt  it  runs  S.  W.,  etc 
thence  N.  E.  crossing  a  run  of  water 
into  the  land  that  was  cleared  by  George 
Holmes,  thence  S.  E.  until  it  meets  with 
a  run  of  fresh  water,  down  the  run  & 
creek  until  it  meets  with  aforesd.  gutt 
on  the  S.  W.  side  of  Keths  Cr.  Due  by 
purchase  from  Jeremiah  Blackman, 
Adm'r.  to  Jacob  Avery;  being  part  of 
500  acs.  leased  to  sd.  Avery  &  since  con- 
firmed by  pattent  to  sd.  Barnhouse  dated 
27  Feb.  1638  &  now  retaken  up  by  new 
rights  by  &  for  trans,  of  5  pers:*  80 
acs.  rights  due  out  of  the  surplus  of  2 
rights  in  other  pattents. 

FRANCIS  GREY,  750  acs.  Chas.  City 
Co.,  24  Nov.  1653,  p.  9.  Being  a  mid- 
dle ground  bet.  the  heads  of  Mr.  Spar- 
row,  Jon.  Wall   &  Jon.   Hackers   land, 


232 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


bounding  S.  E.  on  land  of  Mr.  Sparrow, 
E.  on  the  head  of  John  Hacker  &  N.  E. 
on  Marke  Averies  land,  N.  on  land  of 
Joseph  Johnson,  and  N.  W.  on  the  head 
of  John  Walls  land.  300  acs.  by  bill  of 
sale  from  John  Wall,  4  Jan.  1649;  & 
450  acs.  by  order  of  the  Govr.  &  Coun- 
cell  24  Nov.  1653  as  also  for  trans,  of 
9  pers:  Grace  Singleton,  Fra.  Loveday, 
Robt.  Lawrence,  Ant.  Allen,  Marv  Cesar, 
Morrice  Sinckler,  Tho.  Southern. 

THOMAS  WHITEHEAD,  162  acs. 
Hampton  Parish,  York  Co.,  6  Mar. 
1653,  p.  9.  112  acs.  formerly  taken  up 
by  John  Dennet  &  50  acs.  now  taken  up. 
Beg.  by  a  branch  of  Capt.  John  West's 
Cr.,  thence  N.  by  W.  down  the  run  to  a 
small  spring,  thence  E.  by  a  path,  thence 

5.  to  beg.  Due  by  virtue  of  the  rights 
of  a  pattent  of  200  acs.  formerly  granted 
to  John  Dennet  in  James  City  Co.,  as- 
signed to  Charles  Green,  who  assigned 
to  James  Brooks,  by  whom  it  was  as- 
signed to  Capt.  David  Mansfeild  &  by 
him  assigned  to  sd.  Whitehead.  38  acs. 
remaining  due.  Marginal  note:  Origi- 
nal surrendered  up  to  the  King  &c.  by 
Joseph  Walker  in  the  General  Court  29 
Apr.  1718.  Test  C  C  Thacker,  CI  Sec. 
Off. 

JOHN  FITCHETT,  8^  acs.  lying  in 
Pasbehaies  near  the  Block  house,  June 

6,  1654,  p.  9.  Bounded  N.  W.  upon  a 
ditch  dividing  this  from  land  of  Mrs. 
Perkins,  S.  E.  towards  the  Block  house, 
S.  W.  upon  the  river  &  N.  E.  upon  a 
swamp  dividing  this  from  land  of  Mr. 
Coleman.  Lease.  Annual  rent  of  one 
bushell  and  three  pecks  of  merchantable 
corne  sheld,  to  begin  att  Michaelmas  in 
1655.  "Order  granted  for  this  land  3d 
of  October  1643." 

THOMAS  SAFFALL,  850  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  1  June  1654,  p.  9.  Up- 
on the  N.  side  of  great  Wiccocomico 
river,  abutting  Wly.  upon  St.  Johns  Cr., 
E.  &  N.  E.  upon  Saffals  Cr.,  including 
St.  Stephens  Cr.,  etc.  Formerly  granted 
sd.  Saffall  3  Sept.  1651. 

JOHN  BARTEN,  200  acs.  in  Deep 
Cr.  a  branch  of  the  Southern  br.  of  Eliz. 
Riv.   10  Mar.   1653,  p.  9.    Trans,  of  4 


pers:    Jane  Harvey,  Tho.  Harvey,  Jon. 
Hawley,  Wm.  Scott. 

LT.  COL.  JOHN  CHEESEMAN, 
Esqr.  &  JOHN  ADLESTON,  300  acs., 
13  May  1654,  p.  10.  Lying  on  N.  side 
of  Cheesemans  Cr.  &  on  the  Bay  tree 
neck,  beg.  at  corner  tree  of  John  Adles- 
tons  devdt.,  running  by  marked  trees 
being  the  deviding  line  bet.  sd.  Cheese- 
man  &  Adlestone  &  land  of  Mr.  Beale 
&  John  Clerkson  &c.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
Jon.  Woodhouse,  Hen.  Midlux,  Jon. 
Binks,     Tho.     Peales,     Jon.     Anderson, 

Mary    Streatly,    John   (land    due 

for.) 

AUGUSTINE  GILLET,  250  acs. 
Upper  Norf.  Co.,  9  Mar.  1653,  p.  10. 
Beg.  at  the  miles  end  of  a  patent  of 
Michael  Wilcox  &  adj.  land  of  Mr. 
Phillip  Bennet.  Trans,  of  5  pers:  Hugh 
Drew,  Mary  Stanton,  Kath.  Bryan,  Wm. 
Phillips,  Matt.  Wilkinson. 

CAPT.  JOHN  WEST,  Esqr.,  one  of 
the  Councell  of  State,  1,000  acs.  Gloces- 
ter  Co.,  27  May  1654,  P.  10.  On  the 
N.  E.  side  of  Mattapony  Riv.,  beg.  at 
upper  westermost  corner  tree  of  Ralph 
Greens  devdt.,  bounded  on  E.  side  with 
sd.  Greens  land,  a  creek  &  land  of  Tho- 
mas Bell,  on  S.  W.  with  sd.  Riv.  &  on 
N.  W.  side  with  land  of  Capt.  Robert 
Abrahal.  Trans,  of  20  pers:  Tho.  Ball, 
Edwd.  East,  Richd.  Drew,  Edmd.  Mash- 
feild,  Richd.  Cole,  Alice  Kelly,  Richd. 
Ken,  Richd.  George,  Geo.  Slade,  Elias 
Hoard,  Hen.  Ken,  Edwd.  Ken,  Sarah 
Hazard,  Geo.  Lyddal,  Robt.  Priddy,  Tho. 
Platford,  Jon.  Collet,  Jon.  Garraway, 
Sus.  Barlow,  Sarah  Boyce. 

TOBY  WEST,  500  acs.  Glocester  Co., 
27  May  1654,  p.  10.  On  the  N.  E. 
side  of  Mattapony  Riv.,  N.  side  of  Tho- 
mas Sanders  land.    Trans,  of  10  pers.* 

WILLIAM  MORGAN,  550  acs.  on 
Mobjack  Bay,  beg.  upon  N.  side  of 
Peper  Cr.  running  by  marked  tree  of 
Richd.  Hull,  N.  thence  N.  E.,  thence 
N.  W.  by  marked  trees  deviding  this  & 
land  of  Hen.  Singleton,  to  the  Bay  side 
including  all  the  marsh,  S.  E.  by  S.  to 
beg.  25  Feb.  1653,  p.  10.  Trans.  11 
pers:    Wm.    Bilsbrough,    Robert    Dye, 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


233 


Hen.  Moor,  Murael  White,  Hen. 
Hamond,  Robert  Grey,  The  Husband  of 
Eliz.  Adison,  Eliz.  Adison  herselfe. 

WILLIAM  JOHNSON,  550  acs. 
Henrico  Co.,  12  Mar.  1653,  p.  11.  On 
the  N.  side  the  river,  known  by  the 
name  of  Harrahadocks,  beg.  next  to  land 
of  Capt.  Edloe,  thence  S.  S.  E.,  thence 
W.  S.  W.  to  the  river,  thence  as  the 
river  bayeth  to  the  place  of  beg.  Trans. 
11  pers:  Ed.  Elton,  Eliz.  Pattern,  Mary 
Franklin,  Kath.  Price,  Jon.  Philpot,  Jon. 
Carter,  Jon.  Mayden,  Danll.  Berry,  Jon. 
Wood,  Tho.  Lock,  James  Humphry. 

MR.  THOMAS  BREMAN  (Bree- 
man),  300  acs.  Glocester  Co.,  11  Mar. 
1653,  p.  11.  Upon  the  head  of  another 
tract  of  land  in  possession  of  sd.  Bre- 
man,  beg.  at  the  mouth  of  a  small 
branch  of  the  main  swamp,  upon  the 
head  of  Ware  Riv.  near  the  Beaver 
Damm,  etc.  Trans,  of  6  pers.*  Note: 
200  acs.  by  virtue  of  the  rights  of  soe 
much  in  a  Pattent  of  his  in  Mobjack 
Bay  for  wch.  he  procured  a  Certificate 
from  the  County  of  Glocester.  The  fol- 
lowing names  appear  hereunder:  David 
Short,  Jone  Banton   (or  Panton.) 

CHRISTOPHER  RIVERS,  150  acs. 
in  the  Westerne  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv., 
beg.  at  the  miles  end  of  Capt.  John 
Sipsey,  running  for  breadth  W.  S.  W. 
&  for  length  S.  S.  E.  into  the  maine 
Swamp,  &  again  from  beg.  tree  S.  S.  E. 
to  land  of  Richard  Pinner.  11  Mar. 
1653,  p.  11.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Ann 
Jackson,  Wm.  Morris,  Tho.  Morgan. 

ROBERT  FLAKE,  600  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  10  Mar.  1653,  p.  11.  On 
the  third  swamo  of  the  Black  Water, 
beg.  at  the  mouth  of  a  small  reedy 
branch,  on  Bushes  neck,  running  by  sd. 
swamp  Sly.  near  a  small  run  of  water 
where  the  sd.  Flakes  former  land  first 
begins  &c.  Trans,  of  12  pers:  John 
Collet,  Ann  his  wife,  Jon.  Collet,  junr., 
Jer.  Collet,  Sam.  Collet,  Joan  Martin, 
Ann  Towerman,  Moroco  Mo — (record 
partially  gone)  Jon.  Hawkins,  Eliz.  his 
wife,  Elias  Faslowe,  Jer.  Hayman. 

EDWARD  HAMOND,  son  &  heire 
of  Marke  Hamond,  250  acs.  Northamp- 


ton Co.,  10  June  1654,  p.  11.  At  the 
head  of  the  broad  Cr.,  bounded  on  the 
N.  &  E.  by  land  of  Roger  Jones,  dec'd. 
&  on  W.  by  land  of  Richard  Jacobs. 
Trans,  of  5  pers:  Ann  Dennis,  Mary 
Clerke,  Tim.  Parkenson,  Micha.  Curet„ 
Tho.  Blittle. 

RICHARD  KELLAM,  200  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  10  June  1654,  p.  11. 
On  N.  side  of  Occahannock  Cr.,  bound- 
ing Sly.  on  the  head  of  a  former  devdt. 
of  sd.  Kellam,  and  Ely.  on  a  branch 
parting  William  Thorne.  Trans,  of  4 
pers:  Jon.  White,  Jon.  Lawrence,  Eliz. 
Percival,  Rose  Mc-Cloyden 

RICHARD  JACOB,  200  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  10  June  1654,  p.  12,  Bet. 
Nuswattocks  branches  &  Hungars 
branches  "as  by  due  consideration  is 
manifest."  Bounding  Wly.  parrtly  on 
a  former  devdt.  of  sd.  Jacob  &  partly 
on  land  of  Elias  Haretree,  (North)  on 
Richard  Aliens.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Joan 
White,  Morris  Lyster,  Amos  Garryson, 
Ellis  Goverty. 

ALEXANDER  MADOCKS  &  JAMES 
JONES,  516  acs.  Northampton  Co.,  10 
June  1654,  p.  12.  At  the  head  of  Nus- 
wattocks Cr.,  bounding  Wly.  by  a  line 
of  marked  trees  at  the  head  of  a  former 
devdt.  of  sd.  Jones.  Trans,  of  10  pers: 
Mary  Leake,  Dorcas  Green,  Peter  Watts, 
Wm.  Alesworth,  Mary  Bromfeild,  Tho. 
Lentall,  Jon.  Devorax,  Wm.  Giles,  Jon. 
Roberts,  Geo.  Hambleton. 

EDWARD  REVELL,  son  of  Randall 
Revell,  1,000  acs.  Northampton  Co.,  10 
June  1654,  p.  12.  On  S.  side  of  Pon- 
goteage  Riv.,  being  a  neck  of  land 
parted  by  Whitsapenny  Cr.  from  the 
land  of  Mr.  Anthony  Hoskins,  bounding 
Sly.  upon  the  Cr.  making  a  point  on 
the  sd.  Riv.  &  enlarging  itselfe,  Ely.  to 
a  tree  by  an  Indian  bridge  &c.  500  acs. 
by  patent  dated  27  Nov.  1652  &  500 
acs.  for  trans,  of  10  pers:  Fra.  Wright, 
Hugh  Loyd,  Edwd.  Loyd,  Fra.  Jones, 
Eliz.  Thomas,  Richd.  Brown,  Fra.  Pope, 
Jon.  Harwood,  Tho.  Whitinge,  Nicho. 
Rice. 

EDWARD  COLE,  300  acs.  North- 
umberland  Co.,    9   Mar.    1653,   p.    12. 


234 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


(Record  incomplete).  Mentions  land  he 
sould  to  Mr.  Mitchell.  Trans,  of  6 
pers:  Fra.  White,  Wm.  Wheeler, 
Langag  Baker,  Tho.  Burnham,  Wm. 
Howse,  Jon.  Williams. 

RICHARD  BUDD,  200  acs.,  bound- 
ing S.  E.  upon  the  head  of  great  Wico- 
comico  Riv.,  N.  E.  upon  the  main 
branch  of  sd.  riv.,  &  S.  W.  upon  an- 
other branch.  9  Mar.  1653,  p.  12. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  Richd.  Williams, 
Mary  Smith,  Danll.  Fitzell,  senr.,  Danll. 
Fitzell,  junr. 

WM.  BACON,  300  acs.  Northumber- 
land Co.,  9  Mar.  1653,  p.  12.  Bound- 
ing N.  E.  upon  Broad  Cr.  betwixt  Yeo- 
comico  &  Mattapony  Rivers,  N.  Wly. 
upon  land  of  Anthony  Linton,  and  S. 
Ely.  upon  land  of  Lawrence  Dameron. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Eliz.  Lacey,  Edwd. 
Tupp,  Phill.  Lanceford,  Jon.  Butcher, 
James  Wren,  Hen.  Weed. 

THOMAS    MORECOCK,     100    acs. 

James  City  Co., Mar.  1654,  p.  13. 

On  the  E.  side  of  Chickahominy  Riv., 
beg.  at  the  Bryery  Swamp,  running 
along  Mr.  Sandersons  marked  trees  to  a 
swamp  E.  N.  N.  E.  &c.  along  Mr. 
Robert  Holts  trees  to  beg.  Trans,  of  2 
pers:  Winfred  Matthews,  Jon.  Hewes. 
Note:  This  pattern  is  by  sd.  Morecock 
relinquished  &  the  rights  assigned  to 
Wm.  Hall. 

JOHN  POUNCEY,  450  acs.  on  S. 
side  of  the  freshes  of  Yorke  Riv.,  in 
Blissland  Parish,  bet.  Pounceys  Cr.  & 
Tanks  Cr.  &  joining  his  own  land.  7 
June  1654,  p.  13.  Trans.  9  pers.* 
"The  land  being  due  by  assign emt.  from 
James  Besouth  of  the  overplus  of  a 
Certificate  formerly  brought  into  the 
office." 

JOHN  DEBAR,  200  acs.  Low.  Norf. 
Co.,  10  Mar.  1653,  p.  13.  Joining  Tho- 
mas Wrights  land  &c.  to  a  great  pond 
of  water,  S.  to  land  of  Richard  Starnell, 
etc.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Susan  Sheres, 
Edwd.  Calvert,  Abra.  Peircey. 

RANDALL  CHAMLY,  100  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  10  May  1654,  p.  13.  On  N. 
side  of  Coxes  Cr.,  extending  N.  E.  by 


N.    towards    trees    of 

Trans,   of   2   pers:   

Wilkinson. 


Wm.    Johnson. 
-  Wilson,  


JOHN  HANEY,  500  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  29  July  1652,  p.  13.  Upon 
S.  side  of  the  Dividing  Cr.  &  upon  head 
of  the  late  land  of  Mr.  Richard  Jones, 
deed.,  Nly.  upon  a  branch  of  sd.  cr., 
near  land  of  Mr.  George  Colclough. 
Due  by  virtue  of  rights  of  a  patent 
granted  sd.  Haney  30  Jan.  1650  for 
850  acs.  reserving  the  residue  bounding 
on  George  Waterman  &  James  Willis 
for  his  own  use. 

THOMAS  ROLFE,  525  acs.  lying  up- 
on the  N.  side  of  Chickahominy  Riv. 
commonly  called  and  known  by  the 
name  of  James  Fort,  running  from  the 
river  N.,  along  the  woods,  W.  from  the 
woods  to  the  river  S.  by  W.  400  acs. 
granted  sd.  Rolfe  by  Act  of  Assembly 
dated  6  Oct.  1646  &  125  acs.  for  trans, 
of  3  pers.* 

THOMAS  SHEPHERD,  66  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  5  July  1653,  p. 
14.  Beg.  at  a  marsh  at  a  Cr.  that  issueth 
forth  of  Yeocomico  Riv.,  extending  N. 
E.  upon  land  of  Thomas  Hayles,  and 
thence  N.  W.  to  land  of  George  Tom- 
son.  Due  by  virtue  of  the  rights  of 
part  of  a  patent  of  850  acs.  granted  to 
Capt.  Yeo,  which  being  resurveyed  was 
found  to  be  wanting  107  acs.  of  the 
quantity  patented. 

JAMES  MASON,  250  acs.  James  City 
Co.,  20  Apr.  1653,  p.  14.  Lying  above 
the  head  of  Greys  Cr.  upon  the  Sly. 
side  of  the  main  branch  of  same.  Nly. 
upon  land  of  Thomas  Grev.  The  sd. 
land  being  formerly  granted  unto  the 
sd.  Mason  by  patent  dated  8  July  1648 
&  now  taken  up  by  new  rights  by  & 
for  trans,  of  5  pers:  Robt.  Lamb,  Giles 
Flake,  Wm.  Savage,  Wm.  Francis. 

RICHARD  NORMANSELL,  450  acs. 
lying  on  Wwd.  side  of  the  Eastermost 
river  in  Mobjack  bay,  28  Nov.  1652,  p. 
14.  150  acs.  beg.  at  a  marked  tree  on 
the  river  side  wch.  divides  this  &  land 
of  John  White,  running  W.  S.  W.  etc. 
300  acs.  beg.  at  a  marked  pine  of  Wil- 
liam Holders  in  a  small  creek,  running 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


235 


W.  S.  W.  etc.  150  acs.  by  patent  dated 
15  Sept.  1651  &  300  acs.  for  tians.  of 
6  pers.* 

JOHN  SHAKLY  (Shakley,  Shackly), 
350  acs.  Northumberland  Co.,  13  Oct. 
1653,  p.  14.  On  the  N.  W.  side  &  to- 
wards head  of  Yeocomico  Riv.,  bound- 
ing S.  E.  upon  land  of  Robert  Smith 
and  one  Pullen,  dec'd.,  N.  E.  upon  land 
of  Richard  Holding  &  S.  W.  upon  land 
of  Mr.  Peter  Knight.    Trans,  of  7  pers.* 

MR.  GERVASE  DODSON,  1300  acs. 
in  Northumberland,  now  Westmoreland, 
Co.,  in  upper  Machoticke  Necke,  13 
Oct.  1653,  p.  14.  Running  Nly.  from 
the  corner  tree  wch.  divides  the  land  of 
Palmer  Hinton  from  Mr.  Christopher 
Boyce  to  the  miles  end  of  Mrs.  Towns- 
hends  land,  Sly.  upon  land  of  sd.  Boyce, 
Nly.  upon  land  of  Mrs.  Townshend  & 
Wly.  upon  the  maine  woods,  called 
Nottingham  Parke.    Trans,  of  26  pers.* 

THOMAS  KIDBY,  300  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  13  Oct.  1653,  p.  14. 
On  S.  side  of  great  Wiccocomico  river, 
running  N.  N.  E.  upon  the  head  of  a 
Cr.  running  out  of  sd.  river  above  land 
of  Mr.  Thomas  Salisbury  &  W.  N  W. 
upon  land  of  Martin  Coale.  Trans,  of 
6  pers:  Susan  Lawson,  Jon.  Price, 
Richard  Percival,  Lettice  Stringer,  Anne 
Ryley,  Eliz.  Drury. 

WM.  REYNOLDS,  92  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  13  Oct.  1653,  p.  15.  Ly- 
ing at  the  very  head  of  Mattapony  Riv., 
abutting  Wly.  &  Sly.  upon  the  main 
branch  thereof.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Kath. 
King,  Wm.  Hart. 

FRANCIS  SYMONS,  91  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  13  Oct.  1653,  p.  15. 
Binding  N.  Wly.  upon  a  branch  of 
Mattapony  Riv.,  N.  Ely.  on  land  of 
Thomas  Wilsford,  and  S.  Wly.  upon 
land  surveyed  for  John  Earle.  Trans,  of 
2  pers:    Tho.  Hart,  Maudlin  Hart. 

THOMAS  SALISBURY,  300  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  13  Oct.  1653,  p. 
15.  On  the  S.  side  of  great  Wiccoco- 
mico Riv.,  bounding  N.  N.  E.  upon 
Vulcans  Cr.  &  the  river,  W.  N.  W. 
upon   sd.    river,    a   creek   &   a    line   of 


marked  trees,  and  E.  S.  E.  upon  the  land 
of  Henry  Weeker.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
Danll.  Poole,  Sam.  Ralph,  Phill.  Loe, 
Grizell  Wise,  Jon.  Hassall,  Wm.  Hassall. 

RICHARD  HOLDEN,  600  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,   13   Oct.   1653,  p. 

15.  On  N.  W.  side  of  Yeocomico  Riv., 
abutting  S.  E.  upon  land  of  Wm.  Wal- 
ker, &  S.  W.  upon  land  of  Jon.  Shakly. 
Trans,  of  12  pers.* 

THOMAS  PHILPOT,  100  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  13  Oct.  1653,  p.  15.  In 
Yeocomico  Neck,  beg.  at  the  head  & 
bet.  lands  of  Wm.  Reynolds  &  Mr. 
Nicholas  Jarnew,  running  S.  S.  E.  by 
sd.  Jarnew  &c.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Anne 
Thompson,  Lyddy  Hart. 

COLL.  RICHARD  LEE,  300  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  14  Nov.  1653,  p.  15.  Upon 
the  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  bounded 
from  a  marked  oak  wch.  standeth  upon 
the  head  of  a  southerne  branch  of  a  Cr. 
commonly  called  Matchepungo  Cr. 
which  divides  this  &  land  of  Dame 
Elizabeth  Lunsford  formerly  Mr.  Samuel 
Abbot  &  extending  along  the  land  of 
John  Benton,  dec'd.  &c.  W.  by  S.  upon 
a  branch  of  Pyanketanck  &c.  Trans,  of 
6  pers:  Wm.  Flabian,  Wm.  Snapes, 
Tho.  Muns,  Wm.  Muns,  Tho.  Carey, 
Ed.  Hampton. 

FRANCIS  SYMONS,  224  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  29  July  1653,  p.  15. 
N.  W.  upon  Mattapony  Riv.,  S.  W.  up- 
on land  of  John  Chambers  &  N.  E.  upon 
land  of  John  Earle.  Trans,  of  5  pers: 
Wm.  Nichols,  Richd.  Bolton,  Joan  a 
maide,  Robt.  Davis. 

MAJOR  WILLIAM  LEWIS,  362  acs. 
on  the  S.  side  the  freshes  of  York  Riv. 
right  against  Totopotomoy  his  Fort 
called   Asiskewincke,    July    1,    1653,    p. 

16.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Fra.  Chaters, 
Robt.  Clerke,  Robt.  Holding,  2  Negroes, 
Abr.  Coffall,  Geo.  Brorgin,  Eliz.  Atkins; 
38  acres  remaining  due  assigned  by  Mr. 
Jon.  Underwood. 

OLIVER  GREEN,  120  acs.  Glocester 
Co.,  24  July  1653,  p.  16.  Upon  E.  S. 
E.  side  of  Poropotanke  Cr.,  W.  N.  W. 
upon  the  same,  N.  N.  E.  upon  a  small 


236 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


swamp  wch.  divides  this  &  land  of  Mr. 
Nicholas  Jarnew,  E.  S.  E.  upon  a  branch 
&  swamp  wch.  divides  this  &  land  of 
Samuel  Sallis  &  S.  S.  W.  upon  Atapo- 
tomays  Cr.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Wm. 
Davis,  Walter  James. 

MR.  EDWARD  DIGGS,  2,350  acs. 
called  Matapony  Fort,  Glocester  Co.,  on 
N.  side  of  Matapony  Riv.,  1  June  1653, 
p.  16.  Beg.  at  a  small  run  called 
Pockatamanio  &c.    Trans,  of  47  pers.* 

JOHN  HOPE,  537  acs.  York  Co.,  1 
July  1653,  p.  16.  On  the  S.  side  of 
Chas.  River  in  the  narrows,  beg.  S.  W. 
upon  the  range  of  Wm.  Cox,  S.  E.  by 
S.  along  land  of  Robert  Priddy,  E. 
along  land  of  Geo.  Chapman,  N.  E.  by 
land  of  Mr.  Barnhouse  &  W.  along  land 
of  Thomas  Austine.    Trans,  of  11  pers.* 

JAMES  MAGREGORY  &  HUGH 
FOUCH,  394  acs.  Northumberland  Co., 
5  Apr.  1653,  p.  16.  Abutting  Nly.  upon 
Potomack  Riv.,  Wly.  upon  their  own 
land  &  Ely.  upon  Cupids  Cr.  Trans,  of 
8  pers:  Tho.  Wilsford,  Bridget  his 
wife,  Paul  Spring,  Cha.  Barnes,  Wm. 
Kendal,  Mary  Kendall,  Cha.  Kendall. 

JARVIS  DODSON,  350  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  14  May  1653,  p.  16. 
Bounding  S.  upon  a  seat  of  land  which 
Stephen  Norman  lives  on  called  Peter 
Phyponds  necke,  &  E.  upon  his  own 
land.    Trans,   of   7   pers.* 

CORBET  PIDDEL,  1,000  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  14  May  1653,  p.  17.  S. 
Ely.  upon  Potomack  Riv.,  S.  W.  upon  a 
creek  above  Capt.  Brents  about  15  mile 
called  Aquoconde  &  N.  E.  upon  another 
creek.  Trans,  of  20  pers:  Wm.  Leigh, 
Jon.  Jones,  Tho.  Davis,  Mary  Watson, 
Abr.  Huffe,  Richd.  Hall,  Su.  Abbot, 
Joan  Evans,  Peter  Johnson,  Sa.  Perry, 
Everard  Rey,  Jon.  Lanson  (or  Lawson), 
Ann  Pellet,  Ja.  Hart,  Mary  Dakins, 
Eliz.  Singlehirst,  An.  Ballard,  John 
Price,  Jon.  Davis,  Tho.  Longe.  Note: 
This  patent  was  assigned  to  Jarvis  Dod- 
son  &  by  sd.  Dodson  surrendered  to 
make  good  another. 

MATTHEW  TOMLIN,  200  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  14  May  1653,  p. 
17.    S.   E.   upon  Hollis   Cr.,   &  N.   E. 


upon  a  branch  of  the  same  towards  land 
of  Wm.  Freake.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
Ellinor  Wms.  (Williams),  Richd.  Tid- 
ney,  Richd.  Jennings,  James  Vincent. 

DAVID  PHILLIPS,  200  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  14  May  1653,  p.  17. 
N.  E.  upon  land  of  Herrals  Bridges  & 
N.  W.  upon  land  of  Major  Baldridge. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  Evan  Thomas,  Timo. 
Felter,  Wm.  Symons,  Jane  Gabriel. 

JOHN  WARE,  700  acs.  lying  upon 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  upon  Clifts 
Cr.  &c,  &  running  S.  by  E.  unto  land 
of  Anthony  Fulgham.  14  May  1653, 
p.  17.  Trans,  of  14  pers:  Jon.  Ware, 
Senr.  twice,  Margaret  his  wife,  Fra. 
Ware,  Jon.  Ware,  junr.,  Kath.  Ware, 
Tho.  Speckman,  Magd.  Peasly,  Tho. 
Weinne,  Hen.  Jordan,  Edwd.  Atwood, 
Wm.  Mackenly,  Eliz.  Day,  Anne  Crofts. 

ROBERT  CAPPS  &  ROBERT 
SPRING,  300  acs.  situate  in  Western 
branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  30  May  1653,  p. 

17.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Richd.  Halla- 
way,  Jon.  Jackson,  Robt.  Capps,  Robt. 
Springe,    Pable   Kingle,   Jon.   Gregman. 

(Note:    Record  incomplete.) 

RICHARD  SLAUGHTER,  200  acs. 
Nanzemond  Co.,  30  May  1653,  p.  17. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  Wm.  Clarke,  Samll. 
Crane,  Richd.  Patridge,  Hen.  Franke. 

HUMPHREY  EDEY,  250  acs.  in  the 
N.  W.  branch  of  Nanzamond  Riv.,  27 
Dec.  1652,  p.  18.  Butting  on  land  of 
Mr.  Robert  Lawrence.  Trans,  of  5  pers: 
Hum.  Edey,  &  his  wife,  Joan  Barnes, 
Wm.  Barlow,  Eliz.  Harwood. 

JOHN  PHILLIPS,  240  acs.  upon  the 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  near  land  of 
Mr.    George    Eaton.    2    Mar.    1642,    p. 

18.  Trans,  of  5  pers:  Hen.  Kinsman, 
Ann  Cowslan,  Tho.  Naylor,  Hugh  Jones, 
Richd.  Smith.    (Record  incomplete.) 

SAME.  100  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  on 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  River,  3  Mar.  1652, 
p.  18.  Beg.  at  a  point  on  the  Ewd.  side 
of  Powells  Cr.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Mary 
Peirce. 

THOMAS  MALLERD,  300  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,   8  June   1653,  p. 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


237 


18.  Sly.  upon  Wicocomico  Riv.,  Ely. 
upon  a  creek  dividing  this  from  land  of 
Thomas  Saffall.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Jon. 
Davis,  Isab.  (Isabel  ?)  Powell,  Tho. 
Mallerd,  Ann  Bradly,  James  Westrill, 
Jon.  Home;  "Tho.  Mallerd  is  wrong 
entered  &  instead  there  is  Magdalen 
Roberts,   Ed.   Hitchcock  land  due  for." 

SAMLL.  BONAM,  300  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  bounding  N.  N.  E.  upon 
Potomack  Riv.,  W.  N.  W.  on  land  of 
Mr.  Jon.  Rosier.  4  July  1653,  p.  18. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Anth.  Harrison,  Jon. 
Griffeth,  Eliz.  Burrowes,  Eliz.  Needum, 
Joan  Pickering,  Jon.  Seabottom. 

MRS.  MARGARET  UPTON,  700 
acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  on  the  N.  side  of 
Rappa.  Riv.  4  July  1653,  p.  18.  Beg. 
on  the  upper  side  of  a  devdt.  of  land 
now  in  possession  of  John  Edgecombe, 
running  to  a  crerek  dividing  this  &  land 
of  Anthony  Jackman.  Trans,  of  14 
pers:  Wra.  Merrit,  Jon.  Gill,  Mich. 
Emerson,  Tho.  Holwell,  Geo.  Sheir, 
Eliz.  Warington,  Tho.  Malford,  Edwd. 
Godyal,  Peter  Raven,  Richd.  Player, 
Robt.  Page,  Hen.  Emery. 

LAWRENCE  PHILLIPS,  100  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  in  Eliz.  River  Parish, 
8  June  1653,  p.  19.  Beg.  at  the  second 
branch  Swd.  from  Wm.  Johnsons  land 
upon  Gaters  Cr.,  running  S.  by  E.  along 
sd.  creek  &c.    Trans,  of  2  pers.* 

JOHN  JOLLIFFE,  250  acs.  Nanze- 
mond  Co.,  4  July  1653,  p.  19.  On  the 
Wwd.  side  of  the  Wwd.  branch  of 
Nanzemond  Riv.,  running  S.  W.  by  W. 
to  land  of  James  Arthur  &  Peter  Ellis 
&c.  Said  land  formerly  unto  John 
Landman,  9  Apr.  1648  &  purchased  by 
sd.  Jolliffe. 

ROBERT  SAVEN,  150  acs.,  lying  in 
the  Northwest  branch  of  Nanzemond 
Riv.,  beg.  by  the  branch  side,  running 
for  length  S.  S.  W.  to  land  of  Symon 
Symons  thence  E.  S.  E.  &c.  11  June 
1653,  p.  19.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Jon. 
Bryan,  Geo.  Frost,  Nath.  Saintpere. 

MAJOR  GEORGE  READ,  500  acs. 
Northumberland   Co.,   9  June   1653,   p. 

19.  Upon   S.   side   of   Potomacke  Riv., 


upon  S.  side  of  Herring  Cr.  next  &  adj. 
land  of  Mr.  Robert  Yeo  &c.  Formerly 
granted  sd.  Read,  18  Oct.  1650  &  re- 
newed by  order  of  the  Govr.  &  Coun- 
cell  bearing  date  with  these  presents. 

THOMAS  COWLINGE,  350  acs.  in 
Matthews  Cr.,  being  a  branch  of  the 
southern  branch  of  Nanzemond  Riv.  5 
July  1653,  p.  19.  Trans,  of  7  pers: 
Mary  Ferr,  Mary  Bly,  Arthur  Hooper, 
Ann  Padget,  Robt.  Westwood,  Mary 
Smith,  Robt.  Hooker. 

ROBERT  CHOWNINGE,  250  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  last  of  June  1653,  p.  20. 
Upon  the  N.  W.  side  of  the  S.  W. 
branch  of  Sunderland  alias  Burnham's 
Cr.,  extending  from  land  of  Henery 
Nicholls  S.  W.,  from  thence  N.  W.  &c. 
Trans,  of  5  pers:  2  Negroes;  Jon. 
Gum,  Senr.,  Jon.  Gum,  junr.,  Jon. 
Pepper;   assigned   by   Geo.   Chowninge. 

HENERY  LEE,  350  acs.  in  Hampton 
Parish,  York  Co.,  5  July  1653,  p.  20. 
Beg.  at  the  miles  end  of  Capt.  Francis 
Morgans  devdt.,  thence  S.  E.  by  E.  &c. 
to  the  miles  end  of  Mr.  Lee's  first 
devdt.,  thence  N.  by  E.  to  Wm.  Sawyer's 
plantation  by  the  Cr.  Trans,  of  7  pers: 
Jon.  Goffe,  Jon.  Win,  Jon.  Macoome, 
Jon.  Bartwright,  Richd.  Fowke,  Marg. 
Davis,  Bar.  Ramsey. 

WILLIAM  THOMAS,  100  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  13  July  1653,  p.  20.  On 
the  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  at  the 
head  of  Powells  Cr.  Due  for  trans,  of 
2  pers:    himself  &  wife. 

MR.  JOHN  PHILLIPS,  400  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  13  July  1653,  p.  20.  On 
the  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  running  by 
the  head  of  a  devdt.  formerly  surveyed 
by  Capt.  Daniel  Gookins  by  the  side  of 
the  mountains,  thence  N.  by  W.  &c. 
to  a  N.  W.  branch  of  Cossatowoman 
Riv.    Trans,  of  8  pers.* 

THOMAS  YOUL  (YOUEL),  500 
acs.  Northumberland  Co.,  19  Oct.  1653, 
p.  20.  Upon  the  Westermost  side  of 
Lower  Machotick  Riv.  opposite  land  of 
Richard  Cole,  from  a  branch  of  sd.  river 
near  to  land  of  George  Watts,  extend- 
ing N.  W.  along  sd.  river  to  a  creek 


238 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


dividing  this  &  land  of  Thomas  Wil- 
kinson. Trans,  of  10  pers:  Mary 
Peircey,  Hen.  Wilson.  Note:  400  acs. 
by  virtue  of  the  rights  of  a  pattent  of 

soe  much  granted  to  Abra.  in  the 

County  of  Chas.  Riv.,  20  July  1649  & 
by  him  delivered  up  in  the  office. 

PATRICK  MILLER,  150  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  19  Oct.  1653,  p.  21.  Upon 
the  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  bounded  on 
the  W.  &  by  N.  with  a  creek  dividing 
this  &  land  of  George  Wading  &c. 
Trans,  of  3  pers:  Wm.  Foster.  Note: 
70  acs.  by  virtue  of  the  rights  remain- 
ing of  a  pattent  to  David  Fox  of  1050 
acs.  which  is  by  sd.  Fox  relinquished 
and  now  all  made  use  of. 

WILLIAM  HARPER  &  HENRY 
RYE,  550  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  19  Oct. 
1653,  p.  21.  Lying  towards  the  head  of 
Harpers  Cr.  near  Fleets  Bay  &c.  Trans, 
of  11  pers.* 

LEONARD  CHAMBERLAINE,  300 
acs.  Glocester  Co.,  27  Oct.  1653,  p.  21. 
Beg.  by  Ashwell  Battins  corner  tree, 
running  crosse  Arracaico  branch  E.  N. 
E.  &c.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Margt.  Lewis, 
Jon.  Atkins,  Fra.  Sharp,  Patrick  Harper, 
Mary  Green.  Jon.  Williams. 

JOHN  BEBEY,  700  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  4  Oct.  1653,  p.  21.  On  S.  side  of 
Rappa.  Riv.  &  about  a  mile  up  Puscati- 
con  Cr.,  now  called  Coxes  Cr.,  &  on 
the  Ewd.  side  thereof.  350  acs.  granted 
him  by  patent  dated  27  Oct.  16— ,  & 
350  acs.  for  trans,  of  7  pers:  Jon. 
Bebey,  Eliz.  Nichols,  Eliz.  Brooks,  Robt. 
Beacham,  Jon.  Jolly. 

THOMAS  SMITH,  300  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  15  Dec.  1653,  p.  22.  On 
the  W.  side  of  the  S.  branch  of  Eliz. 
Riv.,  beg.  on  a  point  at  the  mouth  of 
Smiths  Cr.,  running  &c.  to  the  mouth 
of  Pussell  Cr.  etc.    Trans,  of  6  pers.* 

DAVID  FOX,  300  acs.  Lancaster  Co., 
1  Nov.  1653,  p.  22.  Upon  the  Wester- 
most  side  of  Corotoman  Riv.,  being 
commonly  known  by  the  name  of  the 
Narrow  Neck,  beg.  at  a  small  branch 
which  divides  this  &  the  land  of  Ed- 
ward  Grimes,    dec'd.,    extending    along 


sd.  Riv.  N.  to  another  branch  thereof, 
along  same  W.  to  land  of  Wm.  Raton 
&  Richard  Flint,  etc.    Trans,  of  6  pers.* 

WILLIAM  HUNT,  800  acs,  at  the 
head  of  Beaverdam  branch,  a  branch  of 
the  Western  br.  of  Nanzemond  Riv,  14 
Dec.  1635,  p.  22.  Trans,  of  16  pers: 
Phill.  Thomas,  Evad.  (?)  Thomas,  Sarah 
Thomas,  Tho.  Batmason,  Anne  Jackson, 
Hen.  Miles,  Fra.  Coach,  Jon.  Longe, 
Wm.  Hunt,  Mich.  Mackerye,  Marry 
Matthews,  Wm.  Scot,  Kath.  Scot. 

ROBERT  SAVEN,  650  acs,  on  a 
branch  of  Nanzemond  Riv,  called  the 
Indian  Cr,  11  June  1653,  p.  22.  Beg. 
at  a  point  by  the  creek  side,  running 
S.  W.  &c.  400  acs.  due  by  virtue  of 
the  rights  of  a  patent  23  Dec.  1642; 
granted  to  George  Busse,  purchased  by 
sd.  Saven  &  by  him  relinquished  into 
the  office;  &  250  acs.  for  trans,  of  5 
pers:  Robt.  Saven,  Senr,  3  several 
times,  Susan  Sabin  (or  Savin),  Geo. 
Marton. 

PETER  R ANSON,  1100  acs.  on  the 
N.  river  of  Mobjack  bay,  beg.  at  the 
Isle  of  Wight  Cr,  from  thence  Nly. 
parallel  to  the  river,  unto  a  Cr.  which 
divides  this  &  land  now  in  possession 
of  Richard  Dudly,  etc.  This  land  was 
formerly  granted  unto  Edmond  Dawber 
&  adjudged  deserted  by  order  of  the 
Govr.  &  Councell  bearing  date  with 
these  presents  &  by  sd.  order  granted 
unto  sd.  Ranson.  9  June  1653,  p.  22. 
Trans,   of   2  pers.* 

GREGORY  RAWLINS,  son  of  Greg- 
ory Rawlins,  dec'd,  476  acs.  Surry  Co, 
10  June  1653,  p.  23.  On  S.  side  of 
James  Riv,  on  E.  side  of  Chipoacks  Cr, 
bounded  on  the  head  of  Richard  Hides 
land  from  a  marked  tree  on  a  point  of 
Burchen  Swamp,  S.  S.  E.  &c.  along 
Wm.  Symons  marked  trees  &c.  Trans, 
of  10  pers:  Mary  Edwards,  Richd. 
Roberts,  Gilbert  Assell,  Adam  Osman, 
Jon.  Pickering,  Jon.  Lidell,  Thomas 
Wright,  Wm.  Copeland,  Adrian  Poole, 
Eliz.  Bostocke. 

WM.  WORSNAM  &  GEORGE 
WORSNAM,  400  acs.  Henerico  Co, 
15  Feb.  1652,  p.  23.    200  acs.  part  here- 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


239 


of  lying  at  the  old  Towne  att  Appa- 
mattox  Riv.,  bounding  Ely.  upon  sd. 
Riv.,  siding  S.  W.  by  the  Old  Towne 
Cr.  upon  John  Coogneys  land,  extend- 
ing N.  E.  upon  land  of  Mrs.  Dorothy 
Clerk,  widdow;  &  200  acs.  being  part 
of  the  old  Towne  aforesaid,  bounded 
from  the  S.  by  W.  corner  of  sd.  Wors- 
nams  first  200  acs.,  upon  the  head  of 
the  sd.  land  N.  by  E.  thence  into  the 
woods  towards  Swifts  Cr.  &c.  200  acs. 
being  part  of  a  patent  granted  unto 
Wm.  Clarke,  deed.,  6  May  1638,  &  by 
sd.  Clarke  sould  unto  Seth  Ward  from 
whom  it  was  purchased  by  Wm.  Wors- 
nam,  2  Nov.  1640;  &  200  acs.  for  trans, 
of  4  pers:  Hen.  White,  Jo.  Plummer, 
Sasan  (or  Susan)  Chiles,  Sarah  Chiles; 
Oliver  Green,  land  due  for. 

COL.  GEORGE  LUDLOW,  Esqr., 
one  of  the  Councell  of  State,  2,000  acs. 
Glocester  Co.,  12  Mar.  1652,  p.  23. 
Upon  S.  side  of  Pyanketanke  Riv.,  beg. 
at  the  mouth  &  W.  N.  W.  side  of 
Gwins  Cr.,  extending  along  the  river 
W.  N.  W.  &  from  Westermost  side  of 
Wading  Cr.  &c.  and  along  land  of  Col. 
Gwin.  Due  by  virtue  of  an  exchange 
made  with  the  King  of  Chiskyacke  for 
the  like  quantity,  wch.  was  granted  un- 
to sd.  Ludlow  by  patent  25  Oct.  last 
past,  wch.  exchange  was  made  &  ac- 
knowledged before  the  Govr.  &  Coun- 
cell on  the  day  of  last,   & 

allowed  of  by  the  Govr.  &  Councell  as 
by  order  the  same  day. 

SAME.  1500  acs.  in  York  Co.,  12 
Mar.  1652,  p.  23.  Beg.  at  the  mouth 
of  a  creek  on  the  S.  side  of  Chas.  River 
called  Wormeleys  Cr.,  running  up  the 
river  &c.  to  the  Green  Swamp  along 
marked  trees  dividing  this  &  land  of 
Capt.  Nicholas  Marteau,  thence  from  sd. 
swamp  S.  W.  by  S.,  then  S.  adj.  to  the 
mill  land  belonging  to  Warwick  Riv. 
&c.  to  Hugh  Aliens  land  &c.  parallel  to 
land  late  Capt.  Wormeleys.  1452  acs. 
granted  him  26  July  1646,  etc.,  &  48 
acs.  by  order  of  the  Govr.  &c,  &  alsoe 
for  trans,  of  1  per.* 

THOMAS  W  ATKINS,  50  acs.  lying 
on  the  Eastern  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  5 
July  1653,  p.  24.    Beg.  at  corner  tree, 


on  the  river  side,  of  land  of  Abraham 
Thomas  &c.    Trans,  of  Susanna  Foster. 

JOHN  SLAUGHTER,  300  acs.  in 
Matthews  Cr.,  a  branch  of  the  southern 
branch  of  Nanzemond  Riv.,  5  July  1653, 
p.  24.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Wm.  Dixon, 
Adam  Stanly,  Joan  Hixon,  Jon.  Wilson, 
Kath.  Evans,  Jon.  Wilson. 

TOBY  SMITH,  Gentleman,  681  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  10  Mar.  1652,  p.  24. 
On  the  W.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  Beg. 
neer  a  wett  slash,  running  N.  N.  W.  to 
an  Eastermost  branch  of  Richard  Cr., 
over  the  Cr.  &c.  Trans,  of  14  pers: 
Ro.  Spring,  Geo.  Marall,  Ra.  Broad- 
hurst,  Ben.  Forby,  Ellinor  Andry,  Ann 
Burgesse,  Hen.  Foster. 

EDMOND  BOWMAN,  Merchant, 
358  acs.  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  8  June  1653, 
p.  24.  In  the  W.  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv., 
formerly  land  of  Mr.  Edward  Loyd. 
Beg.  on  a  point  &  running  up  Mr. 
Loyds  Cr.  S.  S.  E.  &c,  to  head  of  Mer- 
chants Cr.  &c.    Trans,  of  7  pers.* 

GEORGE  KEMP,  400  acs.  in  Lyn- 
haven  Parish,  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  28  Apr. 
1652,  p.  24.  Beg.  at  corner  tree  of  Mr. 
Sidneys,  now  in  possession  of  Jon. 
Porter  &c,  crossing  the  Eastern  branch 
of  Eliz.  Riv.  &c.  Trans,  of  8  pers: 
Dorothy  Wincock,  Peter  Joice,  Jon. 
Blunt,  Natha.  Gibbs,  Wm.  Robinson, 
Senr.,  Wm.  Robinson,  Junr.,  Sarah 
Robinson,  Danll.  Makey. 

JAMES  ALLEN,  300  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  9  June  1653,  p.  25.  Ely. 
upon  Wiccocomico  Cr.  The  said  land 
being  formerly  granted  unto  the  said 
Richard  ah.  (alias)  James  Allen  by 
patent  20  June  1651  &  renewed  by 
order  of  the  Govr.  &  Councell  bearing 
date  with  these  presents. 

SYMON  THOROGOOD,  200  acs., 
Eliz.  City  Co.,  18  Apr.  1653,  p.  25. 
50  acs.  abutting  Sly.  upon  the  head  of 
the    long    pond,    Wly.    upon    Scoones 

Da (Damm    ?),    Nly.    upon    land 

granted  to  Toby  Smith;  100  acs.  beg. 
at  a  notched  gum  tree  &  runs  E.  N.  E. 
&c.  butting  Nly.  upon  land  of  sd.  Smith, 
Ely.  upon  Walter  Pritchard,  Sly.  upon 


240 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Thomas  Preston  &  Wly.  upon  the  long 
ponds.  50  acs.  by  patent  dated  10  Feb. 
1650,  &  150  acs.  for  trans,  of  3  pers: 
Ro.  Newberry  &  his  wife,  Tho.  Preston, 
Jon.  Goddin;  Robt.  Howden,  land  due 
for. 

JOHN  RIGGE,  200  acs.  Low.  Norf. 
Co.,  8  June  1653,  p.  25.  On  the  E.  side 
of  the  S.  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  beg.  at 
the  mouth  of  Riggs  Cr.,  running  N. 
N.  W.  &c.    Trans,  of  4  pers.* 

THOMAS  WILKINSON,  320  acs. 
lying  on  both  sides  of  a  creek  upon  the 
S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv  &  distant  about 
2%.  mi.  from  land  of  Richard  Coleman 
&c.  to  a  runn  divding  this  &  land  of 
Mr.  Tho.  Lucas,  thence  W.  by  S.  &c. 
Trans,  of  7  pers.*    No  date.    P.  25. 

THOMAS  LUCAS,  647  acs.  upon  the 
freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  on  the  S.  side 
thereof,  beg.  at  a  little  creek  about  a 
mile  above  land  of  Richard  Coleman's 
first  devdt.  &  extendeth  into  the  woods 
S.  S.  W.  a  mile  parallel  to  the  river  &c. 
No  date.  P.  25.  Trans,  of  13  pers:  2 
Negroes;  Jon.  Hawkins,  Tho.  Hawkins, 
Ra.  Parry,  Jon.  Humphreys,  Wm. 
Cooper,  Phill  Delpha,  Wm.  Cripps, 
Fra.  Freeman,  Ja.  Charles,  Tho.  Butting. 

JOHN  GARWOOD,  1,000  acs. 
Nanzemond  Co.,  4  July  1653,  p.  25. 
Lying  on  the  Nwd.  side  of  the  head  of 
Indian  Cr.,  beg.  at  a  point  on  the  main 
branch  side  &c.    Trans,  of  20  pers.* 

CAPT.  DANIEL  LUELLIN,  200  acs. 
lying  in  or  neer  Sherly  hundred,  which 
was  late  in  the  possession  of  Edward 
Gardner,  deed.,  bounding  E.  into  the 
woods,  W.  upon  the  river,  N.  upon  40 
acs.  purchased  of  Edward  Maddin,  and 
S.  upon  land  lately  belonging  to  Serjeant 
John  Harris.  Sd.  land  formerly  granted 
unto  sd.  Luellin  by  order  of  the  Quarter 

Court  dated and  alsoe  for  trans,  of 

4  pers:  Jon.  White,  Geo.  Midlemore. 
11  July  1653,  p.  26. 

ELIZABETH  HUTTON,  136  acs. 
Surry  Co.,  29  May  1654,  p.  26.  Beg. 
at  the  halfe  way  tree,  running  S.  by  W., 
etc.,  joining  to  Coll.  Browns  devdt., 
then  N.  by  E.  to  the  river  side  &  along 
bank  of   same  to   the  halfe  way  tree. 


Formerly  granted  unto  Col.  Henry 
Brown  by  order  of  Quarter  Court,  21, 
Nov.  1643,  who  then  produced  his  right 
thereto  for  trans,  of  3  pers.,  &  by  sd. 
Browne  assigned  to  Richard  Harris,  who 
assigned  same  to  David  Ludicies  (or 
Ludicres),  by  whom  it  was  assigned  to 
sd.  Col.  Browne,  &  by  him  assigned  to 
Daniell  Hutton  &  accruing  due  unto  sd. 
Elizabeth  Hutton  as  daughter  &  heire 
of  sd.  Daniel  Hutton.  The  following 
names  appear  under  this  patent:  Mary 
Temple,  Tho.  Wilcocks,  John  Wilcocks. 

ROBERT  SORRELL  (Sorrel),  700 
acs.  lying  on  the  Southermost  branch  of 
Warreny  Cr.,  beg.  at  the  S.  W.  tree  of 
Mr.  Soanes,  running  S.  by  E.  &c.  along 
land  of  Mr.  Hen.  Soanes  &c.  20  Nov. 
1653,  p.  26.  Trans,  of  14  pers:  Jon. 
Brown,  Richd.  Downing,  Richd.  Tud- 
man,  Ja.  Brown,  Wm.  Lant,  Ann  Sters- 
more,  Toby  Bradly,  Nich.  Chenner, 
Mar.  Bray,  Ann  Daberton,  Kath.  Mut- 
ton, Wm.  Davis,  Rob.  Powel. 

MAJR.  FRANCIS  MORRISON,  24 
acs.,  commonly  knowne  by  the  name  of 
the  Glasse  House,  James  City  Co.,  1 
June  1654,  p.  26.  The  sd.  land  being 
formerly  by  Sr.  John  Harvey,  Knt.  by 
bill  of  sale  assigned  to  Anthony  Cole- 
man, &  by  Edward  Knight  &  Joseph 
Knight  the  heires  of  sd.  Coleman,  as- 
signed to  John  Senior,  who  assigned 
same  to  John  Fitchett,  by  whom  it  was 
assigned  unto  John  Phipps  &  Wm. 
Harris,  wch.  sd.  Phipps  assigned  his 
right  &  share  unto  sd.  Harris,  who 
wholly  assigned  the  same  unto  Majr. 
Morryson. 

MR.  HEN.  SOANES,  1200  acs.  on 
the  N.  E.  side  of  Mattapony  Riv.,  be- 
neath the  land  of  Mr.  Wm.  Wyat,  beg. 
at  the  mouth  of  a  creek  &  running  S. 
S.  W.  down  the  river  to  an  ancient  In- 
dian Ferry  on  the  upper  side  a  marsh, 
soe  S.  S.  E.  &  S.  E.  by  S.  along  the 
back  of  the  marsh  to  the  river  &c.  10 
Mar.  1653,  p.  26.  700  acs.  granted  to 
Hen.  Soanes  last  of  July  1653  &  500 
acs.  for  trans,  of  10  pers:  Negro  wo- 
man; Kath.  Yorkshire,  Marv  Wms., 
Tho.  Knight,  Mary  Knight,  Richd. 
Lathbury,  Jon.  Knight  3  times;  assigned 
by  Mr.  Robert  Ellyson. 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


241 


HEN.  SOANES,  Gentleman,  200  acs. 
Glocester  Co.,  10  Mar.  1653,  p.  27. 
On  the  N.  E.  side  of  Mattapony  Riv., 
beg.  above  the  land  of  Mr.  Wm.  Wyat 

6  running  Wwd.  up  the  river  towards 
the  land  of  Mr.  Richard  Barnehouse  &c. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  Robt.  Ellyson,  Gent., 
Jon.  Walton,  Wm.  Morgan,  Danll. 
Whitby. 

GREGORY  WELLS  &  RICHARD 
WILLIAMS,   199  acs.  James  City  Co., 

7  Apr.  1654,  p.  27.  On  the  N.  side  of 
James  Riv.  on  the  W.  side  of  Chicka- 
hominy  Riv.,  bounding  Nly.  on  Wm. 
Fry,  Ely.  on  sd.  Wells'  devdt.  of  600 
acs.,  Sly.  on  sd.  Fry  &  Wly.  on  Richard 
Williams.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  David 
Wheatly,  John  Whaly,  David  Whitly, 
Tho.  Bayly. 

JOHN  FINCH,  450  acs.  Low.  Norf. 
Co.,  11  Mar.  1653,  p.  27.  On  the  W. 
side  of  the  southerne  branch  of  Eliza- 
beth Riv.  called  by  the  name  of  High 
Piny  Point,  bounded  Sly.  with  the  broad 
creek,  N.  by  James  Warner,  &c.  Trans. 
of  9  pers.*    (Record  incomplete.) 

RICHARD  JENNINGS,  100  acs.  in 
Browns  Cr.,  being  a  branch  of  the  west- 
ern branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  10  Mar.  1653, 
p.  27.  Joining  land  of  Mr.  Wm.  Eyres 
&c.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Mary  Davis, 
Ellinor  Dexton. 

COL.  RICHARD  LEE,  300  acs. 
Glocester  Co.,  20  Mar.  1653,  p.  27. 
Upon  the  N.  side  of  York  Riv,  abutting 
upon  land  of  Richard  Jones,  dec'd.,  now 
in  possession  of  Francis  Jones,  relict  of 
sd.  Richard  Jones,  &  E.  S.  E.  upon  land 
of  Robert  Todd.    Trans,  of  6  pers.* 

ARTHUR  PRICE,  300  acs.  Glocester 
Co.,  3  Apr.  1654,  p.  27;  Upon  the  N. 
E.  side  of  Mattapony  Riv.,  which  land 
is  about  10  mi.  up  the  river.  Formerly 
granted  to  Wm.  Ginsey,  3  Apr.  165 — 
&  by  him  assigned  to  Nath.  Pindar,  who 
assigned  to  Arthur  Price  &  now  retaken 
up  by  new  rights  and  for  trans,  of  6 
pers.* 

JOHN  JOHNSON,  135  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  25  Mar.  165—,  p.  27.  Bound- 
ing   Swd.    upon    a    small    branch    of 


Archers  Hope  Cr.,  N.  upon  another 
branch  of  sd.  Cr.,  E.  upon  sd.  cr.  &  W. 
upon  a  great  swamp.  100  acs.  granted 
to  his  father  John  Johnson,  12  Jan. 
1624  &  accrueth  due  unto  him  as  being 
sonn  &  heir  of  the  sd.  John  Johnson; 
&  35  acs.  for  trans,  of  1  pers.*  Note: 
This  was  made  out  againe  &  15  acres 
added  in  James  Island  Eastward  on  the 
land  of  Wm.  Spencer  (or  Spence),  150 
acres,  wch.  makes  it  up. 

THOMAS  HOLMES,  434  acs.  York 
Co.,  25  May  1654,  p.  28.  On  the  S.  W. 
side  of  York  Riv.  on  the  back  part  of 
the  land  of  Richd.  Jackson,  beg.  on  the 
head  of  a  branch  issueing  into  Pachi- 
mon  tree  branch  &c,  thence  S.  by  an 
Indian  path  ah.  Indian  feild  path  &c. 
to  the  head  of  a  branch  issueing  into 
Cattaile  Swamp  then  to  beg.  300  acs. 
by  virtue  of  the  rights  of  a  patent  for 
soe  much  dated  26  Mar.  1653;  &  134 
for  trans,  of  3  pers:  Margt.  Wedge, 
Abra.  Lambe,  Jon.  Clerke. 

RAWLEIGH  TRAVERS,  300  acs.  on 
the  S.  side  of  Rappa.  River.,  about  2  mi. 
Sly.  from  the  plantation  of  Mr.  James 
Bagnal,  9  Mar.  1653,  p.  28.  Trans,  of 
6  pers:  Mary  Marloe,  Jon.  Heath, 
Antho.,  Negro,  Margt.,  Negro;  &  100 
acs.  by  assignment  from  Mr.  Spry  to 
Mr.  Bagnall,  wch.  was  found  lesse  than 
the  bounds  of  a  former  pattern  men- 
tioned. 

JAMES  JOHNSON,  300  acs.  Nanze- 
mond  Co.,  11  Mar.  1653,  p.  28.  Joining 
to  Mr.  Phillip  Bennets  land.  Trans,  of 
6  pers:  Margt.  Guy,  Eliz.  Hugh's,  Eliz. 
Wimbleton,  Jon.  Prescot,  Richd.  Jones, 
Jon.  Owen. 

RICHARD  JONES,  288  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  6  Apr.  1654,  p.  28.  Bound- 
ing Wly.  on  John  Merryman,  Sly.  on 
Mr.  Overman,  Ely.  on  William  Smith's 
Swamp  &  Nly.  on  Nicholas  Bush. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Hen.  Wms.  (Wil- 
liams), Tho.  Dixon,  Edmd.  Parry,  Fred. 
Jenkinson,    Jon.    Dany,    Peter    Reynold. 

MAJOR  WM.  LEWIS,  800  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  last  of  March 
1654,  p.  28.  Upon  the  Ewd.  side  & 
towards  the  head  of  upper  Machoticks 


242 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Cr.,  neer  land  of  Thomas  Blagg,  and 
Nly.  into  the  woods,  upon  branches  of 
Chotanke.    Trans,  of  16  pers.* 

HUGH  LEE,  288  acs.  Northumber- 
land Co.,  22  Apr.  1654,  p.  28.  Abutt- 
ing S.  E.  upon  the  head  of  a  swamp 
that  cometh  out  of  Kings  Cr.,  and  N. 
E.  towards  land  of  John  Mottrom. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Edmd.  Perry,  Joan 
Perry,  And.  Bashaw,  Wm.  Bashaw,  Jane 
Bashaw,  Mary  Bashaw. 

WILLIAM  JOHNSON,  50  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  10  Mar.  1653,  p.  29.  In 
Eliz.  River  Parish,  running  by  Daniel 
Tanners  Cr.    Trans,  of  Francis  Thomp- 


FRANCIS  PEALE,  50  acs.  James  City 
Co.,  &  York  Co.,  21  May  1654,  p.  29. 
Beg.  at  2  cherry  trees,  running  S.  E.  by 
E.  56  perches  to  the  paile  att  a  small 
walnutt  tree,  thence  by  the  Pallisadoes 
S.  W.  by  W.  to  an  oake  marked  corner 
tree,  thence  N.  N.  W.  to  a  hickory, 
thence  N.  by  E.  to  beg.  Trans,  of  1 
pers.* 

CAPT.  NATHANIEL  HURD,  380 
acs.  on  the  N.  E.  side  of  a  Cr.  dividing 
this  from  land  of  Mr.  Nowells  &  on 
S.  E.  side  of  Skeaths  Cr.  &c.  running 
N.  W.  by  W.  to  the  Cr.  dividing  this 
from  the  land  of  Mr.  Rabnets  &c.  12 
May  1653,  p.  29.  Trans,  of  8  pers: 
Barth.  Cheverel,  Tho.  Baker,  Wm.  Green, 
Tho.  Newel,  Jane  Grace,  Hen.  Martin, 
Edmd.  Charle,  Geo.  Lyons. 

SAME.  250  acs.  att  Queen  Hith,  on 
N.  side  of  James  River,  beg.  at  a  small 
creek  which  divides  this  from  land  of 
Mr.  Burham,  deed.,  along  marked  trees 
of  land  of  Capt.  Flint,  dee'd.,  to  head 
of  run  dividing  land  between  Mr. 
Nowells  &  Mr.  Hurd  &c.  Same  date  & 
page.  Trans,  of  5  pers:  Anne  Gamon, 
Kath.  Dearing  (or  Deaning),  Sampson 
Alkin,  Richd.  Howell,  Geo.  Blower. 

SAME.  144  acs.  on  S.  E.  side  of 
Skeaths  Cr.  &  running  N.  W.  by  W. 
alongst  the  side  of  a  run  which  cometh 
from  Jacobs  well  dividing  this  from 
land  of  Mr.  Wm.  Rabnetts  &c.  Same 
date  &  page.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Ed. 
Roberts,   Ed.   Simpson,    Hen.   Culpeper. 


SAME.  533  acs.  at  the  head  of 
Skeaths  Cr.  in  Warwick  Co.,  Same  date 
&  page.  Beg.  on  the  S.  W.  side  of  a 
swamp  that  falleth  into  the  sd.  cr.  at 
the  N.  W.  by  N.  corner  tree  of  Capt. 
Tho.  Harwood,  running  Nly.  &c.  Trans. 
of  11  pers:  Jon.  Gamon,  Wm.  Jones, 
Mary  Helin,  Tho.  Fanch,  Ja.  Spragon, 
Isa.  Emerye,  Tho.  Dale,  Richd.  Gowlate, 
Richd.  Moreland,  Jon.  Smith,  Dor. 
Eastern. 

THOMAS  KIDD,  200  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  last  of  Mar.  1653,  p.  30.  Upon 
the  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  &  upon  the 
N.  W.  side  of  a  S.  W.  branch  of  Burn- 
hams  Cr.  &  N.  E.  upon  land  of  Robert 
Chouninge.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Xpher 
Morris,  Nicho.  Heath,  James  Green, 
Langham  Mack-Person. 

CAPT.  ROBERT  ABRAHAL,  160 
acs.  York  Co.,  27  Apr.  1653,  p.  30. 
Upon  S.  side  of  York  Riv.  opposite  to 
Mattapony  Riv.,  S.  S.  E.  upon  land  of 
Thomas  Holmes,  N.  N.  W.  upon  Hanke 
(or  Hawke)  pine  nest  &  E.  N.  E.  upon 
the  river.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Nicho. 
Watson,  Wm.  Lucas,  Jon.  Towneshend, 
Robert  Bett.  40  acs.  due  to  Capt.  Barn- 
house  who  assigned  these  to  the  said 
Capt  Abrahal. 

CAPT.  ROBERT  ABRAHALL,  400 
acs.  Glocester  Co.,  same  date  &  page. 
Upon  S.  E.  side  of  Mattapony  Riv.,  9 
mi.  up  the  same,  bounding  S.  E.  upon 
land  of  Natha.  Pindar  alias  Machepungo. 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  Jon.  Egglestone,  Nich. 
Mellon,  Ja.  Malton,  Robt.  Whitecraft, 
Jon.  Billins,  Nath.  Chambers,  Margery 
Donibell,  Cor.  Sanders,  assigned  by 
Capt.  Barnehouse. 

WILLIAM  COLBORNE,  350  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  at  the  head  of  Nus- 
wattucks  Cr.,  4  Mar.  1652,  p.  30. 
Bounded  on  the  W.  by  land  of  Nicho. 
Waddilow,  and  on  S.  by  main  branch 
of  sd.  Cr.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  Howell 
Glading,  Jon.  Jones,  Margt.  Tillet, 
Joan  Parrot,  Tho.  Pitcher,  Owen  Wms., 
Edmd.  Sermoner, 

ROBERT  WOODY,  200  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  at  the  head  of  the  Easterne 
branch  of  Daniel  Tanners  Cr.,  16  Apr. 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


243 


1653,  p.  30.  Beg.  by  the  branch  side  & 
running  for  length  E.  by  N.,  joining 
to  Jasper  Hogkinsons  land  to  a  white 
oake  &  for  breadth  from  the  beg.  point 
S.  by  E,  &c.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Rob. 
Woody,  Anne  Finch,  Mary  Stanton,  Art. 
Watson. 

THOMAS  HOLMES,  300  acs.  York 
Co.,  26  Mar.  1653,  p.  30.  Upon  the 
head  of  another  devdt.  of  sd.  Holmes, 
bounded  on  the  N.  N.  W.  with  Cattaile 
Swamp  on  E.  N.  E.  with  his  own  land 
&  S.  S.  E.  with  a  branch  of  Hacadays 
Swamp.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Margt. 
Bridges,  Richd.  Jackson,  Jon.  Trotter, 
Richd.  Harrison,  Gabriel  Wilson,  Benj. 
Strange.  (This  name  has  been  altered 
to  HOMES.) 

THOMAS  DODFORD,  100  acs.  in 
the  Easterne  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.  on 
the  N.  side  of  same.  11  Mar.  1652,  p. 
31.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Alex.  Gwyn, 
Eliz.  Browne. 

JOHN  SPILTIMBER  &  JOHN 
BRADY,  325  acs.,  15  Mar.  1652,  p.  31. 
Record  incomplete;  mentions  Greys 
Creek  &  Milne  Swamp.  125  acs.  pur- 
chased of  John  Ker unto  whom  it 

was  formerly  granted;  and  150  acs.  for 
trans,  of  3  pers:  Hen.  Latturd,  Jon. 
Bryant,  Jon.  Richds.,  Mercht. 

GAWEN  LANCASTER,  75  acs. 
Chas.  River  Co.,  in  Cheesecake,  first 
March  1652,  p.  31.  Butting  upon  Capt. 
Wests  Cr.  westerly,  bounded  on  the  N. 
with  land  of  Thomas  Mareland  &  on  S. 
side  with  land  of  Wm.  Reynolds.  Trans, 
of  2  pers:  Barnaby  Litchcum,  Mary 
Nicholls. 

RICHARD  JACKSON,  400  acs.  upon 
Yorke  Riv.,  in  a  bay  next  beyond  land 
of  Wm.  Hockaday,  bounded  E.  by  S. 
upon  Warrany  Cr.  &c.  5  Apr.  1653,  p. 
31.  Due  by  purchase  of  a  survey  & 
rights  for  trans,  of  8  pers:  Martin 
Westerlinckes  his  wife  &  child,  Hum. 
Wms.  (Williams),  Alex.  Gregory  twice, 
the  said  Alexander  again,  Timothy 
Turton. 

SAMUEL  ABBOT,  1177  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  15  Mar.  1652,  p.  31.  Upon 
S.  side  of  Cherkrose  Cr.,  along  land  of 


Richard  Bell  &  Sir  Wm.  Berkeley,  W. 
to  a  swamp  dividing  this  from  the  land 
of  Geo.  Union.  (Record  incomplete.) 
775  acs.  granted  sd.  Abbot  25  Feb. 
1648;  402  acs.  for  trans,  of  9  pers.*  & 
48  acs.  due  upon  the  last  name. 

JOHN  JOLLIFFE,  150  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  30  May  1653,  p.  32.  Join- 
ing to  Mr.  Nasworthies  land  &  butting 
on  land  of  Mr.  Jones,  and  Mr.  Oudlant. 
Trans,  of  3  pers:  Anne  Marshall,  Tho. 
Kemp,  Reb.  Bennet. 

SAME.  200  acs.  Low.  Norf.  Co., 
same  date  &  page.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
Jon.  Corye,  Ar.  Lewis,  James  Hunter, 
Mary  Cooper. 

RICHARD  THOMAS,  185  acs. 
Henrico  Co.,  on  N.  side  of  Appamat- 
tacks  Riv.,  24  Mar.  1652,  p.  32.  On 
the  N.  side  of  Cotnecocks  (or  Cone- 
cocks)  brooke  opposite  to  Scurvy  (or 
Scurry)  Hill,  etc.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
Wm.  Blackman,  Marg.  Loyd,  Tho.  Dyar, 
Hen.  Mitchell. 

EDWARD  DIGGS,  Gent.,  700  acs. 
of  land  called  Mantpoyick,  Glocester 
Co.,  18  Apr.  1653,  p.  32.  On  N.  side 
of  Mattapony  Riv.,  running  from  a 
small  creek  up  by  the  river  S.  Ely.  to 
Mattoones  Cr.  &c.    Trans,  of  14  pers.* 

COL.  GEORGE  LUDLOW,  Esq,  one 
of  the  Councel  of  State,  Glocester  Co. 
(acreage  not  given).  12  Mar.  1652,  p. 
32.  Mentions  Pyanketanck  Riv,  and 
Wading  Creek.    Record  incomplete. 

MR.  WM.  DEYNES  (Deines),  2,400 
acs,  beg.  at  the  S.  side  of  a  creek  in 
the  Northermost  river  of  Mobjack  bay, 
which  Cr.  divides  this  from  land  of 
Geo.  Levels,  extending  W.  N.  W. 
thence  S.  S.  W.  thence  E.  S.  E.  to  the 
river,  parallel  to  the  same,  and  to  the 
mouth  of  the  creek  where  it  began. 
Formerly  granted  unto  Edmond  Dawber 
18  Nov.  1642;  renewed  in  his  name 
18  Mar.  1649  &  since  deserted;  granted 
by  order  of  Assembly  1652  to  sd. 
Deynes  &  also  due  him  for  trans,  of 
48  pers.*    19  Mar.  1652,  p.  32. 

WILLIAM  HAINES,  700  acs.  neer 
the   head    of   the   Southerne   branch    of 


244 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Nanzemond  Riv.,  13  Apr.  1653,  p.  33. 
Trans,  of  14  pers:  Morris  Glyn,  Tho. 
Davis,  Tho.  Carnal,  Wm.  Davis, 
Rowld.  Hockly,  Angel  Carnall,  Jon. 
Boardman,  Roger  Parry,  Rothal  Carnal, 
Eliz.  Hinde,  Hen.  Edwards,  Wm. 
Hynde,    Mary   Edwards,   Jon.   Edwards. 

ROBERT  BRASSEUR,  1200  acs. 
Nanzemond  Co.,  12  Apr.  1653,  p.  33. 
At  the  head  of  the  southerne  branch  of 
Nanzemond  Riv.,  600  acs.  lying  on  the 
S.  side  of  the  branch  &  the  other  600 
on  the  N.  side.  Beg.  on  the  N.  side  &c. 
joining  land  of  Adrian  Buny.  On  the 
S.  side,  being  an  Indian  Towne,  beg.  at 
a  marked  pine  standing  on  a  bancke  by 
the  branch  side,  joining  land  of  Wm. 
Haines  &c.  Trans,  of  24  pers:  Marg. 
Stockwell,  Geo.  Juory  (or  Ivory),  Robt. 
Brasseur,  Florence  his  wife,  Mary 
Brasseur,  Persid  (or  Persie)  Brasseur, 
Kathe.  Brasseur,  Bennet  Brasseur,  Wm. 
Wotton,  Tho.  Parker,  Jon.  Sutton,  Jon. 
Stephens,  Step  Dordon,  Jon.  Loyd.  Jon. 
Bott,  Symon  Iron,  Jon.  Barefeild,  Eliz. 
Pateman,  Geo.  Daldye,  Wm.  Ball, 
Nicho.  Moroise  (?),  Tho.  Pursell,  Ra. 
Ellis,  Jon.  Abby. 

RICHARD  HAINES,  400  acs.  neer 
the  head  of  the  Southerne  branch  of 
Nanzemond  River,  12  Apr.  1653,  p.  33. 
Beg.  att  a  marked  white  oake  standing 
by  the  branch  side  &  running  S.  E.  &c. 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  Richd.  Haines,  Richd. 
Green,  Jane  Hains,  Tho.  Cowken,  Nath. 
Wristone  (?),  Eliz.  Johnson,  Marg. 
Gosnell,  Eliza.  Gosnell. 

THOMAS  WILLIS,  170  acs.,  Yorke 
Co.,  commonly  called  York  ridge,  14 
Apr.  1653,  p.  33.  Bounded  on  the  E. 
by  land  of  Thomas  Jackson,  dec'd.,  from 
thence  parallel  to  Dead  mans  brooke  & 
adj.  land  of  Wm.  Clarke,  deed.,  W., 
thence  N.  &  lastly  adj.  land  of  Edward 
Wright  N.  E.  until  it  meets  with  land 
of  sd.  Jackson.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Tho. 
Willis,  Mary  Willis,  Ed.  Peirce,  Eliz. 
Costen,  Christian  Varblow  (or  Vart- 
low),  land  due  for. 

JOHN  BLACKBORNE,  100  acs. 
Surry  Co.,  11  Mar.  1652,  p.  34.  Upon 
the  head  branches  of  the  Suncken  marsh, 
bounded  S.  S.  W.  along  the  land  of  Mr. 


Arthur  Jordan,  W.  N.  W.,  thence 
parallel  to  the  first  line  N.  N.  E.,  thence 
along  land  of  Mr.  John  Dibdal  &  his 
own  former  devdt.  to  beg.  Trans,  of  2 
pers:  Jon.  Blackborne,  Mary  Banin  (or 
Bavin). 

JOHN  BANISTER,  THOMAS 
FOOTE  &  JOHN  BOARHAM,  350  acs. 
lying  on  the  Swd.  side  of  Home  Har- 
bour Cr.,  beg.  on  the  Cr.  side  &  run- 
ning by  markt  trees  deviding  this  from 
the  land  of  Mrs.  Morrison,  S.  W.  by 
Mr.  Armsteads  markt  trees,  over  the  Cr. 
to  Mr.  Halls  land  thence  S.  by  E.  &c. 
to  markt  trees  of  Henry  Singleton,  N. 
to  corner  of  John  Teages  &  Edward 
Morgans  land  at  the  head  of  the  Cr.,  & 
down  the  Cr.  Wly.  to  the  beg.  25  Nov. 
1653,  p.  34.    Trans,  of  7  pers.* 

FRANCIS  HALE,  400  acs.  on  the  N. 
side  of  Home  Harbour,  beg.  on  the 
side  of  same  &  running  N.  N.  E.  to  the 
head  of  a  creek,  thence  N.  E.  by  E.  to 
the  S.  side  of  Winter  Harbour,  thence 
Ely.  &c.  25  Nov.  1653,  p.  34.  Trans, 
of  8  pers:  Francis  Hale,  John  Steere, 
John  Turner,  Anne  Watson,  Nathaniel! 
Parmeton,  John  Parmeton,  Elizabeth 
Sadler,  Sarah  Palmeton. 

COL.  WILLIAM  CLAYBORNE, 
Esqr.,  Secretary  of  State  of  this  Colony, 
5,000  acs.  lying  on  the  N.  side  of 
Pamunkey  Riv.  in  the  Narrowes,  abutt- 
ing on  the  mouth  of  a  creek  called 
Tanckes  Maddaqume  (or  Maddaquine), 
parting  same  from  land  of  Capt.  John 
West,  &  thence  running  Westerly  to  a 
poynt  of  land  where  the  sd.  Col.  Clay- 
borne  landed  the  Army  under  his  com- 
mand in  1644,  &  so  running  along  ud 
the  Banke  of  the  sd.  River  to  a  small 
run  at  the  mouth  of  Crany  Island  Reach 
there  being  a  marked  black  walnutt  tree 
&  soe  extending  all  along  into  the 
woods  one  myle  from  the  sd.  River 
side.  Due  unto  sd.  Clayborne  for  trans, 
of  100  pers.*  1st  Sept.  1653,  p.  34. 
Note:  "This  Pattent  by  reason  of  an 
Error  is  renewed  and  recorded  under- 
neath this." 

SAME.  5,000  acs.  of  land  at  Pamun- 
key on  the  N.  side  of  the  freshes  of 
Yorke  River,   bounded   on   the  E.   side 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


245 


with  Tanx  (?)  Mattadaquin  Cr.  on  the 
S.  side  of  the  Yorke  Riv.  &  the  marshes 
of  the  same,  on  the  W.  side  with 
Cohoake  Cr.  &  on  the  N.  side  with  the 
maine  woods  running  one  mile  into  the 
same  as  appear es  by  the  marked  trees. 
Same  date  &  page.  Trans,  of  100  pers: 
Arthur  Figes,  Thomas  Bagwell,  John 
Belson,  John  Poare,  Henery  East,  Tho- 
mas Kendall,  William  Cooke,  John 
Russell,  Joane  Younge,  John  Tompson, 
Phillipp  Hamlin,  John  Donne,  Christo- 
pher Fleminge,  John  Butler,  Thomas 
Tripland,  Robert  Halsey,  Henery  Eu- 
bunke,  Edward  Breckler,  William  Col- 
lup,  James  Tenricke,  Martin  Male,  Tho- 
mas Lester,  Robert  Lake,  Mary  Anthony, 
Joane  Qually,  Robert  Coop  (?),  Thomas 
Youall,  John  Pumwell,  Edward  Tomp- 
son, Francis  Hantrinpp  (?),  Richard 
Powell,  William  Lauc  (?),  George 
Perkins,  Michaell  Polentine,  Edward 
Blunt,  Edward  Hale,  Edmond  Perry, 
Thomas  Orly,  Edmond  Deering,  Samuel 
Scifeild,  Thomas  Streete,  Henery  Hunt, 
Roger  Backster,  Originall  Browne,  John 
Morgan,  Vincent  Mansfeild,  John  Ackew 
(or  Askew),  Howell  Morgan,  John 
Neswid  (?),  Robert  Tureton,  Ann 
Waneman,  Samuell  Boict  (?),  William 
Edwards,  Thomas  White,  Anne  Linny, 
John  English,  Thomas  Symds,  John 
Bennett,  Thomas  Woodhouse,  Richard 
Hill,  Richard  Hobeane,  William  Ellyus, 
John  Reading,  William  Freeman,  Rich- 
ard Raiman,  Joane  Vizard,  Edward 
Guilfeth  (?),  John  Glantum,  Robert 
Turke,  John  Walker,  Ann  Baker,  Tho- 
mas Steerman  John  Dendy,  William 
Williamson,  Ann  Williamson,  John 
Hobson,  Phillipp  West,  Thomas  Keene, 
William  Porter,  John  Stare. 

CAPT.  WM.  BROCAS,  Esqr.,  190 
acs.,  Lancaster  Co.,  upon  S.  side  of 
Rappa.  Riv.,  18  Nov.  1653,  p.  34. 
Bounded  N.  N.  W.  upon  land  of 
Dennis  Conniers  &  Evan  Davis,  N.  N. 
E.  along  a  swamp  leading  along  upon 
the  head  of  Obarts  Cr.,  S.  E.  upon  land 
of  Mr.  Bar.  Obart  &  S.  W.  upon  a 
White  Marsh.  150  acs.  part  granted  to 
Edward  Boswell,  5  Mar.  1651  &  as- 
signed to  Evan  Davis  &  John  Pedro, 
who  assigned  to  sd.  Brocas;  &  40  acs. 
for  trans,  of  1  per.* 


DENNIS  CONNIERS,  700  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  upon  the  N.  side  of  Pyanke- 
tanke  Riv.,  towards  the  head  of  same. 
18  Nov.  1653,  p.  35.  300  acs.  thereof 
bounded  upon  the  S.  W.  side  with 
Pyanketanke  Riv.,  on  the  S.  E.  &  N.  E. 
with  the  land  of  Mrs.  Elia.  Brocas,  ex- 
tending N.  W.  along  land  of  Abraham 
Moon  &  upon  the  great  swamp;  said 
land  being  due  for  trans,  of  6  pers;  and 
400  acs.  bounded  on  the  N.  side  with 
the  land  of  Mrs.  Elianor  Brocas,  on 
S.  W.  with  the  same  &c.  Due  for  trans, 
of  8  pers.  The  following  names  appear 
hereunder:  John  Seaden,  John  Thorpe, 
Henery  Waldron,  Charles  Rawlins, 
Hugh  Barres,  Richard  Woodsworth, 
Thomas  Heashew,  Francis  Harrison, 
Mrs.  Tabitha  Brocas;  Kate,  Peeter, 
Grasheere,  Dorothy,  Xpher,  Edward, 
Susan,  Martha,  Negroes;  "by  assign- 
ment from  Capt.  William  Brocas.  150 
acres  unto  the  said  Capt.  Brocas  viz. 
the  3  last  and  placed  to  Mrs.  Elianor 
Brocas." 

MRS.  ELIANOR  BROCAS,  250  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  upon  the  S.  side  of  Rap- 
pa.  Riv.,  18  Nov.  1653,  p.  35.  Beg.  at 
a  S.  E.  corner  of  another  tract  of  her 
land,  extending  S.  W.  &c.  thence  along 
Pianketank  Riv.  &c.  Trans,  of  5  pers: 
Edward,  Susan  &  Martha,  Negroes, 
Robert  Hill,  William  Narton. 

ABRAHAM  MOONE,  400  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  2  Jan.  1653,  p.  35.  Upon 
the  head  of  Mrs.  Brocas  devdt.,  extend- 
ing S.  W.,  thence  S.  E.  &  thence  N.  E. 
upon  sd.  devdt.    Trans,  of  8  pers.* 

HENRY  DEADMAN,  400  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  upon  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
18  Nov.  1653,  p.  35.  Bounded  on  the 
N.  W.  side  with  the  land  of  Mr.  James 
Bagnall,  N.  E.  with  Rappa.  Riv.,  and 
S.  E.  with  another  tract  now  in  possess- 
ion of  sd.  Deadman.  150  acs.  by  right 
of  patent  granted  him  for  350  acs.  21 
June  1650,  on  the  S.  side  of  Rappp. 
Riv.,  which  is  relinquished  to  make  this 
good;  &  250  acs.  for  trans,  of  5  pers: 
William  Cantry,  James  Bouce,  George 
Apleton.  "One  hundred  acres  Rights 
assigned  by  Abraham  Moone  beeing  pte. 
of  a  Pattent  of  Two  hundred  and  nyne 
granted  to  Thomas  Hinson  and  by  the 


246 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


said  Thomas  Hinson  Assigned  and  sold 
to  the  said  Moone." 

JOHN  WOOD,  1200  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  12  Oct.  1653,  p.  35.  250 
acs.  upon  the  Eastermost  side  of 
Nomeny  Riv.  opposite  to  land  of  Mr. 
Lewis  Burwell,  beg.  at  a  swamp  divid- 
ing this  &  the  land  of  Gabriel  Odgir, 
extending  nigh  sd.  river,  W.  upon  a 
branch  of  same  upon  the  S.  side  of 
Vasatican  path,  S.  &c.  600  acs.  beg. 
where  the  former  land  ends,  upon  a 
branch  of  Nomeny  Riv.,  opposite  to  Mr. 
Rosiers  land,  &  running  W.  &c,  350 
acs.  beg.  at  corner  tree  of  sd.  Odgier, 
running  S.  &c.  250  acs.  formerly 
granted  unto  Tho.  Phillips  16  Sept. 
1651  &  by  him  assigned  to  Tho.  Haw- 
kins, who  assigned  to  Francis  Sherwood 
&  John  Wood,  which  sd.  Sherwood  as- 
signed his  right  to  sd.  Wood;  600  acs. 
granted  sd.  Wood  1st  Aug.  1652,  & 
350  acs.  for  trans,  of  7  pers.* 

GEORGE  TAYLOR,  542  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  20  Oct.  1653,  p.  36.  Upon 
the  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  adj.  his 
former  grant.  242  acs.  pan  hereof  lyeth 
betwixt  land  formerly  granted  unto  sd. 
Taylor  &  Wm.  Moseley.  Trans,  of  11 
pers:  James  Nayler,  Ja.  Rude,  Jon. 
Wyld,  Rob.  Miles,  Grace  Simpson,  Alex. 
Dampher. 

JOHN  AYTON,  2,000  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  15  Oct.  1653,  p.  37.  On  the 
N.  side  of  James  River,  N.  E.  side  of 
Wallingford  Riv.  &  E.  side  of  Warrreny 
Cr.  alias  Tyascan,  bounded  S.  E.  by  E. 
by  Timber  Swamp.  Due  by  order  of 
the  grand  Assembly,  20  Oct.  1650. 

JOHN  ROSYER  (Rossier),  700  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  19  Oct.  1653,  p. 
37.  Upon  N.  W.  side  of  Nomeny  Riv., 
beg.  upon  a  small  branch  which  divides 
this  &  land  surveyed  for  Major  Lewis 
Burwell,  dec'd.,  extending  W.  by  N. 
parallel  to  sd.  Riv.  upon  a  tract  sur- 
veyed for  Thomas  Youl.  500  acs.  there- 
of granted  to  Major  Lewis  Burwell,  17 
Nov.  1650,  who  assigned  same  to  Tho- 
mas Youl,  by  whom  it  was  assigned  to 
sd.  Rosyer;  &  200  acs.  for  trans,  of  4 
pers:  Mrs.  Marg.  Booker,  Mary  her 
daughter,  Phillip  Williams,  Elizabeth 
Hues. 


COL.  GEORGE  LUDLOW,  Esqr., 
one  of  the  Councill  of  State,  1,000  acs. 
on  the  S.  side  of  Patowmack  Riv., 
Northumberland  Co.,  10  Oct.  1653,  p. 
38.  Lying  S.  &  S.  W.  upon  the  Macko- 
tick  Cr.,  N.  W.  upon  Heards  Cr.  &  N. 
E.  upon  Patowmack  Riv.  against  a  small 
sedgy  island  lying  at  the  mouth  of  sd. 
Crr.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  18  Oct. 
1650. 

RICHARD  FOARD,  367  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  8  Nov.  1653,  p.  38.  Upon  a 
N.  E.  branch  of  Powhatan  Swamp,  run- 
ning N.  N.  E.,  thence  W.  by  N.  to 
land  of  Sir  Wm.  Berkeley,  thence  N. 
by  E.,  etc.  200  acs.  purchased  by  him 
of  Richard  Vardy  (or  Hardy)  &  John 
Barker,  &  167  acs.  for  trans,  of  4  pers.* 

Note:    This  is  relinquished. 

JOHN  EARLE,  1,000  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  13  Oct.  1653,  p.  38. 
Bounded  S.  W.  &  N.  Wly.  upon  the 
several  lands  of  one  Bloyce  &  a  Cooper 
on  the  N.  W.  side  of  Yeocomoco  Riv. 
&  a  branch  of  the  same  towards  land  of 
George  Knott.  Trans,  of  20  pers:  John 
Evans,  William  Smith,  Anne  Harris, 
Mary  Morris,  Edmond  Jones,  John 
Roberts,  Wm.  Lepeat,  Jone  Howell, 
Richd.  Moor,  Tho.  Thorpe,  Walter 
Thorpe,  John  Knight,  Mary  Knight, 
Adam  Hornett,  Eliz.  Langford,  Abigail 
Evans,  Anne  Evans,  Jno.  Dale,  Judith 
Dale,  Susan  Spencer. 

WILLIAM  BEDLAM,  70  acs.,  29 
Nov.  1652,  p.  39.  Comonly  known  by 
the  name  of  Yeocomoco  Point.  Bounded 
with  a  creek  which  divides  this  &  land 
of  Thomas  Hayle,  W.  upon  land  of 
Edward  Walker,  N.  N.  E.  upon  Patow- 
meck  Riv.  &  E.  S.  E.  upon  Yeocomoco 
Riv.    Note:    This   record    "torn   away." 

JAMES  BESOUTH,  98  acs.  York  Co., 
19  Mar.  1652,  p.  39.  Upon  S.  W.  side 
of  the  Briery  Swamp,  bounded  N.  by  E. 
along  land  of  Thomas  Shaw  &  Richard 
Harris  to  the  Indian  Spring  path,  W. 
by  N.  upon  land  of  Richard  Jones  & 
S.  W.  &  S.  upon  a  line  of  marked  trees 
near  the  white  Marsh.  50  acs.  formerly 
granted  unto  John  Hartwell,  25  Mar. 
1642    &   assigned   unto   Thomas   Shaw, 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


247 


who  renewed  it  by  patent  25  Oct.  1652 
&  assigned  to  sd.  Besouth.  48  acs.  the 
residue  for  trans,  of  1  per.* 

DENNIS  CONIERS,  194  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  30  Mar.  1653,  p.  40.  Beg. 
upon  Sunderland  Cr.  at  branch  that 
divides  this  &  land  of  Edward  Boswell, 
extending  itself  parallel  to  the  creek 
N.  W.  Wly.,  thence  to  land  of  Evan 
Davies  &c.  Trans,  of  4  pers.*  Richd. 
Willms  (Williams)  is  the  only  name 
given. 

SAME.  223  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  30 
Mar.  1653,  p.  40.  Butting  upon  land  of 
Richard  Lewis.  Note:  Record  "torn 
away."  Trans,  of  5  pers:  Thomas 
Peach,  William  Peach,  George  Staimes 
(or  Stannes),  Thomas  Sanders,  Grace 
his  wife. 

THOMAS  WHITE  &  PETER  SEX- 
TON, 450  acs.  Norfolk  Co.,  Last  of 
March,  1653,  p.  40.  On  the  Ewd.  side 
of  the  Swd.  branch  of  Elizabeth  Riv., 
beg.  at  the  mouth  of  Gaythers  Cr.,  run- 
ning up  by  same  E.,  thence  S.  by  W. 
&c.  by  the  side  of  Little  Cr.,  by  the 
mouth  of  same  &c.  Trans,  of  9  pers: 
2  Negroes  by  assignment  from  Mr. 
Gutheridge;  John  Bigg,  Geo.  Goodman. 

HENRY  LOWNE,  300  acs.  Henrico 
Co.,    on    the    N.    side    of    Appamattux 

Riv.,  Mar.   1652,  p.  41.    Beg.  at 

Conecock  Brook.  200  acs.  boundeth 
from  sd.  brook  N.  N.  E.,  thence  W.  N. 
W.  &c.  S.  S.  W.  to  the  head  of  Major 
Woods  land  &c.  100  acs.  lyeth  next 
above  this,  bounded  W.  along  head  of 
Major  Woods  land  that  runeth  to  the 
Rocks  &c.    Trans,  of  6  pers:  Sale, 

Nichols,     Jno.     Antrobors     (?), 

Will.  Ridley,  Wm.  Webster,  Tho. 
Lowe.    Note:    Record  "Torn  away." 

" shall  come  I  Richard  Bennett 

Greeting  in  our  twelfth   of 

March   one  thousand   six  hundred   fifty 

by  the  consent authority 

of  Parliament  for  the  red and 

Governing  Virginia  It  was  pro- 
vided   that    the    priveledge    fifty 

acres  of  Land  for  every  person  trans- 
ported into  this  Colony  should  be  con- 
tinued as  formerly  granted.  And  Where- 


as by  Act  of  a  Grand  Assembly  made 
the  26th  of  Aprill  1652  It  was  pro- 
vided that  all  should  hereafter  be  signed 
under  the  Governrs.  hand  with  the 
Secr'ys.  and  shall  be  accounted  authen- 
tique  and  Valid  in  Law  untill  a  Colony 
Seall  shall  be  provided  and  appointed." 
(Signed)  Ri.  Bennett;  W.  Claiborne, 
Sec.  Page  42.  (Note:  The  foregoing 
is  copied  as  fully  as  record  permits  and 
is  quoted  here  because  it  relates  to  sub- 
sequent patents. — N.  M.  N.) 

THOMAS  BOSWELL,  800  acs.  on 
N.  side  of  Ware  River  in  Mock  jack 
Bay,  6  May  1652,  p.  42.  Beg.  upon  the 
River  side  opposite  to  a  piney  island 
&c,  E.  S.  E.  by  marked  trees  of  Wil- 
liam Dudley  &c.  Trans,  of  16  pers: 
Domine  Cherrick,  Eliza.  Locker,  Fra. 
Wiggan,  Anne  Lovell,  two  Negroes; 
Ann  Tabrer,  Eliza.  Harrage,  Jno.  Howet 
&  his  wife,  Margery  Paine,  James 
Kaiton,  Miles  Moor,  John  Boswell, 
Eliza.  Wiggs,  Jno.  Adsdon. 

JOHN  MARSHALL,  of  Lynnhaven 
parish,  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  250  acs.,  4th 
May  1652,  p.  43.  Beg.  near  a  branch 
coming  out  of  the  head  of  the  dam  of 
the  broad  Cr.,  running  S.  by  E.  &c. 
Trans,  of  5  pers.* 

GEORGE  THOMPSON,  400  acs. 
Glocester  Co.,  26  Feb.  1653,  p.  44. 
Lying  below  the  mouth  of  Pieanketank 
Riv.,  bounded  on  N.  W.  side  with  a 
tract  of  land  surveyed  for  Richard 
Burton,  N.  E.  upon  Pieanketank  River 
als.  Sting  rye  Bay,  and  S.  E.  upon 
Queens  Cr.  Trans.  8  pers:  Jno.  Rich- 
ards, Wm.  Bracon,  James  Lacy,  James 
Leigh,  David  Donart,  Richard  Brent, 
Jno.  Leech,  Danll.  Nash. 

GEORGE  TOMPSON,  200  acs.  upon 
the  head  of  1,000  acs.  formerly  known 
by  the  name  of  Col.  Hugh  Gwyns 
dividend  of  land  in  the  main,  upon  S. 
side  of  Pieanketank  Riv.,  beg.  at  a 
pockhiccory  tree  which  divides  this  & 
land  surveyed  for  Col.  Higgenson,  ex- 
tending E.  S.  E.  &c.  26  Feb.  1653,  p. 
44.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Jno.  Bence, 
Patrick  Manough,  Mary  Lewis,  William 
Foard. 


248 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


JOHN  MEDSTARD  &  JOHN  ED- 
WARD (Edwards),  300  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  26  Feb.  1653,  p.  45.  On 
the  N.  side  of  Great  Wicocomoco  Riv. 
about  5  mi.  up  the  same,  beg.  upon  land 
of  Martyn  Coale,  extend.  W.  N.  W.  &c. 
Due  sd.  Thomas  Medstard  &  John  Ed- 
wards for  trans,  of  6  pers:  John  Ed- 
wards, William  Baley,  John  Cason  (or 
Caton),  Anne  Mekins,  Jenkin  Edwards, 
Mary  Novell. 

JOHN  EDWARDS,  700  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co.,  26  Feb.  1653,  p.  45.  Upon  the 
head  of  the  Eastermost  branch  of  Coro- 
toman  Riv.,  beg.  at  N.  E.  side  of  a 
branch  of  sd.  Eastern  Branch,  extending 
N.  E.  by  N.  to  Moraticon  and  Wicoco- 
moco path,  near  the  mouth  of  a  swamp, 
thence  E.  S.  E.  to  beg.  Trans,  of  14 
pers:  Jno.  Nayler,  Ja.  Hatcher,  John 
Gower,  John  Brice,  Richd.  Snelling, 
Eliza.  Martyn,  Mary  Wilcox,  Mary 
Clarke,  Rey.  Jones,  Jno.  Mader,  Joane 
Kible,  Jno.  Edwards,  Pat.  MackManor, 
Mary  Seeleyn. 

ROBERT  PARFITT  &  WILLIAM 
THATCHER,  300  acs.  Lancaster  Co., 
26  Feb.  1653,  p.  45.  Upon  N.  W.  side 
of  Corotomon  Riv.,  bounded  N.  E.  upon 
250  acs.  surveyed  for  John  Nichols.  S. 
E.  upon  the  River  &  S.  W.  upon  land 
of  George  Goldsmith.  Due  unto  sd. 
Parfitt  for  trans,  of  6  pers:  Jno. 
Broughton,  Wm.  Lewis,  Jno.  Rice. 
Mary  Farmer,  Richd.  Long,  Anne 
Nusham. 

THOMAS  BOURN  (BOURNE),  220 
acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  26  Feb.  1653,  p. 
46.  Upon  N.  side  of  Pianketank  Riv., 
bounded  upon  S.  W.  side  with  a  west- 
ern branch  of  Pianketank  opposite  to 
Store  point  divident,  from  the  head  of 
sd.  branch  extending  N.  by  W.  to  a 
branch  of  Barbique  Cr.  upon  Rappa- 
hanock  Riv.  Trans,  of  5  pers:  Arthur 
Newcomb,  Margaret  Powell,  James 
Dunkin,  Vincent  Jones,  Mary  Lowell. 
30  acs.  due  upon  the  last. 

TOHN  MERRYMAN  &  MORGAN 
HEYNES  (HAYNES),  700  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.  upon  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
26  Feb.  1653,  p.  46.  Lying  near  the 
mouth  of  the  narrows,  N.  W.  upon  land 


of  John  Pain,  S.  E.  upon  the  first  clifts 
&  S.  W.  upon  sd.  River.  Trans,  of  14 
pers:  Jno.  Willett,  Wm.  Johnson, 
Richd.  Barrett,  Ja.  Holding,  Tho.  Mash, 
Wm.  Larrett,  Ja.  Attaway,  Richd.  James, 
Robt.  Lane  (or  Land),  Wm.  Robinson, 
Tho.  Harrison,  Wm.  Long,  James  West, 
Antho.  Byfeild. 

COL.  HUGH  GWYNN,  200  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  upon  N.  side  of  Piean- 
tank  Riv.,  26  Feb.  1653,  p.  47.  W.  N. 
W.  upon  a  creek  dividing  this  from 
land  of  Col.  John  Mattron,  S.  E.  upon 
land  of  Maj.  George  Read  &  S.  S.  W. 
upon  the  River.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Peter 
Cade,  Hum.  Higgens,  Susan  Barker, 
Susan  Hillery. 

PETER  KNIGHT,  of  Wicocomoco, 
500  acs.  Northumberland  Co.,  on  S.  side 
of  great  Wicocomoco  Riv.,  26  Feb. 
1653,  p.  47.  Beg.  at  branch  of  sd.  Riv. 
dividing  this  &  land  of  Thomas  Scoggin, 
extending  E.  S.  E.  to  another  branch  of 
sd.  Riv.  to  a  point  near  or  against  the 
Island  &c.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Wm. 
Fluellin,  James  Donnell,  Marmad.  At- 
kins, Wm.  Saines,  Silvester  Jones,  Wm. 
Jenkins,  Mary  Wilkey,  James  Traverse, 
Mary  Sealing,  John  Allinton. 

FRANCIS  EMPEROR,  HUGH  GALE 
&  EDWARD  MORGAN,  1,000  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  in  the  S.  branch  of 
Eliz.  Riv.  at  the  head  of  Cypress  Cr., 
18  Feb.  1653,  p.  47.  Running  N.  N. 
W.  by  Peter  Sextons  line,  thence  W. 
S.  W.  &  S.  S.  E.  through  the  Cypress 
Swamp  &c.  Trans,  of  20  pers:  Jno. 
Marshall,  Jno.  Resbury,  Jno.  Trent,  Fra. 
Barbar,  Jno.  Brooke,  Tho.  Bonner,  Mr. 
(or  Wm.)  Woolly,  Jno.  Hues,  Tho. 
Simpson,  Tho.  Gover,  James  Miller, 
Richd.  Hitchcock,  Cha.  Flemin,  Jno. 
Barnett,  Nicho.  Kent,  Geo.  Smith, 
Math.  Lenn,  Richd.  Downes,  Tho.  God- 
by,  Jno.  Rowles. 

CAPT.  FRANCIS  POTT,  2,000  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  15  Feby.  1653,  p.  48. 
At  Matchepungo  Cr.,  bounded  on  the 
Eastern  part  by  the  Seaboard  side  &c. 
Trans,  of  40  pers:  Fra.  Pott,  Hattill 
Pott,  Hen.  Pott,  Jno.  Pott,  Junr.,  Brid- 
^.ett  Pott,  Richd.  Townshend,  Richd. 
Pritchard,    Jno.   Turner,    Hen.    Bowyer, 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


249 


Cornelius  Mills,  Ralph  Partin,  Richd. 
Britten,  Eliza.  Green,  Eliza.  Hill,  Mary 
Booker,  Jane  Salmon,  Edwd.  Hartford, 
Edwd.  Normansell,  John  Milshire, 
Robert  Nelmes,  Chr.  Feild,  Tho.  Tutty, 
Arthur  Jeffreys,  Jno.  Cittinge,  Joseph 
Colston,    Geo.    Sweet,    Mary    Sumner. 

Note:  1,000  acs.  the  one  moiety  of  this 
abovementioned  patent  relinquished  as 
under  his  hand  in  this  patent  may  ap- 
pear and  the  rights  thereof  transferred 
to  another  patent  bearing  date  14  Apr. 
1657.    Test:    Griff.  Standen. 

JOHN  CO  ALE,  200  acs.  James  City 
Co.,  6  Feb.  1653,  p.  48.  Bounding  N. 
&  by  W.  upon  a  freshett  called  Moyses 
Run,  E.  by  N.  upon  Moyses  Cr.,  S.  by 
E.  upon  land  of  Barthalomew  Knise  (or 
Kinse)  &  W.  by  S.  upon  land  of  John 
Clasey.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Tho.  Prit- 
chett,  Winifred  Eaton,  Eliza.  Elsmore, 
Jno.  Richards. 

CAPT.  FRANCIS  POTT,  1500  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  24  Jan.  1653,  p.  49. 
Beg.  at  the  end  of  a  point  of  land  on 
the  N.  side  of  a  branch  runing  out  of 
Matchepungo  Cr.  &c.  to  land  of  Rich- 
ard Allen.  500  acs.  by  venue  of  an 
order  of  the  Quarter  Court,  7  Dec. 
1633,  and  1,000  acs.  for  trans,  of  20 
pers:  Joseph  Filch,  Jno.  George,  Wal- 
ter Horton,  Cha.  Greene,  Wm.  Gapin, 
Richd.  Osborne,  Tho.  Price,  Wm.  Price, 
Randall  Holt,  Walter  Daniel,  Joseph 
Hill,  Edwd.  Grimes,  Richd.  Taylor,  Ed- 
ward Harryson,  Nich.  George,  James 
Hall,  Susan  Wilson,  Eliza.  Blore,  Susan 
Holston,  Margery  Little. 

RICHARD  FOSTER,  250  acs.  in  Lyn- 
haven  Parish,  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  26  Nov. 
1653,  p.  49.  Beg.  at  the  head  of  the 
broad  Cr.,  running  S.  S.  W.  near  a 
swamp,  thence  W.  N.  W.  &c.  Trans, 
of  5  pers:  Dorcas  Foster,  Senr.,  Dorcas 
Foster,  Junr.,  Richd.  Foster,  Richd. 
Street,  Henry  Williams. 

CHARLES  EDMONDS,  350  acs. 
York  Co.,  8  Oct.  1653,  p.  50.  On  the 
S.  side  of  Charles  Riv.  on  back  side  of 
Mount  Holly,  running  bv  land  of  John 
Holding,  etc.    Trans,  of  7  pers.* 

JAMES  BONNER,  650  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,   upon   S.   side   of   Rappa.   Riv.,    19 


Oct.  1653,  p.  50.  Beg.  at  the  mouth  of 
a  branch  which  divides  this  &  land  of 
Thomas  Dale,  son  of  Nicholas  Dale, 
deed.,  extending  along  the  river  E.  by 
S.  to  marked  trees  dividing  this  &  land 

of   George   W ding   &c.    Trans,    of 

13  pers:  James  Mackmum,  Tho.  Smith, 
Eliza.  Harwood,  Wm.  Cockman,  Hugh 
Jones,  Mary  Rowles. 

FRANCIS  CLAY,  200  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  19  Oct.  1653,  p.  50.  Upon 
S.  W.  side  of  Herring  Cr.,  on  the  S.  E. 
side  of  the  western  branch,  which 
divides  this  &  land  of  Mr.  Yeo.  &  along 
head  of  Major  George  Reeds  land,  etc. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  Tho.  Cleaver  (or 
Cleaner),  Wm.  Jones,  Edward  Sampson, 
Wm.  Bethell. 

THOMAS  YOUL,  150  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  19  Oct.  1653,  p.  51.  Upon 
S.  side  of  Nomeny  Riv.,  bounded  on 
Westermost  side  with  a  creek  which 
divides  this  &  land  of  Mr.  Thomas 
Vause,  deed.,  &  N.  E.  upon  land  of 
John  Tasker.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Jno. 
Cleves  (or  Clenes),  Jno.  Camell,  Jno. 
Wilson. 

JOSEPH  CROSHAW,  1750  acs.  York 
Co.,  8  Nov.  1653,  p.  51.  On  S.  side 
of  York  Riv.  behind  land  of  Capt.  John 
West  called  Cbeemockin,  running  by 
black  Cr.  unto  Croshaws  Extent.  Trans, 
of  25  pers:  Henry  Banister,  Michael 
Widnell,  John  Turpey,  Ann  Barden, 
Martin  Palmer,  Mary  his  wife,  Mary 
Palmer,  John  Godsmen,  Villemile 
Hughes,  Edward  Tirrell,  John  Daniell, 
John  Fleming,  John  Miller,  Richard 
Bayley,  John  Wlening  (?),  Sarah  Boyce, 
George  Smith,  Hugh  Stanfort,  George 
Gymes. 

WILLIAM  FREEKE,  300  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  19  Oct.  1653,  p.  52. 
Nly.  upon  Hollis  Cr.  &  a  creek  dividing 
this  from  land  of  John  Cooke.  Trans, 
of  6  pers:  Mary  Davis,  Fra.  Coale, 
Henry  Barnes;  three  Negroes;  "by  as- 
signmt.  of  Abrah.  Moone.'' 

JOHN  DAY,  400  acs.  Glocester  Co., 
19  Oct.  1653,  p.  52.  Upon  S.  E.  side 
of  Poropotank  Cr.,  upon  head  of  Matto- 
pony  Cr.,  upon  N.  E.  side  of  a  swamp 


250 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


which  divides  this  &  land  of  Isack 
Richeson,  extending  along  a  branch  of 
the  swamp  which  divides  this  &  land 
of  Willm.  Kinsey,  W.  &  by  S.  upon 
land  of  Isaac  Richeson  &  N.  W.  by  W. 
upon  land  of  William  Bayley.  Trans, 
of  8  pers:  Mary  Hockett,  Elizabeth 
Hockett,  Mary  Clover  (or  Clever),  Fra. 
Jacob,  Thomas  Lake,  Thomas  Clarye, 
Judith  Laton,  Ann  Field. 

EDWARD  DOBSON,  920  acs.  on 
the  S.  side  of  Severn  in  Mockjack  Bay, 
4  Apr.  1653,  p.  53.  Beg.  on  Ewd.  side 
of  Burnt  poynt,  over  the  creeke  & 
alongst  markt  trees  of  Mr.  Cheleys  &c. 
to  S.  side  of  Ceedar  Island,  incompass- 
ing  the  island.  Trans,  of  19  pers:  Ed- 
ward Dobson,  Fra.  his  wife,  John 
Snellinge,  Wm.  Dorcye,  Elizabeth  Dod- 
berye,  Richard  Hagar,  Richard  Baker, 
John  Broune,  (Brown  ?),  Anne  Kinge, 
Danl.  Mackall,  John  Smith  twice,  Joane 
his  wife,  Richard  Moseley,  John  Powell, 
Cor.  Peterson,  Wm.  Townsend,  Jane, 
Haslewood,  Alexander  Anderson,  30 
acs.  due  upon  the  last  name. 

ROGER  WALKER,  600  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  31  Dec.  1653,  p.  53. 
On  N.  side  of  great  Wicocomico  Riv. 
at  the  head  of  Thomas  Saffrons  land, 
Wly.  upon  a  swamp  near  the  head  of 
a  creek  which  runs  into  sd.  river  above 
Parrats  poynt,  running  over  the  creek, 
along  the  head  of  Saffrons  land  and 
over  the  head  of  another  Cr.  which 
runneth  into  the  sd.  river  betwixt  the 
land  of  William  Thomas  &  sd.  Saffron. 
Trans,  of  12  pers:  Nath.  Sheppd. 
(Shepperd  ?),  Robert  Tracye,  John 
Parris,  John  Fouesham,  Robert  Payne, 
John  Clerke,  Richard  Bradfort,  Fra. 
Cagen,  John  Alexander,  Edmond  Cuspe, 
Willm.  Usklye,  John  Sheeles. 

MR.  JOSEPH  CROSHAW,  700  acs. 
York  Co.,  2  Mar.  1653,  p.  54.  Upon 
the  S.  &  N.  side  of  the  old  Mill, 
bounded  N.  by  E.  along  land  of  Thomas 
Pankman  to  Ricohack  path  &  S.  E.  & 
N.  E.  along  land  of  Thomas  Price. 
Trans,  of  14  perrs.* 

MAJOR  JOHN  WESTHROPE,  600 
acs.  Chas.  City  Co.,  24  Nov.  1653,  p. 
54.    On   S.   side  of   James  River  upon 


branches  of  the  Burchen  Swamp  run 
being  part  of  the  old  towne,  bounded 
from  William  Short  W.  thence  N.  to 
the  head  of  Mr.  Sparrows  400  acs., 
thence  along  sd.  Sparrows  &  William 
Shorts  markt  trees.  Trans,  of  12  pers: 
William  Hacro,  Elizabeth  Ray,  David 
Sands,  Marg.  Franklin,  Constant 
Basticks,  Bridget  Chudworth,  Leo. 
Whalps,  Thomas  Smith,  John  Smart, 
Jane  Aykins,  William  Marshall,  Thomas 
Duncombe. 

JOHN  DIPDALL,  Clerk,  756  acs. 
Chas.  City  Co.,  24  Nov.  1653,  p.  55. 
On  S.  side  of  James  River  between  the 
heads  of  Florida  hundred  &  Powells  Cr., 
bounded  upon  Capt.  Frame,  Capt. 
Rothewell,  Mr.  Sparrow  &  Harris'  run. 
Due  for  trans,  of  16  pers:  Edward 
Beck,  Per  eg.  (or  Perey)  Port,  John 
Rogers,  Henry  Walker,  Edmond  Clarke, 
Wm.  Edwards,  William  Bird,  Ben. 
Gregory,  Avis  Barrett,  George  Boult, 
Mary  Druell,  Hugh  Mohunharaga, 
Claus  Mavellis,  Pee.  Hamer,  John  Rey- 
noll,  John  Hatton. 

WILLIAM  DEBNAM,  1500  acs.  in 
Mockjack  Bay.,  26  Dec.  1653,  p.  55. 
Beg.  at  marked  tree  of  George  Ludlow, 
Esqr.,  a  mile  distant  from  a  branch  in 
Severne  &c.  through  Cedar  Island  to  the 
Bay,  Sly.  along  the  bay  side  including 
all  the  marshes  to  Oaken  Island,  to  N. 
side  of  Shawes  Cr.  &c.  to  marked  tree 
of  sd.  Squire  Ludlow  &c.  Trans,  of  30 
pers:  Robert  Woodstock,  John  Butcher, 
George  Marton  (or  Maston),  Wm.  Ash- 
well,  Tho.  Hedges,  Richard  Hobson, 
Wm.  Booes,  Fr.  Willoughby,  John 
Hamwood,  Alice  Curnock,  Thomas 
Saker,  Thomas  Parry,  Henry  Noakes, 
Thomas  Cure,  James  Hurst,  James 
Rouse,  Wm.  Kempton,  Thomas  Lane, 
Xtopher  Boone,  Henry  Walby,  Wm. 
Crane,  Thomas  Warbeton,  Nicho.  Bot- 
cham,  Thomas  Passe,  Robert  Griggs, 
John  Harvey,  John  Gurrington,  Row- 
land Jones,  Samuel  Stephens,  Bennedick 
Gracewood. 

HENRY   CORBELL,    600   acs.   Gloster 

Co.,  Mar.  1653,  p.  56.    Being  on 

the  N.  &  S.  side  of  a  path  which  lead- 
eth  from  the  now  plantation  of  Col. 
Richard  Lee,  Esqr.,  to  the  plantation  of 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


251 


Mr.  Thomas  Breeman,  beg.  by  Jeffery 
Bews  land,  running  S.  W.  thence  S.  E. 
&  N.  W.  Trans,  of  12  pers:  John 
Wrightwell,  John  Hudson,  John  Co- 
heane,  Henry  Elmore,  Richard  Baragan, 

Mary  Bausworth,  Littlefield,  

Follards.    (4    blank    lines    for   names.) 

FRAN.  GOWER,  280  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  15  Nov.  1653,  p.  56.  S.  side 
Rappa.  Riv.  on  Ewd.  side  of  Hodskins 
Cr.,  running  W.  by  S.  &c.  Trans,  of  6 
pers:  William  James,  Ann  Bartlett, 
Alice  Peeter,  Ann  Taylor. 

MR.  JOHN  CUSTIS,  Merchant,  100 
acs.  Northampton  Co.,  15  Oct.  1653,  p. 
57.  In  the  middle  parish  on  S.  side  of 
Naswattocks  Cr.  by  Fishing  Hawke 
branch,  adj.  Mr.  Charltons  land.  Trans, 
of  2  pers:  Doll  the  Negro,  Georg 
Sutch..    Assigned  by  Col.  Yardly. 

JOHN  CABLE,  250  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  4  Oct.  1653,  p.  57.  S.  side  of 
Rappa.  Riv,  on  Ewd.  side  of  Coxes  Cr., 
beg.  at  devdt.  of  land  formerly  surveyed 
for  Dan.  Batts,  and  running  by  the  side 
of  a  creek  dividing  this  &  land  of 
Ralph  Payne.    Trans,  of  5  pers.* 

FRANCIS  FLEETWOOD,  250  acs. 
within  the  mouth  of  the  Church  Cr.  in 
Eliz.  Riv.,  running  S.  W.  by  S.  &c.  15 
Dec.   1653,   p.   58.    Trans,  of   5   pers.* 

JOHN  SHERLOCK,  200  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  15  Nov.  1653,  p.  58.  In 
Rappa.  Riv.,  on  the  head  of  a  devdt.  of 
land  formerly  surveyed  for  Mr.  James 
Williamson,  lyeing  on  Totaskey  Cr., 
running  N.  E.  by  N.  by  the  creek  side 
to  a  small  branch  dividing  this  &  the 
land  allotted  to  the  Rappahanock  In- 
dians.   Trans,  of  4  pers:    Judith  Holli- 

man,    Holliman,    Robert    Sutton, 

Christopr.  Holliman. 

JOHN  PAYNE,  940  acs.  lying  upon 
the  N.  side  of  Pepetick  Cr.  &  a  creek  at 
the  foot  of  certain  white  clifts.  15  Nov. 
1653,  p.  59.  Said  land  formerly  granted 
unto  Fra.  Hobbs,  20  Aug.  1650,  &  as- 
signed to  sd.  Payne. 

MAJOR  WILLIAM  LEWIS,  50  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,   14  Oct.    1653,  p.   59.    On 


S.  S.  W.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.  freshes  op- 
posite to  land  of  John  Pownsey,  etc., 
&  N.  W.  to  Chohoake  Cr.,  etc.  Trans, 
of  1  pers.* 

RICHARD  LONG  (Longe),430  acs., 
25  Nov.  1653,  p.  60.  Beg.  upon  branch 
of  Milford  haven,  on  Wwd.  side  of  a 
small  run  dividing  this  &  land  of  George 
Billups  &c.  Trans,  of  9  pers:  Edward 
Dymont,  Henry  King* 

THOMAS  MORGAN,  200  acs.  lying 
at  the  head  of  the  North  river  in  Mock- 
jack  Bay,  beg.  at  marked  tree  of  Andrew 
Careless,  running  E.  by  N.  &c.  25  Nov. 
1653,  p.  60.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Jona- 
than Harris,  Joane  Carelesse,  John  Grey, 
Elizabeth  Williams. 

GEORGE  CABLE,  200  acs.  lying  in 
Milford  Haven,  beg.  at  marked  tree  up- 
on Hollowing  Poynt,  running  alongst  a 
creek  Wly.  &c.  25  Nov.  1653,  p.  61. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  John  Owen,  Richard 
Clothier,  Hugh  A  highlander,  Edward 
Bambas. 

THOMAS  KEENE,  527  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  13  Oct.  1653,  p.  61. 
Abutting  N.  W.  upon  the  several  lands 
of  Ralph  Horsly  &  Edward  Coppedge, 
S.  S.  E.  upon  Cloughtons  Cr.  &  N.  E. 
upon  Cherry  Poynt.  Trans,  of  11  pers: 
Thomas  Orley  twice,  Archibald  Read, 
Thomas  Watson,  Margaret  Brown,  John 
Earle  &  his  wife,  Thomas  Keene,  Mary 
Keene,  Wm.  Keene. 

JOHN  FAUCETT,  FREEMAN 
CONNAWAY  &  JOHN  HOWARD, 
1,000  acs.  Northumberland  Co.,  13  Oct. 
1653,  p.  62.  Abutting  Ely.  upon  land 
of  Mr.  George  Fletcher,  deed.,  and  Sly. 
upon  a  branch  of  Dennis  his  creek 
dividing  this  from  land  of  Mr.  Richard 
Budd.    Trans,  of  20  pers.* 

WILLIAM  HARDIDGE,  1,000  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  19  Oct.  1653,  p. 
62.  Upon  S.  side  of  Potomeck  River, 
beg.  at  an  Oyster  Shell  poynt  at  the 
mouth  of  Poor  Jack  Cr.,  extending  S.  E. 
to  another  creek  which  divides  this  & 
land  of  Mr.  Thomas  Speake,  thence 
S.  W.  upon  land  of  Mr.  John  Rosyer, 
and   N.   E.   along  land   of  Mr.  Walter 


252 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Broadhurst.  450  acs.  granted  sd.  Hard- 
idge  by  patent  15  Sept.  1651;  &  550 
acs.  on  the  S.  W.  &  upon  the  head  of 
sd.  450  acs.  for  trans,  of  11  pers: 
James  Wesh,  John  Jones,  Patrick  Ascott, 
Joane  Lasey,  William  Neworth,  Robert 
Jackson,  Mary  Howell,  Frances  Juett, 
Lucy  Robinson,  William  Church,  Tho- 
mas Vaughan. 

NICHOLAS     MERIWETHER,     600 

acs.  Northumberland  Co.,  16  Nov.  1653, 
p.  63.  At  Wicocomico  Riv.,  bounded 
N.  E.  by  N.  upon  the  head  of  Dennis 
Cr.  opposite  to  land  of  Mr.  Fletcher  & 
Mr.  Richard  Budd,  and  S.  E.  by  E.  upon 
land  of  John  Howell  (or  Howett — al- 
tered) ;  Trans,  of  12  pers:  Henry 
Cockett,  Thomas  Hurt,  William  Ross, 
Joane  Wright,  Peter  White,  Edward 
Whiteing,  John  How,  Edmond  Wil- 
liams, William  Clerke,  Jeffery  Moore, 
Charles  Harward,  Richard  Perrin,  James 
Bowles,  Henry  Walke. 

THOMAS  SCOGGIN,  500  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  19  Oct.  1653,  p. 
63.  Upon  the  S.  side  of  great  Wicoco- 
mico Riv.,  extending  to  Scoggins  Cr. 
Trans,  of  10  pers:  John  Smith,  Mary 
his  wife,  John  Prosser,  Thomas  Goodale, 
Bartho.  Blome,  George  West. 

COL.  JOHN  MOTTROM  (Mat- 
trum),  1200  acs.  Northumberland  Co., 
19  Oct.  1653,  p.  64.  Upon  S.  side  of 
Chickacone  Riv.,  beg.  from  poynt  on 
the  Westermost  side  of  the  Bridge  Cr., 
extending  S.  by  W.  to  branches  of  great 
Wicocomico  Riv.,  thence  E.  by  S.  upon 
branches  of  Chuckahann  (Chickhan)  &c. 
Due  by  assignmt.  of  Whittingham  Fogg, 
assignee  of  Sir  Thomas  Wilford  for 
50  Lbs.  Sterling  for  400  acs.  &  100  acs. 
by  the  partye  abovesaid  assigned  to  sd. 
Mattrum,  &  residue  for  trans,  of  14 
pers:  Whittington  Fogg  &  Wm.  Bran- 
don* 

PETER  KNIGHT,  1,000  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  13  Oct.  1653,  p.  64. 
Upon  N.  W.  side  &  on  the  head  of 
Wicocomico  Riv.,  200  acs.  part  thereof 
S.  E.  on  the  head  of  sd.  river,  N.  E. 
on  land  of  one  Pallen,  dec'd.  450  acs. 
S.  E.  on  the  main  branch  of  the  head  of 
Yeocomico   Riv.   &  N.   E.   on   sd.    200 


acs.,  &  350  acs.  S.  E.  upon  this  land  & 
N.  E.  upon  land  of  John  Shakley.  200 
acs.  formerly  granted  unto  George  Knott 
&  assigned  to  sd.  Knight  &  800  acs.  for 
trans,  of  16  pers:  Charles  Roe,  John 
Roe,  Edward  Morris,  Mary  Morris, 
William  Stephens,  Nicho.  Allen,  Fra. 
Leake,  John  Skiddiner,  Jane  Stoe  (or 
Sloe),  Alice  Howell,  George  Shaw, 
Ann  Shaw,  Marjary  Green,  Ralph 
Millett,  Abraham  Stronge,  Robert 
Barnett. 

JOHN  GOSLIN,  150  acs.  lying  near 
the  head  of  Chuckatuck  Cr.,  beg.  at  the 
Miles  End  of  Peter  Mountegues  land. 
13  Dec.  1653,  p.  65.  Trans,  of  3  pers: 
William  Donson,  Mary  his  wife,  Wm. 
Darrington. 

RICHARD  RUSSELL,  150  acs.,  27 
Aug.  1653,  p.  66.  Adj.  to  Massey  Poynt 
&  divided  from  the  land  of  John  Gookin 
by  the  first  runing  gutt  round  about  the 
sd.  Mossey  Poynt.    Trans,  of  3   pers.* 

JOHN  PAGE,  Merchant,  200  acs.  on 
the  N.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.,  beg.  at  a 
little  run  joyning  to  land  of  Col.  Wil- 
liam Clayborne  &c.  23  Aug.  1653,  p. 
66.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  John  Page,  Mer- 
chant, twice,  William  Ore  (or  Ord), 
John  Cox. 

MR.  JOHN  HOLLOWES,  2,400  ocs. 
on  S.  side  of  Potomeck  Riv.,  bounding 
from  the  mouth  of  Connowoman  Cr.  N. 
W.  to  the  Marsh,  N.  by  E.  on  Conno- 
woman Bay,  E.  by  S.  on  Nomany  Bay, 
S.  W.  on  sd.  River,  &  S.  E.  on  land  of 
Mr.  Speake.  Due  by  vertue  of  3  patents 
granted  for  the  same  land,  all  bearing 
date  30  Jan.  1650.  11  Sept.  1653,  p. 
67. 

MR.  THOMAS  DAVIS,  600  acs.  ly- 
ing in  Potomeck  Riv.,  bounding  S.  E. 
on  land  of  Mr.  Fra.  Jones  Sec.  11  Sept. 
1653,  p.  67.  Trans,  of  12  pers:  Anne 
Cooper,  Martha  Hill,  Anne  Roe,  Natha. 
Hurisatt,  Fra.  Cooper,  Antho.  Wilkin- 
son, Mary  Kirke,  Anne  Brown,  Mary 
Lovell,  Patrick  Mackroe,  Richard  Col- 
lett,  Math.  Browning. 

MR.  THOMAS  SPEAKE,  1,000  acs. 
in     Potomeck     Riv.,     opposite     against 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


253 


Miompses  Island.  11  Sept.  1653,  p.  68. 
Trans,  of  20  pers:  Henry  Lilly,  Nicho. 
Eison  (or  Euson),  Fra.  Durwell,  Tho- 
mas Hamond,  John  Crosticke,  Charles 
Hoell,  Symons  &c,  George  Abathon 
(?),  Mr.  Edward  Tempest,  Dan.  Mack- 
danell,  Edward  Martaye,  Thomas  Mack- 
daniel,  Richard  Marsh,  Lahawn  (?) 
Mackdanna,  Elisia  Macartee,  John 
Tovey,  Marine  Annoagan  (?),  Richard 
West,  Galloway  a  Scotchman,  Henrry 
Stanton   (or  Stinton). 

The  abovesaid  patent  is  granted  unto 
THOMAS  BREWERTON  by  order  of 
the,  Govr.  &  Councill,  4  Oct.  1657. 
P.  68. 

ROBERT  WILD  &  PHILLIP  CHES- 
LEY,  100  acs.  York  Co.,  in  Hampton 
Parish,  11  Oct.  1653,  p.  68.  Beg.  at 
marked  ash  tree  in  Mill  Swamp  at  the 
head  of  Queens  Cr.,  running  up  N.  W. 
&c.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Thomas  Makin, 
William  Edwards. 

ABRAHAM  MOON,  1700  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  last  of  Mar.  1653,  p.  69. 
Upon  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  oposite 
land  of  Lady  Chichley;  bounded  S.  E. 
along  Lady  Chisleys  land  till  it  cometh 
to  land  of  Capt.  William  Brocas,  Esqr. 
&c.  N.  W.  &  N.  Upon  Nyemcock  Cr. 
&  N.  E.  to  beg.,  being  down  the  sd. 
Cr.  upon  land  of  the  aforesd.  Lady 
Chisley  alis.  Sir  Henry  Chichley.  Due 
for  trans,  of  34  pers:  James  Rods, 
John  Pelam,  John  Brice,  William  Dray, 
James  Brice,  William  Byer,  John 
Roberts,  James  Williams,  William 
Lendall,  John  Margaretts,  Thomas 
Potts,  Fra.  James,  James  Morgan,  Wil- 
liam Clarke,  Morose  a  Scott,  Mary 
Willington,  Geo.  Holding,  Robert 
Weaborne,  William  Jefferys,  James 
Mackmell,  Robert  White,  William 
Newton,  Marga.  Browne,  John  Newton, 
Richard  Groves,  Thomas  Donniell, 
Mary  Light,  Anne  Slaughter,  Michael 
Inges,  Phillip  Beadle,  William  Cantrey, 
James  Bonner,  Gregory  Apliton. 

SAME.  300  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  19 
Oct.  1653,  p.  69.  Upon  N.  W.  side  of 
Nimcock  Cr.  opposite  to  another  tract 
of  land  of  sd.  Moon,  beg.  at  Cedar 
Poynt    upon    the    head    of    Sir    Henry 


Chichleys  devdt.  of  200  acs.  now  in 
possession  of  Thomas  Kidd  &c.  Trans, 
of  6  pers.* 

THOMAS  TODD,  600  acs.  lying  on 
Wwd.  side  of  the  Easternmost  river  in 
Mockjack  Bay,  beg.  at  Chesnutt  Cr., 
running  W.  N.  W.  &c.  to  William 
Holder  &c.  15  Oct.  1653,  p.  70.  Trans, 
of  12  pers:  Thomas  Uggins,  John 
Torme  (?),  Mary  Maddox,  John  Mar- 
tin, Sanders  Mandrose,  James  Mackay, 
John  Blake,  John  Neale. 

JOHN  HILLIER,  920  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  19  Oct.  1653,  p.  70.  N.  E. 
upon  Potomeck  Riv.,  W.  upon  land  of 
Thomas  Peake  &  a  small  branch  of  up- 
per Matchotique  Riv.  &  S.  E.  upon  land 
of  Thomas  Boyce.  Trans,  of  19  pers: 
Richard  King,  William  Thomas,  Rich- 
ard   Dennett,    John    Hillier,    his    wife 

,  Wm.  Fossett,  Fra.  Jenkins,  Joane 

Thomas,  Sarah  Wilsonn,  William 
Beale,  Math.  Welbeloved,  Andrew  Dun- 
ston,  Elizab.  Parry,  Lawrence  Dawby, 
Fra.  Morgan,  Gent.  Note  20  acres  the 
overplush  in  Browns  patent  being  at 
the  disposall  of  Abra.  Moone.  150  acres 
rights  the  overplush  of  a  patent  of  209 
acres  granted  to  Thomas  Hinson  and  by 
his  Assignee  sold  to  Abra.  Moone  on 
which  patent  is  5  rights  the  residue 
made  use  of. 

GEORGE  WADDING,  600  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  upon  S.  side  of  Rappa.  River, 
19  Oct.  1653,  p.  71.  Beg.  upon  land 
of  James  Bonner,  extending  along  the 
river  to  a  creek  which  divides  this  and 
land  of  Patrick  Myler  &c.  Trans,  of  12 
pers:  Geo.  Wadding,  Thomas  Powell, 
Jno.  Williams,  Willm.  Jones,  Margaret 
Mounford,  Abigail  Gwynn,  Thomas 
Littlepage,  James  Johnson,  Robert 
Willett,  Jane  Hackett,  William  Rouse, 
John  Linn. 

JOHN  HILLIER,  100  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  19  Oct.  1653,  p.  71.  At 
the  head  of  Attopinn  Cr.,  bounding  N. 
E.  upon  the  lower  part  of  the  Dam,  etc. 
Trans,  of  2  pers:  Richard  Parker, 
Robert  Border. 

GEORGE  WATTS,  300  acs.  North- 
umberland  Co.,    19  Oct.    1653,   p.   72. 


254 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


On  S.  side  of  Lower  Matchoticke  Riv., 
beg.  about  2  mi.  up  the  sd.  river  near 
an  Oyster  Shell  poynt  &c.  Trans,  of  6 
pers:  Sarah  Milford,  David  Maie  (?), 
Makum  Thompson,  Robert  Anderson, 
Henry  Stuart,  Henry  Johnson. 

JOHN  HOLDING,  389  acs.  York 
Co.,  1  Nov.  1653,  p.  72.  On  S.  side  of 
Charles  Riv.,  on  the  back  side  of  Mount 
folly,  running  by  land  of  Charles  Ed- 
monds, &c.  to  a  branch  belonging  to 
Ware  Cr.    Due  sd.  Houlding  for  trans. 

of    8    pers:    Alexander    Smith,    R , 

John  Fulcher,  George  Thomas,  Thomas 
Bryan,  John  Hall,  Catherine  Huitt, 
Thomas   Knap,   Dorothy  a   maid   servt. 

CHARLES  GRYMES,  Clerk,  960  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  26  Dec.  1653,  p.  73. 
Upon  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  &  N.  W. 
side  of  Corotoman  Riv.,  beg.  on  N.  W. 
side  of  a  swamp  which  devides  this  & 
land  of  Mr.  Hoane,  extending  W.  &  by 
N.  to  Chicokone  Path  &c.  Trans,  of 
19  pers:  Daniell  Stammer,  William 
Cooke,  William  Parsons,  George  Crane, 
Mathew  Scrivener,  William  Byrd, 
Oliver  Waytes,  Gabll.  Binion,  Thomas 
Mullett,  Richard  Miller,  Thomas  Nel- 
son, Josias  Vessell,  Henry  Blakinsop, 
Eleazer  Ratford,  Robert  Savidge,  Rich- 
ard Eccles,  Edward  Gibbs,  Eliza.  Sutton, 
Thomas  Quiner  (?). 

SAME.  1,000  acres.  Same,  county, 
date  &  page.  Upon  N.  side  of  Rappa. 
Riv.,  bounded  S.  W.  upon  the  head  of 
Fleets  Cr.  on  the  N.  W.  side  of  Rappa. 
Town  &c.  Trans,  of  20  pers:  Edmond 
Atwood,  Thomas  Sawyer,  John  Licer- 
more,  George  Torringe,  Robert  Haw- 
kins, Wm.  Tinglebuge,  Robert  White- 
ing,  Thomas  Wilson,  James  Messer, 
Wm.  Deare,  John  Watkins,  William 
Mafield,  John  Armstrong,  George 
Waines,  Richard  Ashton,  Richard  Arm- 
hurst,  William  Polly,  Henry  Hudsale, 
Thomas  Bulling,  John  Catlett. 

SAME.  1,000  acres.  Lancaster  Co., 
18  Oct.  1653,  p.  74.  Upon  N.  W.  side 
of  Moraticon  Cr.,  beg.  upon  Eastermost 
side  of  a  small  branch  which  devides 
this  &  land  of  Thomas  Steevens,  ex- 
tending E.  by  N.  &c.  Trans,  of  20  pers: 
Ralph    Waddington,    Thomas    Sanders, 


Provess  Nelson,  Thomas  Grymes,  Ralph 
Dawbigg,  Thomas  Stretflld,  Richard 
Stone,  John  Woodgear,  John  Willough- 
by,  Anto.  Hegnone  (or  Hegrove),  John 
Workman,  John  Elcock,  Mingoe  a 
Negro,  Tho.  Faulkner,  Wm.  Miller, 
Marke  Gasser,  Lan.  (or  Law.)  Stoakes, 
Sam.  Spicer,  John  Rolland,  Wm.  Fore- 
man, John  Robrisius  (?).  Land  due 
for  the  last  name.  Renewed  3  Dec. 
1656. 

JOHN  BELL,  150  acs.  Lancaster  Co., 
26  Feb.  1653,  p.  74.  Upon  the  S.  W. 
side  of  Barbique  Cr.,  beg.  at  the  mouth 
of  a  branch  which  divides  this  &  land 
of  Thomas  Bourne  &c.  Trans,  of  3 
pers:  James  Strong,  William  Lee, 
James  Purt. 

JOHN  PHILLIPS,  250  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  13  July  1653,  p.  75.  On  N.  side 
of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  at  a  pine  standing 
on  a  poynt  of  Johns  Cr.,  running  N. 
N.  E.  &c.  Trans,  of  5  pers.*  Note: 
This  patent  surrendered  1st  Nov.  1654. 
Teste:    Robert  Hubberd,  Clk. 

SAME.  100  acs.,  same  county,  date 
&  page.  Being  a  neck  of  land  on  the 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  between  2 
creeks,  butting  W.  S.  W.  on  a  marsh 
dividing  this  &  land  of  Evan  GrifTeth 
&c.    Trans,  of  2  pers.* 

CHARLES  KIGGEN,  100  acs.  called 
the  Pinny  Ridge,  Yorke  Co.,  1  July, 
1653,  p.  76.  Adj.  Wly.  upon  land  of 
Wm.  Clarke,  dec'd.,  thence  E.  by  N. 
upon  land  of  Thomas  Harwood,  etc. 
Trans,  of  2  pers:  Elizabeth  Turner, 
Francis  Carr. 

MR.  NICHOLAS  PERRY,  250  acs. 
Chas.  City  Co.,  11  Mar.  1652,  p.  76. 
On  S.  side  of  James  Riv.,  on  the  N.  W. 
side  of  Upper  Chipoakes  Cr.,  alongst 
Thomas  Colliers  markt  trees  N.  W., 
thence  S.  W.  down  to  the  Little  Cr., 
S.  E.  to  the  great  creek  &c.  Trans,  of 
5  pers:  Nicholas  Perry,  John  Sparrow, 
Barbary  Keth,  Elizabeth  Butler,  John 
Harris. 

THOMAS  HAWKINS,  340  acs.  upon 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  towards  the  head 
of  Pepetick  Cr.,  beg.  where  the  Cr.  first 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


255 


divides  itself  into  two  small  branches, 
the  maine  branch  extending  N.  W. 
parallel  with  the  sd.  land  unto  a  marked 
tree  standing  by  an  Indian  Path,  thence 
N.  E.  &c.  1  July  1653,  p.  77.  Trans. 
of  7  pers:  Thomas  Hawkins,  Senr. 
twice,  and  his  wife  twice,  Thomas  Haw- 
kins, Junr.,  James  Challice,  Thomas 
Browne. 

MAJOR  ABRAHAM  WOOD,  1557 
acs.  lying  at  Fort  Henry  in  Chas.  City 
Co.,  9  June  1653,  p.  77.  On  S.  side  of 
Appamattock  Riv.,  bounded  from  a 
marked  tree  on  the  back  of  a  little 
swamp  on  sd.  Riv.,  S.  by  E.  into  the 
woods,  W.  by  S.,  thence  N.  by  W.  on 
the  river,  E.  by  N.  down  the  river  to 
beg.,  including  1052  acs.,  from  thence 
N.  by  W.,  W.  N.  W.  along  the  river, 
thence  W.  S.  W.  along  the  poynt,  cross- 
ing part  of  sd.  Riv.  to  the  lower  end 
of  an  island  called  Flea  Is.,  W.  running 
upon  a  straight  line  along  the  run  to 
poynt  above  tenement  of  John  Yowens 
(or  Yowers),  including  the  islands  & 
inletts  of  waters  lands  &  rocks,  being 
49  acs.  &  2  rood;  &  456  acs.  &  24 
perch,  the  residue,  bounded  S.  E.  by  S 
&c.  600  acs.  part  granted  sd.  Wood  by 
Order  of  Assembly  1  Oct.  1646,  &  957 
acs.  for  trans,  of  20  pers:  Augustin 
Elsby,  Charles  Maguiry,  Symon  Cooper, 
George  Hill,  Tho.  Linuse  (or  Lucuse), 
Daniell  Lyres,  Richard  Collins,  Edward 
Hayes,  Jane  Pryse,  Ch.  Fetherstone, 
Hen.  Neucombe,  Will.  Mantone,  Richd. 
Lloyd,  John  North,  Ellin  Parker,  Bar- 
bary  Richardson,  Jenkin  Leech,  Thomas 
Field,  Debo.  Eldridge,  John  Joanes. 

JAMES  WATSON,  345  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  11  June  1653,  p.  78.  At 
the  head  of  one  of  the  branches  of 
Pagan  Cr.,  beg.  at  an  ash  in  the  Deep 
Swamp,  running  S.  E.  &c.  Trans,  of  7 
pers:  James  Watson,  Mary  his  wife, 
John  Edwards,  John  Higate,  Ann 
Willis,   Anne  Cooke,   Edward   Kensick. 

THOMAS  GRIFFIN,  1064  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  4  July  1653,  p.  79.  On  N. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  &  Wwd.  side  of 
Farnam  Cr.,  beg.  on  Ewd.  side  of  a 
branch  that  divides  this  &  land  of  Capt. 
Moore  Fantleroy,  running  N.  E.  &c. 
350   acs.   part   hereof  by  virtue   of  the 


rights  of  a  patent  dated  22  July  1651 
&  by  sd.  Griffin  relinquished  and  de- 
livered into  the  office;  &  714  acs.  for 
trans,  of  15  pers:  Henry  Guttridge, 
Sarah  Jarvis,  Alex.  Bartlett,  John 
Welch,  Bryan  Turner,  Evan  Turner, 
Thomas  Lowell,  George  Locus,  Eliza- 
beth Grymes,  Susan  Newman,  Richard 
Weavor,  Mary  Renolds,  George  Stone, 
John  Mould. 

JAMES  MAGREGORY  &  HUGH 
FOUCH,  450  acs.  Northumberland  Co., 
4  July  1653,  p.  79-  Upon  the  S.  W. 
side  &  towards  the  head  of  Lower 
Chetank  Cr.,  beg.  near  the  creek  side  & 
opposite  to  another  tract  of  sd.  Magre- 
gorys  &  Fouche,  extending  S.  W.  &c. 
Trans,  of  9  pers.* 

WILLIAM  JOHNSON,  350  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  last  of  Mar.  1653,  p.  80. 
Upon  W.  N.  W.  of  Puscaticon  Cr.  op- 
posite land  of  John  Burke,  bounded  on 
N.  N.  E.  &  S.  S.  E.  with  branches  of  sd. 
Cr.  &  S.  W.  upon  the  high  lands,  Cr. 
&  land  of  Robert  Young.  Trans,  of  7 
pers:  John  Ware,  Mary  Walker,  James 
Wilson,  James  Hunter,  Andrew  Alles- 
ton,  Francis  Colston. 

JOHN  JENKIN,  1,000  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  14  May  1653,  p.  80. 
Bounding  S.  upon  a  little  creek  which 
parts  it  from  the  Doegs  Island  &  upon 
the  western  branch,  beg.  above  the 
mouth  of  said  little  creek,  etc.  Trans, 
of  20  pers.* 

RICHARD  STARNELL,  200  acs.,  20 
Apr.  1653,  p.  81.    (Record  incomplete.) 

Trans,    of   4    pers:    Blithe,    

Willis,  Ann  Frice,  Geo.  Smither. 

SAMUEL  PARRY,  1250  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  7  Feb.  1652,  p.  81.  Upon 
S.  side  of  Pascation  Cr.,  bounding  on 
N.  N.  E.  with  sd.  Cr.  &  on  E.  S.  S.  E. 
with  land  of  Ralph  Payne.  Trans,  of 
25  pers:  David  Poole,  Mary  his  wife, 
Martin  his  son,  Jane  his  daughter, 
Robert  Morley,  Isabell  Tassue  (?), 
Xtopher.  Vaughan,  Tho.  Hinton, 
Humph.  Meares,  Anne  his  wife,  Richard 
Pitt,  Elizabeth  Granger,  Robert  Whit- 
more  twice,  his  wife  twice,  John  Thomp- 
son, John  Bottomly,  Mary  Devine,  Eliza- 


256 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


beth  Kelly,  Thomas  Goldcock,  James 
Willis,  Thomas  Parce,  Saml.  Parry,  Tho- 
mas Wagett,  Anthony  Hine  (or  Hive), 

Robert    Young,     Humph.    ,    Dan. 

.    Note:    "200  acs.  of  these  rights 

was  formerly  taken  up  by  John  Hawkins 
and  instead  thereof  is  " 

GERVASE  DODSON,  1,300  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,   14  May  1653,  p. 

82.  Bounding  S.  upon  the  western 
branch  of  Potomeck  &  E.  upon  land  of 
John  Jenkin.  Trans,  of  26  pers:  Anne 
George,  Thomas  Bacon,  Alex.  Blackhan, 
Kath.  Walbeck,  Kath.  Lee,  Mary  Har- 
man,  Cicily  White,  Walter  Stuart,  An- 
drew Hare,  Mary  Hardy,  Jno.  Red- 
chester,  Ruth  Neale,  Richard  Stuble, 
Susan  Jones,  Thomas  Catchnett,  Honor. 
Dureing,  Susan  Keene  (or  Kleene.) 

MR.  THOMAS  STAMPE  (appears 
to  have  been  first  written  John),  3  score 
&  10  acs.,  being  an  Island  heretofore 
called  Phillips  his  Island,  on  the  W. 
side  of  Chicohamony  Riv.,  butting  N. 
on  Phillips  Bay,  E.  on  certain  drown'd 
marshes  lying  between  the  Island  &  sd. 
River,  S.  on  a  great  tract  of  marsh  & 
creekes  &  W.  on  a  slip  of  marsh  sepe- 
rateing  the  sd.  peninsula  or  island  from 
the  high  land  then  untaken  up.  Form- 
erly granted  unto  Thomas  Dunington 
20  Sept.  1647  &  purchased  by  sd. 
Stampe  &  renewed  by  order  of  Govr. 
&  Councill,  bearing  date  with  these 
presents.    8  July  1653,  p.  82. 

EDMOND  KEMP,  GEO.  CORT- 
LOUGH  &  JOHN  MERADITH,   900 

acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  25  Nov.  1653,  p.  83. 
Upon  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  bounded 
upon  S.  side  of  an  eastern  branch  of 
Corotoman  Riv.,  beg.  upon  a  poynt  upon 
the  Eastermost  side  dividing  this  & 
land  of  William  Clapham,  Senr.  Trans. 
of  18  pers:  James  Johnson,  William 
Jones,  John  Williams,  Richard  Willott, 
William  Rouse,  Jane  Macklatt,  John 
Lynar,  Fra.  Cole,  Edmond  Kemp,  Wil- 
liam Leige,  Charles  Waldgrave,  Edward 
Walgrave,  Edward  Kempe,  Roury  mac- 
Roury,  David  a  Scott,  John  Wright, 
William  Birkenhead,  Mary  Payton. 

THOMAS  PAYNE,  200  acs.  on  S. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv..    1   Aug.   1653,   p. 

83.  Adj.  a  patent  taken  up  by  Ro.  Eyres 


&  running  towards  land  of  Mr.  Richard 
Bennett.    Trans,  of  4  pers.* 

MARY  PELLOE  (BELLOE),  1,000 
acs.  On  N.  side  of  Charles  Riv.  in 
Poropotank  Cr.,  running  up  sd.  Cr.  N. 
E.  thence  E.  S.  E.  joyneing  part  on  the 
way  to  Capt.  Wormeleys.  8  Oct.  1653, 
p.  84.  Formerly  granted  to  Capt.  Wil- 
liam Leigh,  1  Aug.  1642  &  ordered  to 
be  renewed  &  patented  in  the  name  of 
sd.  Mary  Belloe,  being  the  daughter  & 
heir  of  sd.  Leigh. 

ASHWELL  BATTEN,  750  acs. 
Glocester  Co.,  13  Oct.  1653,  p.  84.  On 
both  sides  of  Cheeskake  path  leading 
towards  Mattapony  Riv  &  between  Pope- 
tyke  &  Araykaco  branches,  beg.  from 
Leo.  Chamberlaines  W.  S.  W.  line  & 
running  S.  S.  E.,  thence  E.  N.  E.  &c. 
100  acs.  by  vertue  of  a  patent  formerly 
granted  unto  his  predecessor  in  James 
City  Co.  &  by  sd.  Ashwell  relinquished, 
Sec.    650  acs.  for  trans,  of  13  pers.* 

MARTIN  COALE,  400  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  5  Oct.  1653,  p.  85. 
Abutting  Sly.  upon  Wicocomico  Riv., 
Ely.  upon  land  of  George  Heale.  Trans, 
of  8  pers:  John  Essex,  his  wife,  Tho- 
mas Swaine,  his  wife. 

THOMAS  HARDING,  740  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  20  Oct.  1653,  p.  85.  Part 
lying  on  Nwd.  side  of  Broad  Cr.,  a 
branch  of  the  Ewd.  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv., 
beg.  at  a  marked  white  oake  standing 
by  the  Valley  side  &  running  for  length 
N.  E.  by  N.  &c,  and  640  acs.  the  resi- 
due beginning  at  a  great  markt  pine 
by  a  branch  side,  running  into  the  Broad 
Cr.,  thence  running  N.  N.  W.  &c.  100 
acs.  granted  unto  John  Bolton  11  Sept. 
1648  &  assigned  unto  sd.  Harding,  & 
640  acs.  granted  sd.  Harding  22  Feby. 
1652. 

MAJOR  JOHN  CARTER,  300  acs. 
on  the  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  13  Sept. 
1652,  p.  86.  Beg.  for  breadth  on  the 
W.  side  of  the  land  of  sd.  Carter  & 
running  along  the  main  river  _  side,  & 
for  length  running  a  mile  into  the 
woods.    Trans,  of  6  pers.* 

EVAN  DAVIS  &  HENRY 
NICHOLLS,  542  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  19 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


257 


Oct.  1653,  p.  86.  Upon  S.  side  of 
Rappa.  Riv.  &  upon  the  S.  E.  side  of  a 
S.  W.  branch  of  Sunderland  Cr.,  beg. 
near  the  sd.  branch,  extending  S.  E.  to 
land  of  Richard  White  &  John  Welsh, 
Ass.  (assignees)  of  John  Pedro  &  Evan 
Davis,  Ass.  of  Edward  Boswell,  from 
thence  S.  W.  &c.  300  acs.  granted  unto 
Dennis  Conniers&  Evan  Davis  12  Feb. 
1651,  which  sd.  Conniers  assigned  to 
sd.  Davis  &  Nicholls  his  right  thereof, 
reserving  for  himself  100  acs.,  &  242 
acs.  due  for  trans,  of  5  pers:  Nicho. 
Chandler,  Jeffry  Williamson,  Grace 
Tompson,  Alexander  Graves.  Note:  42 
acs.  the  overplush  in  John  Meredith  10 
Oct.  1652. 

NICHOLAS  MERIWETHER,  300 
acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  4  July  1653,  p.  87. 
Upon  S.  E.  side  of  Corotoman  Riv.  to- 
wards the  head,  bounded  S.  W.  upon  a 
branch  dividing  this  from  land  of  Mr. 
Edwynn  Connaway.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
Thomas  Mannor,  Thomas  Webster,  Eli- 
zabeth Phillips.  Mary  John  &  Mary  by 
purchase. 

WILLIAM  THOMAS,  400  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  19  Oct.  1653,  p. 
87.  Upon  S.  side  of  great  Wicocomico 
Riv.,  bounded  on  S.  E.  side  with  Fish- 
ing Cr.,  N.  W.  upon  a  branch  of  the 
river  &  N.  E.  upon  the  river  opposite 
land  surveyed  for  Thomas  Saffall. 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  Mary  Boone,  John 
Newton,  Richard  Groves,  Thomas 
Daniell,  Mary  Light,  Anne  Slaughter, 
Michael  Inges,  Phillip  Beadle. 

MAJOR  JOHN  CARTER,  1600  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  19  Oct.  1653,  p.  88. 
Upon  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  bounding 
upon  the  S.  E.  with  Slaughters  Cr.  alias 
Johns  Cr.,  along  the  river  N.  W.  to  the 
mouth  &  E.  S.  E.  side  of  Corotoman 
Riv.  &c.  1300  acs.  granted  him  by 
patent  25  Mar.  1642  &  confirmed  3  May 
1652  &  resurveyed  9  Oct.  1652;  &  300 
acs.  by  patent  13  Sept,  1652. 

WILLIAM  BLACKEY,  100  acs.  up- 
on a  branch  of  little  Queens  Cr.,  23 
Apr.  1653,  p.  88.  Trans,  of  2  pers: 
Robert  Speare,  John  Young. 

WILLIAM  COX,  312  acs.  in  Yorke 
Riv.    behind    land    of    Mr.    Vause.    23 


Apr.  1653,  p.  89.  Trans,  of  7  pers: 
Richard  Thorpe  (or  Thrope),  Henry 
Greene,  John  Drinkwater,  John  Shelly, 
John  Kerton,  Mary  Toprell,  Katherine 
White. 

BENJAMIN  BRASSEUR,  300  acs.  at 
the  head  of  Indian  Cr.,  a  branch  of  the 
Western  br.  of  Nansemun  Riv.,  joyning 
land  of  Mr.  John  Parrett  (altered — may 
be  Garrett).  12  Apr.  1653,  p.  89. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Charles  Drurey, 
Richard  Bateman,  Mary  Richford, 
Humph.  Evan,  Hugh  Edwards,  John 
Harris. 

MR.  WILLIAM  HOCCADAY,  1000 
acs.  Yorke  Co.,  14  Apr.  1653,  p.  89. 
Near  the  head  of  Ware  Creek,  N.  W. 
by  N.  upon  a  former  devdt.  &  N.  W. 
by  N.  towards  Waraney  Cr.  Trans,  of 
20  pers:  Alexander  Watson,  Wm. 
Mackgahye,  Andrew  Sharpe,  Jane  John- 
son, Randall  ,  Isabell  Grace,  Mary 

Reeise      (?),     Tomasin     Madero      (or 

Maders),    Mary   Graham,    James   , 

Edward  Hodge,  Richard  Gillman, 
Willm.  Moline,  Fra.  Peppett,  Richard 
Jones,  Michaell  Barrow,  Richard  Moore, 
Joane  Rivers,  Ja.  Nicholson,  Wm. 
Gowin.    Renewed  20  Nov.   1654. 

WILLIAM  LEECH,  300  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  last  of  March  1653,  p.  90. 
Upon  N.  side  of  Peanketank  Riv.  about 
a  mile  above  Cheskyacke  &  Rappa- 
hanock  path,  bounded  S.  upon  the  river 
against  a  small  island  &c.  Trans,  of 
6  pers:  James  Rice,  William  Jones, 
John  Report,  James  Price,  William 
Browne,  John  Remorts. 

JOHN  ROBINSON,  300  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  p.  90.  Upon  N.  side  of 
Rappa.  Riv.  against  land  of  Col.  Bur- 
bage.  (Record  incomplete).  The  fol- 
lowing names  appear:  Richard  Lambert, 

James   Lewis,   Jane   Lewis,   Will  , 

Elias  . 

MR.  JOHN  SHEPPERD  (1,000)  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  6  May  1652,  p. 
91.  Upon  N.  W.  side  &  near  the  mouth 
of  a  swamp  upon  the  head  of  Jernews 
Cr.  dividing  this  from  land  of  John 
Powell  (altered)  &  extending  along 
land  of  Nicho.  Jernew  &  William  Hoc- 


258 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


caday,  N.  W.  to  a  branch  of  Matchoti- 
que  Cr.  Due  sd.  Sheppard  for  trans,  of 
20  pers:  Capt.  Leonard  Yeo,  Mrs. 
Clare  Yeo,  Temperancce  Laner  (?), 
John    Smith,    Richard    Haines,    George 

,  Hugh  Aden,  Charles  Hill,  Wm. 

Wilson,  Mr.  Tho.  Sheppard,  Senr.,  John 
Sheppird,  Thomas  Sheppard,  Junr., 
Daniell  Shippe,  Edward  Sheppe,  Geo. 
Thompson,  Clare  Thompson,  Nathun 
Fletcher,  Jane  Hackley,  Wm.  Blackin, 
Susan  Adams. 

MR.  WILLIAM  DEBNAM,  600  acs 
beg.  at  a  marked  tree  of  W.  line  of 
land  formerly  belonging  to  George 
Worleich  against  Crany  Cr.  in  Ware 
Riv.  in  Mockjack  Bay,  S.  &c.  to  corner 
tree  of  Mr.  Breemans  &c.  6  May  1652, 
p.  91.  Trans,  of  12  pers:  Pallardary 
Pritchard,  Francis  Hemsly, Dickin- 
son, Isarell  Gare,  Geo.  Jyllings,  Roger 
Williams,    John    Winter,    two    Negros. 

LAWRENCE  DAMERON,  340  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  p.  92.  No.  date. 
Butting  S.  E.  upon  the  head  of  Tanx 
Yeococomico  Riv.,  &c.  Trans.  7  ser- 
vants: John  Meekes,  Thomas  Clarke, 
Edward  Maddox,  3  tymes,  Elizabeth 
Coringe,  Barth.  Wethersby,  Dan.  Piggin. 

MR.  JOHN  GRESHAM,  520  acs.,  5 
May  1652,  p.  92.  320  acs.  lyeing  E. 
upon  part  of  Greshams  Cr.  and  the 
main  bay,  bounded  on  S.  with  Bakers 
Cr.  &  on  N.  by  Greshams  Cr.  parting 
this  from  land  of  Peter  Knight;  &  200 
acs.  in  Northumberland  Co.  S.  upon 
Waddis  Cr.  &  Nly.  upon  land  of  sd. 
Knight  &c.  Trans,  of  11  pers:  John 
Gresham,  twice,  Freeman  Connaway, 
Anne  Abbott,  John  Scarburgh,  Christopr. 
Houghton,  John  Baker,  John  Lee,  John 
Chamnis  (or  Charnis),  Richard  Davis, 
Jane  Maning. 

CAPT.  JOHN  WEST,  Esqr.,  850  acs. 
at  the  mouth  of  the  Narrowes  of  Yorke 
Riv.,  being  a  neck  of  land  on  the  N. 
side  thereof,  the  neck  being  made  by 
Yorke  Riv.  on  S.  side  thereof  &  a  Cr. 
called  Tancks  Maccadegums  issueing 
thereof,  Mattaponye  on  the  E.  &  Armo- 
gotegue  (or  Annogotegue)  Cr.  issueing 
thereout  &c.  3  July  1652,  p.  93.  Trans. 
of    17    pers:    John    Baldwin,    Elizabeth 


Powell,  Anne  Minefrid,  Simon  Turner, 
Joseph  Warrall,  John  Seargent,  Tho. 
Gilgraffe,  Wm.  Blackey,  Wm.  Ruck 
(Rush  or  Rusk),  Wm.  Wassail,  Wm. 
Lacye,  Elizabeth  Hudson,  Marmad. 
Made,  Benja.  Mann,  Jacob  Shure 
(Share),  James  Williams,  John  Dickin- 


EDWARD  WRIGHT,  50  acs.  Yorke 
Co.,  3  July  1652,  p.  93.  Adj.  to 
Southermost  bounds  of  land  first  taken 
up  by  Mr.  Richard  Lee,  Secre  &  Coll., 
commonly  called  the  Ridge.  Trans,  of 
1  pers:  Jone  the  wife  of  the  sd.  Ed- 
ward Wright. 

RICHARD  DUDLEY,  200  acs.  on 
Ewd.  side  of  the  North  River  in  Mock- 
jack  Bay,  beg.  on  the  river  side  of  Mr. 
Curtis'  land  near  the  black  water  Cr. 
mouth,  running  N.  E.  &c.  3  July  1652, 
p.  94.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  William 
Morksly,  Fr.  Halliard,  William  Mash, 
Mary  Andrews. 

GILBERT  BLUNT,  320  acs.  upon  N. 
side  of  Yorke  Riv.  &  Eastermost  head 
branch  of  Poropotank  Riv.,  bounded  on 
the  Eastermost  side  with  the  head  run 
of  sd.  branch  which  divides  it  from  land 
of  Winfield  Webb,  beg.  at  Chiskayack 
path  &c.  16  July  1652,  p.  94.  Trans, 
of  7  pers:  Gilbert  Blunt,  his  wife,  his 
Brother,    Wm.   Jackman,    Eliza.   Wells, 

Anne  Dodson,  Ann  ,  Wm.  Blyth, 

Jone  Blyth.    30  acs.  due. 

MR.  WILLIAM  WHITBY,  1300  acs. 
Warwick  Riv.  Co.,  page  95.  800  acs. 
whereof  surveyed  Nov.  24,  1640  &  the 
other  500  acs.  Sept.  164 —  by  Mr.  Tho- 
mas Symons  but  joyned  together  by  John 
Senior.  Beg.  at  mouth  of  Waters  his 
Creek,  running  down  the  great  river 
side  &c.    Note:    "The  rest  is  lost." 

PETER  KNIGHT,  1,000  acs.  Gloces- 
ter  Co.,  16  July  1652,  p.  95.  On  S. 
side  of  Poropotank  Cr.,  on  N.  side  of 
York  Riv.,  &  bounded  from  the  head 
of  gutt  issueing  out  of  sd.  Cr.  dividing 
this  from  land  formerly  surveyed  by 
Mr.  Richard  Lee  &c.  Trans,  of  20  pers: 
William  Vert  (or  Uert),  Robert  Young, 
Godfrid  Niren  (or  Nixen),  William 
Evans,  Law.  Evans,  Humph.  Hawoods, 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


259 


John  Fulcher,  John  Knighthill,  John 
Farmer,  Wm.  Chamberlin,  Mathew 
Bradford,  John  Lastly,  James  Foster, 
Ursela  Smith,  William  Right,  John 
Smith,  Thomas  Jervis,  Stephen  Collin, 
Thomas  Powell,  Eliza.  Monke,  (or 
Mouke. ) 

ROBERT  BAULDRY,  100  acs.  York 
Co.,  10  Oct.  1652,  p.  96.  Abutting  N. 
upon  the  horse  path  dividing  this  &  the 
late  land  of  Mr.  Win  (or  Wing)  Prior, 
E.  upon  land  of  Capt.  Richard  Townsen, 
deed.  &  W.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Henry 
Lee.  Trans.  of  2  pers:  Thomas 
Mathews,  James  Austine. 

THOMAS  DARROW,  100  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  10  Oct.  1652,  p. 
96.  Upon  little  Wicocomico  Riv.,  abutt- 
ing Sly.  upon  land  of  Edward  Coles  & 
Nly.  upon  land  in  possession  of  Rich- 
ard Spann  (?).  Trans,  of  2  pers: 
Himselfe  &  Anne  his  wife. 

CAPT.  HENRY  FLEETE,  750  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  1  Aug.  1652,  p.  97.  Up- 
on N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  &  S.  W.  of 
great  Rappahanock  Town  where  the  In- 
dians are  at  present  seated  2  miles  up 
Fleets  Cr.  &c.  Trans,  of  15  pers:  David 
Seavell,  Roger  Moyle,  John  Rosier, 
John  Bircher,  Bennet  Bennet,  Rich- 
ard Goodman,  Thomas  Smith,  John 
Alewood,  William  Talbott,  John  Tal- 
bott,  Richard  Tufton,  Chalice  (or  Chal- 
cie)  Foard,  Henry  Islea,  John  Beamont, 
Thomas  Boards. 

TEAGUE  FLOYNE,  300  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co.,  1  Aug.  1652,  p.  97.  On  N. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  upon  the  head  & 
next  to  tract  of  Capt.  Henry  Fleet, 
bounding  Nly.  upon  Fleets  Cr.  &  Rappa. 
Riv.  &  Wlv.  on  land  of  John  Taylor. 
Due  sd.  John  alias  Teague  Floyne  for 
trans,  of  6  pers:  Thomas  Boards  wife, 
Lawrence  Hulett,  Thomas  Smith,  Henry 
Barrett,  Thomas  Leech;  in  all  six,  as- 
signed by  Capt.  Fleet. 

MR.  CLEMENT  THRUSH,  500  acs. 
lying  on  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  nigh 
the  miles  end  of  a  patent  of  1350  acs. 
taken  up  by  Barth.  Hoskins,  beg.  on 
top  of  a  mountaine,  E.  by  N.  &c.  1st 
Aug.   1652,  p.  98.    Trans,  of  10  pers: 


Henry  Freestone,  John  Hunt,  William 
Jacob,  John  Rumball,  Alice  Whiteworth. 

AMBROSE  DIXON  &  STEPHEN 
HORSELY,  Junr.,  600  acs.  Northamp- 
ton Co.  at  (or  alias)  Accomack,  12  Oct. 

,  p.  98.    Being  a  neck  faceing  the 

Cr.  mouth  &  running  to  a  poynt  sepera- 
teing  this  from  John  Custis  &c.  Trans, 
of  12  pers:  Christopher  Stanley,  Rich- 
ard Britten,  Joane  Holden,  Thomas 
Ware,  Ann  Benbow,  Mary  Dixon,  Hugh 
Yeo,  Wm.  Yeo,  Edward  Gunter,  Eliza- 
beth Rossell,  Oliver  Soreland,  Thomas 
Smith. 

ELIAS  EDMONDS,  600  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co.,  10  Oct.  1652,  p.  99.  Upon  the 
head  of  another  tract  of  land  lying  on 
the  N.  side  of  the  Easterne  branch  of 
Corotoman  Riv.  towards  the  head  of  a 
N.  N.  W.  branch  of  same  &c.    Trans. 

of  12  pers:    Needam,  Prine, 

— -— Dilliard,  Henry  Bray,  Elizabeth 
Phillips,  Thomas  Payne,  Fra.  Morgan; 
3  Negroes;  Elizabeth  Perry,  Lawrence 
Dawby.  from  Abra.  Moone. 

JOHN  CHAMBERS,  150  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  10  Oct.  1652,  p.  99. 
Upon  Metopony  Riv.,  Wly.  upon  a 
branch  of  same.  Trans,  of  3  pers: 
Mary  Beaushampe,  John  Phillips,  Hugh 
Lattimore. 

JOHN  SHARPE,  300  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  10  Oct.  1652,  p.  99.  Upon  S.  side 
of  Rappa.  Riv.,  abutting  S.  E.  upon  tract 
surveyed  for  Fra.  Browne,  upon  N.  W. 
side  of  Sandy  Poynt  Neck  &c.  Trans, 
of  6  pers:  John  Puller,  John  Grey, 
Mary  Beadell. 

THOMAS  HARWOOD,  150  acs.  up- 
on the  New  Poquoson  river,  bounded 
upon  Northermost  bounds  of  his  own 
land  by  former  grant  &c.  unto  a  branch 
of  his  creek  which  divides  it  from  land 
of  John  Potlin  &c.  14  Oct.  1652,  p. 
100.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Jone  Humphry, 
George  Castleton,  William  Peirce. 

CAPT.  HENRY  FLEET,  200  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  1  Aug.  1652,  p.  100.  In 
Fleets  Bay,  butting  S.  upon  Haddaways 
Cr.  &c.  includeing  the  three  Indian 
Cabins.    Trans,  of  4  pers:    Phillip  Tay- 


260 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


lor,  William  Foy  (or  Joy),  Thomas  Joy, 
Henry  Rice. 

MR.  JOHN  MOTTROM,  250  acs. 
comonly  called  the  Widow  Hills 
Thickett,  Northumberland  Co.,  9  May 
1652,  p.  100.  Abutting  Nly.  upon 
mouth  of  Potomeck  Riv.,  Sly.  towards 
land  of  George  Colclough  &c.  Trans. 
of  5  pers:  Hopkin  Davis,  John  Hill, 
Nicholas  Butler,  Wm.  Williams,  Joane 
Kerle. 

JOHN  JOHNSON,  550  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  10  May  1652,  p.  101.  At 
great  Naswattocks  Cr.,  adj.  200  acs. 
granted  to  Anthony  Johnson.  Trans,  of 
11  pers:  John  Edwards,  Wm.  Routh, 
Tho.  Yowell,  Fra.  Maland,  William 
Price,  John  Owen,  Dorothy  Rily,  Rich- 
ard Hemstead,  Law.  Barnes,  Row.  Rith, 
Mary  Johnson. 

THOMAS  TEAKLE,  500  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  10  May  1652,  p.  101.  At 
Corattock,  Wwd.  of  a  branch  parting 
land  of  John  Norton  &  Richard  Hill 
&c.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Hezekiell 
Allen,  William  Jack,  Dan.  Isham,  Issa- 
bell  Burton,  Sanders  Perterson,  William 
Gray,  William  Michaell,  James  Browne, 
John  Banister,  Thomas  . 

WILLIAM  WATERS,  700  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  10  May  1652,  p. 
102.  Beg.  at  Harlowes  holes  near  the 
head  of  old  plantation  creek  &c.  Trans. 
of  4  pers:  Anthony  Neale,  Arthur 
Moone,  Fra.  Morris,  Marga.  Bolton,  Lt. 
Edw.  Waters,  Jane  Jackson,  Anthony 
Brewster,  "three  men  kild  the  first 
Massacree,"  William  Soule,  Edward 
Bryan,  William  Warren,  John  Miles. 

JOHN  GODFREY,  200  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  4  June  1652,  p.  102.  Lyin^ 
in  Eliz.  Riv.,  beg.  on  southern  branch 
of  Daniell  Tanners  Cr.  &c.  Trans,  of 
4  pers:  William  Lumbers,  William 
Sherman,  Samuel  Alad  (or  A  lad), 
Susan  Hill. 

THOMAS  DODFORD,  100  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  Eliz.  Riv.  Parish,  29 
Apr.  1652,  p.  103.  On  Ewd.  side  of 
Long  Point  Cr.  &  N.  side  of  Eastern  br. 
of  Eliz.  Riv.,  beg.  on  Muskmellon  Poynt 


&c.  to  head  of  long  Point  Cr.  Trans, 
of  2  pers:  Anne  Coleman,  Sarah  God- 
frey. 

EDWARD  HALL,  250  acs.  3  rood  & 
1  pole,  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  24  June  1652, 
p.  103.  Lyeing  upon  Samuel  Bennets 
Cr.  bounded  down  to  Scull  Neck  branch 
&c,  W.  to  the  path  on  N.  side  of 
Sewell  Goskins  house  &c.  Trans,  of  5 
pers:  Thomas  Cox,  Anne  Chiter,  Henry 
Conaway;  John,  Bittabby,  Sambombo 
his  wife,  Negroes. 

MR.  NICHOLAS  JERNEW,  614  acs. 
Glocester  Co.,  3  July  1652,  p.  104.  Up- 
on E.  S.  E.  side  of  Poropotank  Cr.,  beg. 
at  a  small  branch  or  swamp  which 
divides  this  &  land  of  Mr.  Oliver  Green, 
extending  E.  S.  E.  &  N.  N.  E.  upon 
land  of  Mr.  Webb  &  Mr.  Pate  &c. 
Trans,  of  11  pers:  Richard  Wright, 
Eliz.  Thomas,  Rob.  Hendly,  Tho.  Wil- 
liams, Fra.  Morgan,  Thomas  Wood, 
James  Hinde,  Henry  Tomkins,  Wm. 
Moore. 

JOHN  ROGERS,  720  acs.  on  S.  side 
of  Yorke  Riv.  near  Skimmino  Cr.,  along 
land  of  Wm.  (?)  Greaves,  along 
southermost  branch  of  sd.  creek  to  the 
very  head,  S.  E.  by  S.  thence  E.  by  S. 
along  land  of  Thomas  Pilkerman  &c. 
12  Nov.  1652,  p.  104.  Trans,  of  15 
pers.* 

JOHN  MERRADITH,  560  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  10  Oct.  1652,  p.  105.  Upon 
W.  side  &  towards  head  of  St.  Johns 
Cr.  Trans,  of  12  pers:  Tho.  Lee,  John 
Leye,  John  Voyle,  Nicho.  Linfield, 
Richd.  Linfield,  Thomas  Joules,  Eliz. 
Armitage,  George  Sadler,  Robert  Wil- 
son, Fran.  Parker,  William  Reynolls, 
Fra.  Housward. 

JULY  GARDNER,  300  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  12  Oct.  1652,  p.  105.  At 
the  Eastermost  part  of  Charles  Scar- 
burgh's  land,  on  N.  side  of  Pungotege 
Cr.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Jenkin  Lurtin, 
Lewis  Rowland,  Dorothy  Bainer  (or 
Barner),  Thomas  Comer,  Kath.  Blum- 
field,  Jane  Dame. 

NICHOLAS  WADILOW,  600  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  12  Oct.  1652,  p.  106. 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


261 


At  Anancocke,  beg.  at  the  South  Poynt 
thereof;  running  Sly.  towards  Matcho- 
tanke.  Trans,  of  12  pers:  Cornel. 
Cornel,  Anthony  Carpenter,  John  King, 
Susan  Dowinge,  Math  Porter,  John 
Greening,  Christopr.  Coxe,  Alice  Deane, 
Ral.  Doe,  Mary  Joyner,  Wm.  Blingston, 
Mecum  Mecunny. 

SAME.  Same  acreage,  location,  date, 
page  &  no.  of  pers.  transported:  Dor- 
mett  Moreland,  Anne  Winn,  Andrew 
Pedegrew,  Roger  Woodford,  Jane 
Nicholson,  Robert  Gibson,  Wm.  Smith- 
son,  Wm.  Wilson,  Mary  Jones. 

SAME.  400  acs.  same  Co.,  date  & 
page.  Known  by  name  of  Gabriells  Is- 
land, lying  right  over  against  Anon- 
cocke  &  environed  of  all  sides  with  the 
Bay  of  Chesepiake.    Trans,  of  8  pers.* 

MR.  THOMAS  CURTIS,  670  acs. 
lying  on  S.  side  of  the  North  Riv.  of 
Mockjack  Bay,  beg.  at  a  lone  pine,  run- 
ning Sly.  by  the  Bay  side  to  a  small 
branch  &c.  to  Ewd.  corner  tree  of  Basses 
Creeke  devdt.  &c.  20  Sept.  1652,  p. 
107.  Trans,  of  14  pers:  Elizabeth  Be- 
ing (or  Bemy),  one  man  servant,  one 
maid  servant,  Eliza.  Love,  John  Har- 
mar,  Miller  Turton,  Millison  Biggs, 
Kath.  Scarburgh,  Jane  Knapton,  Tony 
&    Lawrence,     Negroes,     &     2     Negro 


SAME.  1150  acs.  upon  Black  Water 
Cr.  on  the  N.  river  in  Mockjack  Bay, 
beg.  on  N.  W.  side  of  Phesant  Cr.  &c. 
to  head  of  the  deviding  Cr.  &c.  Same 
date  &  page.  Due  sd.  Custis  as  fol- 
loweth:  700  acs.  by  patent  dated  15 
Aug.  1642;  &  450  acs.  for  trans,  of  9 
pers:  Patrick  Forgeson,  Walter  Michell, 
Alexander  Marke,  John  Allen,  William 
Knotts. 

MR.  THOMAS  PURIFYE  &  MRS. 
TEMPERANCE  PEPPETT,  760  acs. 
lying  on  the  Wwd.  side  of  the  N.  Riv. 
in  Mockjack  Bay,  15  Sept.  1652,  p.  108. 
Beg.  on  Swd.  of  a  Cr.  dividing  this 
from  land  of  Thomas  Symons,  dec'd., 
running  up  the  Cr.  Wly.  &c.  to  trees  of 
Joseph  Gregorv  &  Duning  &c.  Trans, 
of  15  pers:  Humphry  Lee,  John  Lee, 
George   Morey,    James    Andrews,    Wm. 


Andrews,  John  Elsey,  Wm.  Chase,  Robt. 
Lynsey,  Elizabeth  Thompson,  Margt. 
Andrews,  Susan  Andrewes,  Mary  Wood- 
mint,  Anne  Shaw,  Wm.  Price. 

MR.  PETER  RANSON,  1100  acs.  on 
Ewd.  side  of  the  N.  Riv.  n  Mockjack 
Bay,  2  Sept.  1652,  p.  108.  Beg.  by  a 
creek  dividing  this  from  land  of  Rich- 
ard Dudley,  Sly.  to  Isle  of  Wight  Cr. 
&c.    Trans,  of  22  pers.* 

THOMAS  LUCAS  &  JOHN  CATT- 
LETT,  336  acs.  running  up  the  back 
side  of  their  land  by  a  former  patent. 
(No  definite  location  given.)  20  July 
1652,  p.  109.    Trans,  of  7  pers.* 

CHRISTOPHER  LEWIS,  750  acs. 
Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  26  July  1652,  p. 
109.  About  a  mile  to  the  Swd.  of 
Henry  White's  plantation  at  the  black- 
water,  etc.  Trans,  of  15  pers:  John 
Harbottle,  John  Owen,  Mary  Redman, 
Phill.  Thomas  Amey  Seagrasse,  John 
Knight,  Richard  Weaver,  Alexander 
Murry,  Edward  Yeomans,  Richard  Case, 
Joseph  Burgess,  James  Wacmott,  Henry 
Paine,  George  Giles,  Mary  White  ah. 
Clinton. 

FRANCIS  ENGLAND,  946  acs.,  26 
July  1652,  p.  110.  746  acs.  being  in 
Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  lying  on  a  swamp 
running  to  black  water,  bounded  along 
Capt.  Peirces  markt  trees,  due  W.  &c; 
200  acs.  lying  at  black  water  upon  the 
Eastermost  branch  pointing  to  Upper 
Chipoaks  in  James  City  Co.,  bounded 
N.  upon  land  of  Francis  England  & 
Swd.  to  lands  of  Peter  Hull.  746  acs. 
by  patent  20  June  1642  &  200  acs.  by 
vertue  of  patent  to  John  White  dated  4 
July   1649  &  assigned   to   sd.   England. 

SAME.  120  acs.  Same  location,  date 
&  page.  Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  adj.  his 
own  &  Richard  Jackson's  land.  Trans, 
of  3  pers:  Josse  (Jesse  ?)  Ingland, 
Tob.  Coke,  Thomas  Barrit. 

RICHARD  HILL,  300  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  10  May  1652,  p.  111.  At 
Coratock  Cr.,  beg.  at  a  little  branch 
parting  this  from  land  of  Toby  Norton 
&c.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Thomas  Ed- 
wards, Henry  Peters,  Mary  Hill,  Senr., 


262 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Mary  Hill,  Junr.,  Richard  Otteway, 
Thomas  Hole. 

JOHN  POTLIN,  50  acs.  12  May, 
1652,  p.  111.  (Record  incomplete). 
Mentions  land  of  Thomas  Harwood. 
Trans,  of:    Samuel  Tucker. 

JOHN  DIER,  100  acs.  Low.  Norf. 
Co.,  29  Apr.  1652,  p.  111.  In  Linhaven 
Parish,  bounded  on  S.  with  land  of 
Thomas  Allen,  on  N.  by  John  Stratton, 
&  on  W.  by  his  own  land.  Trans,  of  2 
pers:    Francis   Clewedge,   Ellen   Hudge. 

JEFFERY  BEW,  600  acs.  Glocester 
Co.,  13  May  1652,  p.  112.  Towards 
head  of  the  land  of  Mr.  Thomas  Bree- 
man  in  Mockjack  Bay,  beg.  on  W.  side 
of  Breemans  Swamp  upon  the  head  of 
Cranie  Cr.  &c.    Trans,  of  12  pers.* 

THOMAS  WILSFORD,  50  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,   22  May  1652,  p. 

112.  Upon  N.  W.  side  of  Chetank  Cr., 
beg.  at  a  tree  standing  upon  the  N.  W. 
side  of  a  poynt  opposite  to  mouth  of 
sd.  Cr.,  extending  night  Potomeck  Riv. 
course  N.  W.  &c.    Trans,  of  1   pers.; 

WILLIAM  MORGAN,  350  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  near  head  of  Morgans 
Cr.  on  E.  side  of  Chicohamony  Riv., 
bounded  from  his  old  devdt.,  along  land 
of  Mr.  George  Lobb,  N.  E.  to  land  of 
Joseph    Knight    &c.    8    June    1652,    p. 

113.  Trans,  of  7  pers.* 

THOMAS  LUCAS,  Gent.,  600  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  7  June  1652,  p.  113. 
N.  W.  along  Popetick  Cr.  &c.  Trans, 
of  12  pers:  Peter  Neale,  Thomas  Page, 
Nicho.  Handly,  Richard  Green,  Eliza- 
beth Worley,  Elizabeth  Billing,  Eliza- 
beth  Plaver,   Thomas   Lucas,   Senr.,   his 

wife  ,  Thomas  Lucas,  Jun.,  Kath. 

Rouzee,  Sarah  Rouzee. 

JOHN  CATLETT  &  RALPH 
ROUZEE,  300  acs.  adj.  to  their  devdt. 
by  a  former  grant.  7  June  1652,  p.  114. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Edward  Lucas,  Sarah 
Rouzee,  Mary  Lucas,  Edward  Rouzee, 
Martha  Lucas,  Martha  Rouzee.  Assigned 
by  Tho.  Lucas. 

ROBERT  ELAM,  503  acs.  Henrico 
Co.,  20  Nov.  1652,  p.  114.    S.  side  of 


James  River,  above  Burmoda  hundred, 
between  Thomas  Shippey  and  Richard 
Johnson.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Ann 
Elam,  Richard  Hudson,  Geo.  Smither, 
George  Swann,  Peter  Drongcold,  John 
Revell,  Richard  Heywood,  John  Parke, 
Wm.  Partrige,  Eliza.  Bridges. 

MR.  ROBERT  WILDE  &  PHILLIP 
CHESLEY,  500  acs.  upon  the  main 
branch  of  Skiminoe  on  the  N.  E.  side 
thereof,  bounded  with  a  swamp  issue- 
ing  out  called  Crooked  Swamp  &c.  22 
Nov.  1652,  p.  115.    Trans,  of  10  pers.* 

JOHN  BRYAN,  168  acs.  on  Indian 
Creeke,  a  branch  of  Nansemum  Riv., 
joyneing  to  patent  of  Mr.  John  Garrett, 
running  for  length  N.,  butting  on  line 
of  William  Storey  &c.  15  Oct.  1652,  p. 
115.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  William  Scott, 
Grace  Harris,  John  Merr,  Anne  Stone- 
hill. 

COL.  GEORGE  LUDLOW,  Esqr., 
2,000  acs.  Glocester  Co.,  25  Oct.  1652, 
p.  116.  Upon  S.  side  of  Peyanketank 
Riv.,  beg.  upon  the  Westermost  side  of 
a  swamp  opposite  land  of  Thomas 
Trotter,  dec'd.  &c.  Trans,  of  40  pers: 
William  Wilcock,  Fran.  Taverne,  Peter 
Thunder,  Michael  Wilcox,  Eliza.  Harris, 
Eliza.  Trevill,  Ann  Playstow,  Senr., 
Ann  Playstow,  Gabriell  Ludlow,  Tho- 
mas Ludlow,  Katherine  Ward,  Elinor 
Buckster  (or  Backster),  Grace  Wilcoxe, 
Joane  Cullin,  James  Field,  John  Rich- 
ards, John  Covide,  Roger  Perkins,  four 
Negros,  vizt:  Sarah,  Frank,  Bridgett, 
&  George;  John  Rumsden,  Saml.  Car- 
rington,  Bened.  Grint,  Wm.  (?)  Ed- 
wards, Senr.,  Wm.  (?)  Edwards,  Junr., 
John  Rop  (?),  Wm.  Labor,  Mary 
Woodnutt,  Tho.  Fabin,  Archeball  Doug- 
las, John  Githred,  John  Pase,  Antho. 
Grant,  Robt.  Wilson,  Robt.  Stuart,  Wm. 
Dinglas,  Danl.,  Hamilton,  Thomas 
Joanes. 

MR.  JOHN  CHEESMAN,  200  acs. 
lying  on  Swd.  side  of  Mr.  Breemans 
land  &  Ewd.  side  of  Lieut.  Col.  Chees- 
mans  land  upon  a  branch  falling  into 
Crany  Cr.  in  Ware  Riv.  25  Sept.  1652, 
p.  116.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  William 
White,  Lewis  Roberts,  John  Clarke, 
Law.  Plutt  (or  Piatt). 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


263 


JOHN  SMITH,  150  acs.  lying  in 
Home  Harbour  by  Mockjack  bay,  beg. 
at  Swd.  markt  trees  of  a  former  devdt. 
of  sd.  Smiths  &  running  Sly.  into  the 
Harbour.  8  Dec.  1652,  p.  117.  Trans, 
of  3  pers:  Christopr.  Wallis,  John 
Nicholls,  William  Bandes. 

LT.  COL.  JOHN  CHEESMAN,  943 
acs.  on  S.  side  of  a  run  which  falleth 
into  Crany  Cr.  in  Ware  Riv.  in  Mock- 
jack  Bay;  beg.  upon  S.  side  of  sd.  run, 
extending  S.  &c.  11  Sept.  1652,  p.  117. 
Trans,  of  19  pers:  James  Nicholls, 
Roger  Worth,  Richard  Loude,  John 
Peake,  Mary  Bind,  Edmond  Watts, 
Silvan.  Prite,  John  Hill,  Wm.  Davis, 
John     Jackson,     John     Haycocke      (or 

Hayicke)    Simon    White,    Roger   , 

Richard  Baines,  Thomas  Morris,  James 

Robinson,   Edward  Everye,   Rich.  , 

Thomas  Williams. 

MR.  WILLIAM  BAULDWIN,  600 
acs.  on  S.  side  of  Skiminoe  Cr.  on 
Charles  Riv.,  in  York  Co.,  26  Oct.  1652, 
p.  118.  Bounded  by  a  branch  to  Pinke- 
mans  Pathes  &c.  E.  by  N.  upon  the 
river,  S.  by  E.  upon  St.  Andrews  Cr. 
Trans,  of  12  pers:  William  Allen, 
James  Browne,  William  Grey,  Thomas 
Bradnadge,  John  Loganell,  Edward  a 
boy,  Nicho.  Wrenn,  Charles  a  man, 
Charles  a  boy,  Samuel  Wolstone,  Kate, 
&  Peter  2  Negros. 

TOBIAS  HORTON,  500  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co.,  29  Nov.  1652,  p.  118.  200  acs. 
part  upon  the  Southermost  side  of  Fleets 
Bay,  abutting  N.  upon  a  Cr.  dividing 
this  and  land  of  Hump.  Tabb  &  Ely. 
upon  the  bay.  The  remainder  upon  the 
head  of  the  aforesd.  Cr.  Trans,  of  10 
pers:  Anne  Powell,  Henry  Morgan, 
John  Williams,  John  Morris,  Thomas 
Dasker  (or  Darker),  Susan  Wariner, 
William  Longe,  Daniel  Lewis,  Thomas 
Todd,  Wm.  Greeting   (or  Greeling). 

MR.  DAVID  FOX,  800  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co.,  29  Nov.  1652,  p.  119.  About 
44  mi.  up  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
bounded  on  S.  E.  side  with  land  of  Mr. 
Soanes  &  N.  W.  with  Puscacon  Cr. 
Trans,  of  16  pers:  William  Davis, 
James  Cox,  James  Cover,  William 
Hewett,  James  Welsh,  William  Lucas, 


David  Lee,  James  Norts,  William 
Browne,  James  Oldis,  John  Linge,  John 
Robinson,  William  Lewis,  David  Ash- 
ley, James  Brite,  John  Purnell. 

JOHN  TAYLOR,  400  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  29  Nov.  1652,  p.  119.  Upon  N. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  &  upon  the  head  of 
Fleets  Neck,  &  S.  upon  a  creek  which 
lyeth  upon  Eastermost  side  of  Musqui- 
to  poynt.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  John  Haye, 
David  Williams,  James  Richards,  Wil- 
liam Thomas,  John  Harris,  William 
Lanett,  James  Willett,  James  Hancocke. 

COL.  HUGH  GWIN  (Gwyn)  300 
acs.  upon  W.  side  of  a  tract  called 
Gwins  Island,  being  the  surplusage  of 
sd.  Island,  bounded  S.  W.  upon  the 
Narrowes,  W.  opposite  to  mouth  of 
Peanketank  Riv.,  S.  upon  Deep  Cr. 
which  lyeth  toward  S.  side  of  sd.  Island. 
6  Dec.  1652,  p.  120.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
John  Cookeley,  Nathanl.  Walters,  Mary 
Joyce,  Robert  Wison  al.  Wiffon  (or 
Wisson),  George  Pletsoe,  Benja.  Sar- 
row,  Peter  Cade,  Humph.  Higgins, 
Susan  Parker,  Susan  Hillary,  one  Negro 
woman.  Note:  Land  due  for  the  last 
five.  Land  patented  for  four  of  the  five, 
one   remains   still   due   being   the   Last. 

THOMAS  STEEVENS,  1400  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  2  Sept.  1652,  p.  120. 
Upon  S.  E.  side  of  Farnom  Cr.,  extend- 
ing N.  N.  E.  from  land  of  Leroy  Griffin 
to  the  head  of  sd.  Cr.,  to  land  of  Tho- 
mas Griffin  &c.  Trans,  of  28  pers: 
Robert  Savidge,  Richard  Eules,  Edward 
Gibbs,  Ra.  Waddington,  Tho.  Quinee, 
Elizabeth  Sutton,  Sarah  Powell,  Thomas 
Sanders,  Provost  Nelson,  Frank  Monkes, 
Henry  Purchase,  Alice  Travabin  (?), 
Symon  Ogbourne,  Thomas  Browne, 
Richard  Dibbins,  Jane  Fenton,  John 
Miles,  Thomas  Hewes,  Jane  Willis, 
Grace  Legg,  Mr.  Wm.  Whitby. 

HENRY  WEEKER,  250  acs.  upon  S. 
side  of  great  Wicocomico  Riv.,  upon 
the  W.  N.  W.  side  of  a  maine  branch 
of  Ulikins  (?)  Cr.,  E.  S.  E.  upon  the 
head  of  sd.  branch  &  upon  land  of 
Jeffery  Gooch.  29  Nov.  1652,  p.  121. 
Trans,  of  5  pers:  Robert  Watts,  Mar- 
tha Sewell,  Sarah  Inghram,  James 
Lambstone,  Bryan  James. 


264 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


CHARLES  SCARBURGH,  400  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  12  Oct.  1652,  p.  121. 
At  Pungotege  Cr.,  bounded  on  W.  side 
by  land  of  Thomas  Johnson,  Junr.  &c. 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  Thomas  West,  Phill. 
Barricole,  Cesar  Yeoman,  Ann  Doeby, 
Mary  Eddow  (or  Eddon),  John  Carye, 
Charles  Scarburgh,  John  Cornish. 

WILLIAM  OWEN  &  WILLIAM 
MORGAN,  360  acs.  lying  on  N.  E.  side 
of  Skiminoe  Cr.  &c.  to  little  Cross  Cr. 
&c.  17  Nov.  1652,  p.  121.  Trans,  of 
8  pers:  Mary  Morryson,  William  Read, 
Tho.  Pumocke  (or  Pinnocke),  Richard 
Wynn,  Thomas  Watts,  Richard  Lewis, 
William  Carre. 

CAPT.  AUGUSTINE  WARNER, 
2,500  acs.  lying  about  the  branches  of 
old  Cheescake  town  on  S.  side  of  Pean- 
ketank  Riv.,  beg.  at  a  marked  tree  of 
the  Indians  Land  a  little  to  the  S.  E. 
of  old  Chiscake,  running  W.  N.  W.  &c. 
26  Oct.  1652,  p.  122.  Trans,  of  50 
pers:  Wm.  Streues  (?),  Robt.  Torring- 
ton,  John  Robinson,  Richard  Floyd, 
Kath.  Pettibones,  Wm.  Hutcheson,  John 
Wilkinson,  Mary  Thrope,  Sands 
Knowles,  John  Mullins,  Nath.  Holding, 
Richard  Davis,  John  Bradford,  John 
Poulson,  John  Scales,  Charles  Reeves, 
Thomas  Barretts,  Edward  Canes  (or 
Caves),  Henry  Thacker,  Saml.  Pitts, 
Edmond  Wallis,  three  Negros;  William 
Skinham,  Tho.  Thornninge,  George 
White,  Henry  Ells,  Antho.  a  negro, 
Alex.  Ray,  Law.  Smith,  Wm.  Bauld- 
win,  Wm.  Powell,  Fra.  Hurd,  Peter 
Hopkins,  Henry  Naipes,  Thomas  Gray. 
Henry  Burrage,  Nicholas  Hart,  Robert 
Cade,  Mary  Warner,  John  Jakes  (or 
Jakues),  Elizabeth  Hull,  Fra.  Hathaway. 
Anne  Downing.  Note:  "four  rights 
due  to  Thomas  Chandiler  by  a  Certifi- 
cate granted  him  in  September  1640  at 
Yorke  Court  the  said  Warner  being 
Administrator   of   the   Said   Chandiler." 

JOHN  ROBINSON,  Junr.,  700  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  12  Oct.  1652,  p.  123. 
At  Anancock,  beg.  at  a  poynt  of  land 
where  Ambrose  Dixon  &  Stephen  Hors- 
ly  doe  end  their  devident,  etc.  Trans, 
of  14  pers:  John  Canady,  Eustace  Dane, 
John  Custis,  Aphrah  Smith,  Mrs.  Anne 
Yardley,  Dan.  Jackson,  James  Stamfast, 


Mary  Stanfast,  Foulkerd  Obbins,  Ed- 
ward Sacker,  Wm.  the  Smith,  Eliza. 
Roberts,  Elizabeth  Moubert,  George 
Greete. 

MR.  THOMAS  TEAGLE,  Minister, 
350  acs.  Northampton  Co.,  12  Oct. 
1652,  p.  123.  At  Pongotege  Cr.,  beg. 
at  a  little  branch  issueing  out  of  Pocco- 
moke  branch.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  John 
Renney,  Fra.  Knight,  Lucretia  Pott, 
Katherine  Smith,  Susan  Foster,  Tho. 
Woodfield,  Thomas  Hews. 

JOHN  BAYLES,  250  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  10  Oct.  1652,  p.  124.  Bounded  on 
N.  W.  with  Cappetts  Cr.,  N.  E.  with 
Potomeck  River,  &  on  S.  E.  with  an- 
other tract  of  his  land.  Trans,  of  5  pers: 
Robert  Welbourne,  Willm.  Jefferys, 
James  Macknill,  Robert  White,  Wm. 
Newton,  Mar.  Boone. 

ANTHONY  HOSKINS,  700  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  12  Oct.  1652,  p.  124. 
Bounded  on  the  E.  &  W.  by  two 
branches  of  Pongotege  Cr.  Trans,  of 
14  pers:  Anthony  Hoskins,  Alice  Hos- 
kins,  Jeremy  Allen,  Thomas  Evane, 
Mary  Seale,  Mary  Arrundell,  John 
Durren,  Jane  Wapshott,  Thomas  Brane 
(or  Brand),  Thomas  Welch,  Anne 
Cheffield,  David  Steward,  John  Gold- 
smith, Patrick  Flemin. 

JOHN  HOWETT,  650  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  29  July  1652,  p.  124. 
Upon  S.  side  of  Dennises  Cr.  which 
issueth  forth  upon  the  S.  side  of  great 
Wiccocomico  Riv.  &  upon  marked  trees 
of  John  Gamlin  &  Isaac  Weaver,  etc. 
Trans,  of  13  pers:  John  Peete,  Wm. 
House,  Mary  Todd,  Wm.  Stone,  Wil- 
liam Eaton,  James  Yates,  Henry  Cowd- 
well,  John  Powell,  Richard  Worthing, 
Henry    Hasleworth. 

ISRAELL  JOHNSON,  200  acs.  upon 
N.  W.  branch  of  Nansemum  Riv.,  6 
May  1652,  p.  125.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
Richard  Masfield  wife  by  assignment  of 
the  sd.  Mr.  Masfield,  Jone  Elly,  Eliza. 
Johnson;  one  indenture  by  assignment 
of  Richard  Masfield. 

JOHN  FLEET,  130  acs.  Yorke  Co., 
22  Nov.  1652,  p.  125.    Upon  S.  side  of 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


265 


a  great  swamp  opposite  another  tract 
in  possession  of  sd.  Fleet.  Trans,  of  3 
pers:  Rebecca  Nahan  (or  Vahan), 
Christopher  Grey,  Clothyer  Lucas. 

RALPH  PAINE,  250  acs.  on  S.  side 
of  Rappa.  Riv.  upon  Coxes  Cr.,  27  Oct. 
1652,  p.  126.  Trans,  of  5  pers:  John 
Aldis,  John  Cox,  Robert  Rowne,  George 
Wilson,  Henry  Purchass;  by  assignment 
from  J.  Aldis. 

RICHARD  COLEMAN,  600  acs.  up- 
on S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  adj.  land  of 
Howell  Powell.    27  Oct.  1652,  p.   126. 

Trans,  of  12  pers:  Mathew  Hopkins, 
Hugh  Eldrige,  Elinor  Palmer,  John 
Clerke,  Wm.  Hammond,  Thomas  Savoy 
(or  Savery),  Thomas  Berker,  Edward 
Malliase  (or  Mallcase),  James  Law- 
rence, Phillip  Vinson,  Mary  Langford, 
Watkin  James;  by  assignment  from 
Thomas  Chapman. 

JOHN  WAREHAM,  150  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  20  May  1652,  p.  126. 
Ely.  upon  a  creek  issuing  out  of  Yeoa- 
comico  Riv.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Fra. 
Swan,  Richard  Watson,  George  Meggs. 

DR.  GEORGE  HACK  (Hacke),  1000 
acs.  Northampton  Co.,  12  Oct.  1652,  p. 
127.  At  Pongotegue  Cr.,  beg.  at  a 
little  branch  on  the  S.  side  thereof,  Wly. 
down  the  same  &c,  on  land  of  Sampson 
Robins  &c.  running  towards  Nondin 
(or  Nondui)  Cr.  100  acs.  being  2  is- 
lands near  N.  point  of  Pongotegue  Cr. 
Trans,  of  20  pers:  William  Tomlin, 
Henry  Willis,  Thomas  Browne,  Alice 
Price,  Thomas  Collar,  John  Curdey, 
Row.  Evans,  Edward  Evans,  Mary  Ed- 
gar, Edward  Cowins,  Wm.  Holt,  Mary 
Batchells,  John  Edwards,  Wm.  Rouen 
(or  Roach),  Mary  Williams,  Jonathan 
Shoud,  Mary  Purnell,  Thomas  Browne; 
Domingo,  Siria  &  Patana  3  Negros. 

JOHN  PEAD,  150  acs.,  beg.  at 
marked  pine  of  William  Beartines  Cr. 
(?),  on  S.  side  of  Winter  Harbour, 
running  S.  W.,  thence  S.  E.  to  the  Bay 
side  &c.  21  Sept.  1652,  p.  127.  Trans, 
of  3  pers:  John  Pead,  Mary  Pead,  John 
Motley. 

THOMAS  PRESTON,  Junr.,  200  acs. 
on   Wwd.    side    of    Eastermost    Riv.    in 


Mockjack  Bay,  beg.  at  the  head  of 
Chesnutt  Cr.,  running  N.  W.  to  Tho- 
mas Todds  land,  S.  W.  to  the  Bay,  S. 
E.  to  mouth  of  Repulse  Cr.  &c.  28 
Sept.  1652,  p.  128.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
Henry  Subtill,  Sabina  Davis,  Richard 
Davis,  Thomas  Conyer;  by  assignment 
from  Tho.  Conyer. 

ISAAC  RICHESON,  300  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co.,  alias  Gloster,  10  Oct.  1652,  p. 
128.  Upon  head  branches  of  Atapoto- 
moyes  Cr.,  S.  W.  upon  land  of  Samuell 
Sollis  &  N.  E.  upon  land  of  John  Day. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Isaac  Richeson,  Eli- 
zabeth Parker,  Elizabeth  Wells,  Wm. 
Brown,  John  James,  one  Negro  woman; 
from  Col.  Gwynns  certificate. 

JOHN  BEBEY,  350  acs.,  upon  S. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  up  Coxes  Cr.  27 
Oct.  1652,  p.  129.  Trans,  of  7  pers: 
"John  Addis  his  transportation  seven 
severall  tymes  and  assigned  by  the  said 
Addis  to  the  said  John  Bebey." 

RICHARD  HATTON  &  LAMBETT 
LAMBETTSON,  600  acs.  Lancaster  Co., 
14  Oct.  1652,  p.  129.  On  S.  E.  side  of 
Moratcon  Riv.,  bounded  W.  by  S.  upon 
land  of  Mr.  David  Fox  &c.  Trans,  of 
12  pers:  Richard  Hatton,  Reynold 
Pawre,  Gart  Pawre,  Reynold  Pawre, 
Junr.,  Peter  Pawre,  Richard  Benne,  John 
Younge,  Elizabeth  Gage,  John  Pawre, 
Lam.  Lambettson,  Eliz.  Vansum  (or 
Vausum),  John  Gillett. 

JOHN  POUNSEY  (or  Ponnsey),  900 
acs.  commonly  called  the  Hoggpen  Neck, 
in  Yorke  Riv.,  8  Dec.  1652,  p.  130. 
Trans,  of  18  pers:  George  Perkins, 
John  Loyd,  Richard  Pulman,  Mary 
Druery,  Anpka  (?)  Pounsey,  Ralph 
Jackson,  Hall.  George,  Wm.  Stannerd, 
Wm.  Pepper,  Henry  Way,  Henry  All- 
ington,  Lyon  Cawch,  William  Seales, 
John  Routh,  Thomas  Freeman,  Willm. 

Adams,  Edward  Hust,  Agnes  ;  650 

acs.  by  assignmt.  from  Antho.  Packhurst. 

MRS.  ELNOR  BROCAS,  wife  of 
Capt.  Wm.  Brocas,  Esqr.,  800  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  10  Oct.  1652,  p.  130.  Upon 
S.  side  &  at  the  mouth  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
bounded  on  E.  S.  E.  with  the  main  bay, 
Ely.   &   including   Goates   Island,    upon 


266 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


the  S.  S.  E.  with  Pyancke  bay,  &  W.  N. 
W.  with  Wading  Cr.  &c.  Trans,  of  16 
pers:  John  Juce  (or  Ince),  Abell  Bur- 
leigh, Mary  Cornish,  Walter  Read, 
George  Sable,  Anne  Dubes,  Wm.  Wal- 
ters, John  Sneade,  John  Easton  (al- 
tered), John  Ridle,  Robert  Burwell, 
John  Fookes,  Peter  Wood,  Corn. 
Goverson,  Nash  Winly,  Harman  (no 
other  name.) 

THOMAS  HALLIARD,  450  acs.  ly- 
ing on  the  Eastermost  Riv.,  beg.  at 
marked  tree  of  Phill.  Hunteys  on  the 
river  side  &c.  to  Marke  Fosters  land  &c. 
1  Nov.  1652,  p.  131.  Trans,  of  9  pers: 
Thomas  Halliard,  Alice  his  wife,  Fran. 

Spencer,  Edey  ,  Patr.  James,  John 

Hatt,  Dor.  Kemerley,  Joell  Gibbs, 
Adam  Home. 

EDWARD  COLES,  500  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  10  Oct.  1652,  p.  131. 
Upon  Southermost  side  of  little  Wecka- 
comco  Riv.  &  upon  the  head  of  a  devdt. 
in  possession  of  Richard  Spann,  along 
his  land  Nly.  to  a  branch  of  sd.  Riv., 
S.  W.  to  land  of  James  Allen  &c.  to 
S.  W.  side  of  Chicacone  Path.  Trans, 
of  10  pers:  Mr.  Fra.  Clay,  Marke 
Lanere,  Walter  Read,  Morgan  Jones, 
William  Talbott,  Samuel  Called,  Wil- 
liam Smith,  Mary  Edwards. 

MR.  GEORGE  FOSTER,  1200  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  1  Sept.  1652,  p. 
132.  Nly.  upon  Potomeck  Riv.  &  Wly. 
upon  Pesbetansey  Cr.  Trans,  of  24  pers: 
Alexander  Stonner,  Thomas  Browne, 
Thomas  Child,  Abra.  Armitage,  Thomas 
Symkins,  Phillip  Conack,  Thomas  Civill, 
Lyonell  Holly,  William  Newman,  Robert 
Jenkins,  John  Oldale,  Edward  Coles. 

MAJOR  LEWIS  BURWELL  & 
LUCY,  his  wife,  200  acs.,  100  acres  of 
which  lyes  within  the  Pallisado  at  the 
Middle  plantation,  taken  out  of  the  land 
of  Mr.  Richard  Brooks;  &  the  other 
without  the  Pallisado,  taken  out  of  the 
land  of  John  Clerk,  dec'd.  The  former 
bounded  S.  E.  upon  land  of  Mr.  John 
Broath  (Broach),  &  N.  W.  upon  the 
Pallisado ;  the  latter  upon  land  of  David 
Mansell,  N.  W.  &  S.  E.  upon  the 
Pallisado.  8  Oct.  1652,  p.  132.  Trans. 
of  4  pers:  (&  alsoe  by  order  of  the 
Govr.  &  Councill  dated  7  Oct.   1652). 


John  Macargoe,  Mrs.  Lucy  Burwell, 
Wm.   Shurley,  Gilbert  Mackdull. 

NICHO.  MORRIS,  182  acs.  North- 
umberland Co., Nov.  1652,  p.  133. 

N.  E.  upon  a  creek  divding  this  from 
land  of  sd.  Morris,  S.  E.  upon  land  of 
John  Essex,  S.  W.  Wly.  upon  land  of 
George  Fletcher,  Gent.  &c.  Trans,  of 
4  pers:  Katherine  Madix,  Wlliam 
Nicholls,  John  Warner,  John  Michem. 

MR.  RICHARD  COCKE,  2,482  acs. 
Henricoe  Co.,  10  Oct.  1652,  p.  133. 
On  N.  side  of  James  River;  I860  acs. 
near  head  of  Turkey  Is.  Cr.,  bounded 
from  corner  tree  of  John  Price  S.  &  by 
W.  &c.  to  head  of  Mr.  Hallams  land 
&c.  622  acs.  commonly  called  by  the 
name  of  Bremo,  bounded  along  the 
heads  of  Capt.  Harris'  land  &  other 
devdts.  belonging  to  Curies,  N.  &  by  E., 
thence  along  the  Cart  Path,  along  Mr. 
Hallams  land  to  the  river  &c.  100  acs. 
due  by  patent  to  Temp.  Bayley,  20 
Sept.  1620;  2,000  acs.  by  patent  to  sd. 
Cocke    10   Mar.    1639;    &   residue   for 

trans,   of  pers:    Cornel.   Canadia, 

Neale  White,  Luce  Davis,  David  Clobe, 
Willm.  Shoemaker,  Robert  Boane, 
Meredith  Langford,  Humph.  Miles. 

JOHN  EARLE,  200  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  Nov.   1652,  p.   134. 

Ely.  upon  Potomeck  Riv.  &  Sly.  upon 
land  of  Thomas  Hayles.  Trans,  of  4 
pers:  Mary  Earle,  Senr.,  Mary  Earle, 
Junr.,  Mary  Holder,  Rachell  Willis. 

RALPH  HORSLEY,  495  acs.  North- 
umberland Co., Nov.  1652,  p.  134. 

Nly.  upon  Potomeck  Riv.,  Ely.  upon 
mouth  of  Checkakone  Riv.,  Sly.  upon 
Cabin  Cr.  &  Wly.  upon  land  now  in 
possession  of  Henry  Reyner.  Trans,  of 
10  pers:  Robert  Sharpe,  Jane  Horsley, 
Joseph  Horsley,  Renold  Younge,  John 
Thompson,  himselfe  "that  is  to  say" 
Wm.  Medralfe,  William,  George  and 
Charles  MedrafFe  by  assignmt.  of  Wil- 
liam Medralfe,    (or  Medcalfe). 

MRS.  MARY  BRENT,  1,644  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  17  Nov.  1652,  p. 
134.  Ely.  upon  Potomeck  Riv.,  Sly.  up- 
on Quiough  Riv.,  Wly.  upon  a  br.  of 
same  &  Nly.  upon  Capt.   Giles   Brent. 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


267 


Trans,  of  33  pers:  Mr.  Wm.  Ayres, 
Richard  Jones,  Robert  Comfrey,  Wm. 
Audrey  (or  Andrey),  3  Negros;  Joane 
Dennis,  John  Coventon,  Richd.  Water- 
man, John  Norton,  Eliza.  Busby,  Kath. 
Cordes,  Joyce  Pep,  Cha.  Chambeech,  (or 
Chamleech),  Wm.  Martin,  Stephen 
Benson,  Phill.  Paskall,  Mathew  Strotter, 
Wm.  Bedham,  Wm.  Sebocke,  Capt. 
Brent,  Mrs.  Mary  Brent,  Mrs.  Marg. 
Brent,  Mrs.  Mary  Brent  wife  to  Capt. 
Brent,  Mary  Kendall,  Thomas  Foster, 
Wm.  Clerke,  John  Williams,  Richard 
Tarlinge  (or  Turlinge),  Jane  Gilpin, 
Mary  Outsis  (?),  John  Fleet. 

RICHARD  LONGE,  350  acs.  lying 
upon  a  branch  of  Milford  haven,  beg. 
on  Wwd.  side  of  a  run  dividing  this  & 
iland  of  George  Billops  &c.  6  Dec. 
1652,  p.  135.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  Robert 
Mansfelld,  Hanah  Catton,  Mary  James, 
Thomas  Hale,  Lt.  Col.  Griffeth,  his 
wife  Anne. 

THOMAS  MORRIS,  200  acs.  lying 
upon  a  branch  of  Milford  Haven,  beg. 
at  corner  tree  of  Richard  Longe,  run- 
ning N.  E.  to  mouth  of  the  Green 
branch  &c.  6  Dec.  1652,  p.  135.  Trans, 
of  4  pers:  Joyse  Escholl  (or  Echoll), 
John  Preston,  William  Blades,  John 
Blades  his  sonn. 

JOHNBAYWORTH  (or  Bagworth), 
80  acs.  lying  on  N.  side  of  the  Mill  run 
at  the  head  of  Warwick  Riv.,  beg.  on 
land  of  Mr.  Bullocke,  dec'd.,  &c.  6 
Dec.  1652,  p.  136.  Trans,  of  2  pers: 
William  Jones,  Winfred  Hunt. 

JOSEPH  GREGORY,  500  acs.  upon 
a  branch  which  falleth  into  Cow  Cr.  in 
Ware  Riv.  in  Mockjack  Bay;  beg.  at 
marked  trees  deviding  this  &  land  of 
Richard  Duninge  &c.  to  Henry  Peaslyes 
marked  trees  &c.  6  Dec.  1652,  p.  136. 
Trans,  of  10  pers:  Alexander  Mackarle, 
Za.  Cripps,  Mich.  Smith,  Alice  Henvitt 
(or  Hewitt).  300  acs.  by  surrender  of 
a  patent. 

HENRY  PALIN  &  JOHN 
SWINGLETON,  300  acs.  lying  on  the 
Eastermost  side  of  a  run  which  falleth 
into  Ware  Riv.  at  the  head  in  Mock- 
jack  Bay,  beg.  at  head  of  John  Walkers 


&c.  6  Dec.  1652,  p.  137.  Trans.  6 
pers:  Rebecca  Browne,  Thomas  Lee, 
Thomas  Fry,  Rich.  Reynolls,  James 
Willimott,   Richard  Buckcocke. 

JOHN  COOKE,  200  acs.  on  W.  side 
of  a  run  falling  into  Cow  Cr.  in  Ware 
Riv.  in  Mockjack  Bay  &c,  Ely.  to  Robert 
Cades  trees  &c.  6  Dec.  1652,  p.  137. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  John  Cooke,  Alice 
Little,  Danl.  Farbuth,  Margaret  a  maid 
servant. 

JOHN  THOMAS  &  WILLIAM 
LEITHERMORE,  400  acs.  upon  E.  side 
of  Eastermost  Riv.  in  Mockjack  Bay, 
beg.  at  Richard  Ripleys  on  the  River 
side,  running  E.  &c.  6  Dec.  1652,  p. 
138.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Fra.  Carr,  Jno. 
Steward,  one  Negro,  Aug.  (Ang)  Hart, 
Chris.  Hurd,  Robt.  Fletcher,  Thomas  a 
Scott,  Thomas  a  boy;  by  assignmt.  of 
J.  Walker. 

MR.  JOHN  BROWNE,  1,000  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  27  Nov.  1652,  p. 
138.  Near  Matchepongo,  bounded  on 
E.  by  the  seaboard  side  &  S.  by  Phillips 
Cr.  &c.  Trans,  of  20  pers:  John  Mar- 
veil,  John  Hordwell,  Thomas  Major, 
Mary  Griffeth,  Wm.  Alsworth,  John 
Martin,  Walter  Wood,  Thomas  Crew, 
James  Hill,  Timothy  Coe,  Robert  Win- 
ley,  Robert  Mapps,  Wm.  Ebourne, 
Robert  Hearne,  Thomas  Solbey,  Prissell 
Feelee,  Thomas  Greene,  Dan.  Shet- 
worth,  Millisent  Green,  Joseph  Ingram. 

NICHO.  SEBRELL  (Sebbrell),  200 
acs.,  York  Co.,  near  the  Middle  planta- 
tion, 30  Jan.  1652,  p.  139.  N.  upon 
land  of  Richard  Davis  &  William 
Watts,  S.  upon  John  Broach,  W.  upon 
the  great  swamp  &  E.  upon  Maiden  Sw. 
150  acs.  by  patent,  30  July  1638,  &  50 
acs.  for  trans,  of  Roger  Sollis. 

SAME.  100  acs.  Northumberland 
Co.,  same  date  &  page.  N.  W.  upon 
Mattapony  Riv.  &  N.  E.  upon  land  of 
Jane  Parry,  Widow.  Trans,  of  2  pers: 
John  Maple,  Eliza.  Street. 

NICHOLAS  WILLIAMS,  200  acs. 
Surry  Co.,  up  Smiths  Fort  Cr.,  12  Oct. 
1652,  p.  140.  Along  the  Reedy  Sw.  &c. 
to  marked  trees  of  Luke  Misen,  &c. 
Trans,  of  4  pers.* 


268 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


WILLIAM  MORTON,  150  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  Eliz.  Riv.  Parish,  26  Nov. 
1652,  p.  140.  Near  John  Manings  Cr., 
running  W.  to  Marringtons  land  &c. 
Trans,  of  3  pers:  Anne  Pates,  Samuel 
Roberts,  James  Roberts. 

WILLIAM  MOORE,  300  acs.  in  the 
Southerne  branch  of  Nansemond  Riv., 
by  Arses  Cr.  &c,  6  Dec.  1652,  p.  141. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Edward  James,  John 
Cockery,  William  Ceely,  Tho.  Wethell, 
Christopr.  Batley,  John  Owen. 

ROBERT  GRIMES,  300  acs.  at  the 
head  of  the  Westermost  br.  of  Eliz. 
Riv.,  along  land  of  Peter  Rigglesworth 
&c.  6  May,  1652,  p.  141.  Trans,  of 
6  pers.* 

RICHARD  COLEMAN,  100  acs.  up- 
on a  Cr.  proceeding  out  of  Occapason 
Cr.  11  Jan.  1652,  p.  142.  Trans,  of  2 
pers:  Jane  Cranaway,  Abraham  Jones. 
(Relinquished  to  make  good  another.) 

SAME.  1300  acs.  Same  location, 
date  &  page.  Trans,  of  26  pers:  John 
Lallifmore  (?),  Wm.  Hallingham,  John 
Ray,  Thomas  March,  Thomas  Tuknor  (or 
Ticknor),    Geo.    Morecocke,    Elizabeth 

,    Thomas    Chapman,    James    Hill, 

Edward  Moor,  Tho.  Hart,  Tho.  Green- 
hoe,  Richard  Wilson,  Thomas  Parry, 
Mathew  Hall,  Mich.  Wictor,  James 
Hore,  Rice  Williams,  Danl.  Clarke, 
Richd.  Hankins,  Peter  Dorman,  Wil- 
liam Stone,  James  Wilson,  Mary  Jones, 
Phill.  Starkey,  Saml.  Jones. 

JOHN    GREENHOUGH,    400    acs. 

Henrico  Co.,  on  E.  side  of  James  Riv., 
known  by  the  name  of  Smithes  Bay,  6 
Dec.  1652,  p.  143.  From  the  Riv. 
alongst  Thomas  Markhams  devdt.,  to- 
ward four  mile  Cr.  &c.  Trans,  of  8 
pers:  Edward  Palmer,  Wm.  Wright, 
John  Lupton,  Luke  Anwell,  James 
Dobbs,  Sam.  Fuer,  Fra.  Streete,  John 
Greenhough. 

CLEMENT  THRUSH,  164  acs.  on  S. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  at  a  Cr.  by 

which  is  made  a  peninsula  at  the  East- 
ermost  end,  extend,  parallel  to  the  river, 
N.  W.  to  his  land  purchased  of  Barth. 
Hoskins    &c.    11    Jan.    1652,    p.    143. 


Trans,  of  4  pers:    Joane  Flood,  Joane 
Broadribb,  John  Flood,   Alice  Spencer. 

BARTH.  KNIPE,  418  acs.  James  City 
Co.,  6  Oct.  1652,  p.  144.  On  N.  side 
of  James  Riv.  on  S.  side  of  a  runn  of 
Mosses  Cr.  &c.  to  sd.  Moses  Corkers 
trees,  S.  W.  &c.  to  Mr.  Bishops  trees 
&c.  Trans,  of  9  pers.*  (Note:  Re- 
newed in  her  son's  name  19  May  1655.) 

ROBERT  WEST,  700  acs.  upon 
branches  of  Bayleys  Cr.,  in  Chas.  City 
Co.,  towards  the  S.  side  of  the  head  of 
sd.  Cr.,  2  Aug.  1652,  p.  144.  Bounded 
S.  by  E.  by  James  Warradins  land 
comonly  called  by  the  name  of  High 
Peake  &  now  in  occupation  of  Mr. 
William  Ditty  &  Robert  Langman  &c. 
Trans,  of  14  pers:  Robert  West, 
Susanna  West,  John  West,  Dan.  Evans, 
Thomas  Bowman,  Mary  Owin,  Saml. 
Garingoe,  Hen.  Wentworth,  Jane 
Terrill,  Robt.  Ebernathell,  John  Toppin, 
George  Willett,  JefTery  Philliph,  John 
Reeves. 

DR.  RICHARD  HALL,  150  acs.  in 
Deep  Cr.,  bounding  on  land  of  George 
Cooksey,  &c.  13  Jan.  1652,  p.  145. 
Trans,  of  3  pers:  Richard  Hall,  Senr., 
Richard  Hall,  Junr.,  Samuel  Hall, 
Joseph  Hall,  Kath.  Hall.  Note:  Land 
due  for  2  last. 

THOMAS  GREENE,  270  acs.  in 
Eliz.  Riv.  upon  head  of  Loyds  Cr., 
bounded  from  the  great  Swamp  N.  W. 
by  W.  &c.  11  Jan.  1652,  p.  145.  Trans, 
of  4  pers:  Richard  Owens,  his  wife, 
Milkey  Hussey,  Nicho.  Caffeway,  Henry 
Hills,  Thomas  Rope.  By  assignmt.  from 
Richd.  Owens. 

MR.  EDWARD  OVERMAN,  1,000 
acs.  Yorke  Co.,  on  W.  side  of  the  main 
Br.  of  Ware  Cr.,  Nov.  9,  1652,  p.  146. 
Beg.  at  the  horse  path  near  head  of  sd. 
branch  &c.  Trans,  of  20  pers:  Thomas 
Castle,  Is.  (or  Js.)  Southerwood,  John 
Daynes,  John  Tucker,  John  Burshall, 
Geo.  Downinge,  John  Harrison,  Nicho. 
Bridges. 

WILLIAM  up  THOMAS,  700  acs. 
on  the  N.  E.  side  of  Mockjack  Bay,  beg. 
at  markt  trees  of  Mr.  Ransons,  running 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


269 


N.  E.  &c.  to  trees  of  Thomas  Preston, 
deed.,  &c.  16  Nov.  1652,  p.  146. 
Trans.  14  pers:  Christopher  Dorgle, 
John  Rawlins,  John  Barlow,  Thomas 
Bayley,  John  Nash,  Win.  Chichester, 
Joane  Middleton. 

RICHARD  NELMES,  400  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  25  Nov.  1652,  p.  147. 
E.  upon  Yeocomico  Riv.,  &  S.  W.  upon 
land  of  William  Walker.  Trans,  of  8 
pers:  Robert  Thompson,  Ralph  Lowe, 
Tho.  Lethrington,  Morgan  Davis,  Susan 
Haynes,  Walter  Cooper,  Math.  Purnell, 
Maria  a  Negro;  by  assignmt.  of  Ralph 
Hunt. 

WILLIAM  GANTLETT,  720  acs. 
on  S.  W.  side  of  Skiminoe  maine 
branch,  beg.  at  cor.  tree  of  William 
Greaves,  running  along  land  of  Thomas 
Pinkerman  &c,  N.  W.  to  land  of  Wm. 
Graves  &c.  30  Nov.  1652,  p.  147. 
Trans,  of  15  pers:  William  Gantlett, 
his  father,  Thomas  Halls,  Thomas  Smith, 
Xtopr.  Hughes,  Geo.  Holt,  George 
Keth,  John  Wood,  Henry  Franklin. 

JAMES  STERLING,  150  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  in  Linhaven  Parish,  10  May 
1652,  p.  148.  Beg.  at  a  point  between 
Bennetts  Cr.  &  Cattaile  Cr.,  etc.  Trans, 
of  3  pers:  Ann  Byard,  Dunkin  Glass, 
Margaret  Hodges. 

THOMAS  HOLLIWELL,  300  acs., 
being  a  neck  of  land  on  the  W.  branch 
of  Eliz.  Rv.,  bounded  with  Broad  Cr. 
on  the  S.  W.  &  a  branch  of  same  called 
the  Sedgy  Cr.  on  the  N.  E.  &c.  11  Jan. 
1652,  p.  148.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Rich- 
ard Thompson,  Richard  Jones,  Daniel 
Pulson,  John  Roge,  William  Rasfe  (or 
Raffe,)  Geo.  Gosden.  By  assignmt. 
from  Richard  Starnell. 

RICHARD  STARNELL,  350  acs.  in 
Eliz.  Riv.,  beg.  at  the  miles  end  of 
Thomas  Wright,  running  E.  by  S.  &c. 
by  Broad  Cr.,  up  the  same  N.  E.  etc. 
11  Jan.  1652,  p.  149.  Trans,  of  7 
pers:  Mary  a  Negro,  Henry  Lambert, 
Mary  Goldsmith,  Jno.  Lownes  &  his 
wife,  Rebecca  Moore,  Robert  Serby.  By 
assignment  from  Mr.  Ro.  Hubberd. 

SAME.  Same  date  &  page.  100  acs. 
on   W.    branch    of   Eliz.    Riv.,    beg.    at 


Clerkes  Cr.  &  running  for  length  N. 
N.  E.  &c.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  William 
Rampsie,  Samuel  Quilt.  By  assignmt. 
as  above. 

MR.  THOMAS  SAWYER,  500  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  2  June  1652,  p.  150. 
Being  2  miles  up  the  Eastermost  br.  of 
Eliz.  Riv.,  W.  upon  Billingsgate  Cr.  & 
E.  N.  E.  upon  Nehuntas  Cr.  &c.  250 
acs.  by  patent  to  him  dated  10  May 
1638  &  the  residue  for  trans,  of  5  pers: 
Himselfe,  Francis  Sawyer,  Francis  Saw- 
yer, Robert  Flitt,  Eliza.  Yellow. 

RICHARD  POOLE,  400  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  22  Aug.  1652,  p.  150.  Ly- 
ing towards  the  head  of  the  master  br. 
of  Saml.  Bennetts  Cr.,  beg.  on  S.  E. 
side  thereof  about  a  mile  above  John 
Gookins  Landing  place.  Formerly 
granted  to  Edward  Hall  1  Sept.  1646 
renewed  in  his  name  24  Sept.  1649,  & 
assigned  to  sd.  Poole. 

SAVILL  GASKINS,  250  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  in  Linhaven  Parish,  6  Dec. 
1652,  p.  151.  Beg.  at  James  Starlings 
land,  running  by  the  head  of  Strattons 
and  Davis'  land  W.  S.  W.  &c.  by  Bur- 
roughs land,  thence  by  Marg.  (or 
Mary)  Gookins  land  &  thence  by  Col. 
Yardleys  land.  100  acs.  granted  to  him 
by  patent,  28  July  1648;  &  residue  for 
trans,  of  3  pers:  Joseph  Bowe,  Allen 
Gallop,  Elizabeth  Hewes.  By  assign- 
ment of  Tho.  Lambert. 

JOHN  PHILLIPS,  200  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  2  Sept.  1652,  p.  151.  On  S.  side 
of  Rappa.  Riv.  &  upon  S.  side  of  Bar- 
ham  ah.  Burnham  Cr.  or  Sunderland, 
lying  at  the  head  of  land  of  Edward 
Boswell;  N.  upon  lands  of  Evan  Davis 
&  Den.  Conier  &c.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
Nathaniel  Eaton,  Charles  Harris,  Robert 
Drap:  (may  be  abbreviation  for  Draper.) 

WILLIAM  WOLFE,  613  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  lying  at  the  head  of  Tamahun 
Cr.  in  Juringe  point  Necke,  bounded 
from  the  Cr.  by  Mrs.  Young,  Widd: 
(widdow),  S.  W.  by  W.  &c.  10  Jan. 
1652,  p.  152.    Trans,  of  13  pers.* 

JOHN  HATTON,  300  acs.  in  the 
Westermost  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  near  the 
head  of  Browns  Cr.    11   Jan.   1652,  p. 


270 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


152.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  John  Harris, 
Edm.  Yeomans,  John  Searle,  Ja.  Jen- 
kins, Xtopher  Vaughan,  Tho.  Atkinson. 

THOMAS  PAINE,  600  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co.,  27  Jan.  1652,  p.  153.  Upon  S. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  &  N.  W.  side  of 
plantation  of  James  Bagnell,  about  43 
mi.  up  the  river,  beg.  upon  N.  W.  side 
of  a  cr.  dividing  this  &  land  of  sd. 
Bagwell.  Due  by  virtue  of  the  rights 
of  a  patent  for  600  acs.,  dated  10  Apr. 
1650. 

NICHOLAS  GEORGE,  700  acs.  on 
the  N.  side  of  Rappa.  River,  on  E.  side 
of  the  W.  br.  of  Corotoman  Riv.,  15 
Feb.  1652,  p.  153.  300  acs.  by  rights 
of  a  patent  to  sd.  George  &  William 
Grindith,  Feb.  28,  1638,  &  surrendered 
by  him;  &  400  acs.  for  trans,  of  8  pers: 
Nicho.  George,  Marg.  his  wife,  John 
Pinhorne,  Neale  Mackee,  Tho.  Bemrose, 
James  Budford,  Mary  West,  Richard 
Appletree,  Stephen  Norman,  John 
Cassens.    Land  due  for  two  last. 

MRS.  ANN  HARWOOD,  300  acs. 
Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  (no  date)  p.  154.  N. 
upon  Uteys  Cr.,  E.  upon  the  Gleab 
Land  &  S.  upon  land  of  Thomas  Fel- 
gate.  Formerly  granted  unto  John 
Wayne,  10  July  1638,  who  assigned  to 
Robert  Bouth,  (Booth),  who  assigned 
unto  Capt.  Gill  &  purchased  of  him  by 
Capt.  Thomas  Harwood,  as  appeareth 
by  deposition  of  Capt.  Stephen  Gill;  & 
also  by  order  of  the  Quarter  Court,  13 
Oct.  1652. 

THOMAS  STEVENS,  600  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  12  Feb.  1652,  p.  154.  Upon 
N.  W.  side  of  Moraticon  Cr.,  opposite 
land  of  Richard  Hatton  &  Lambert 
Lambetson,  W.  by  S.  against  land  of 
Nicho.  Freeman  &c.  Trans,  of  12 
pers:  Eight  Negros;  Tho.  Mount 
Stevens,  Mary  West,  Anne  Downing, 
Holliday  Chessee. 

MR.  HENRY  PITTS,  450  acs.  on 
Pagan  Cr.,  13  Jan.  1652,  p.  155.  Run- 
ning to  land  of  Mrs.  Joane  West, 
George  Medlin,  Mrs.  Upton  &  Samuel 
Mathews.  Trans,  of  9  pers:  Henry 
Pitt,  Wm.  Oakes,  Chr.  Jones,  Jno.  Dol- 
ton,   Danl.   Rooke,    Sarah   Payne,   Tho. 


Forrest,  Jam.  Haynes,  Thomas  Jones, 
Wm.  Dawson,  Wm.  Wincen,  (or  Vin- 
cen),  John  Gatehouse,  Jane  House, 
Segro  and  Mingo,  Negroes.  Land  due 
for  6  last. 

THOMAS  HOLME,  200  acs.  Yorke 
Co.,  15  Feb.  1652,  p.  155.  Upon  S. 
side  of  Yorke  Riv.,  opposite  another  of 
his  tracts,  Ewd.  of  Cattaile  Swamp  &c. 
to  the  head  of  a  branch  of  Persimon 
Valley  &c.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Gabriell 
Wilson,  Benjamin  Strange,  Richard 
Harrison.  Note:  This  land  is  included 
in  a  patent  granted  sd.  Holmes,  26  Mar. 
1653,  &  these  rights  to  make  that  good. 

JOANE  YATES,  Widdow,  200  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  in  Eliz.  Riv.  Parish,  6 
Dec.  1652,  p.  156.  Beg.  at  head  of 
the  W.  Neck  branch,  which  falls  into 
the  S.  br.  of  sd.  Riv  &c.  Trans,  of  4 
pers:  Jonathan  Barthram,  Anne  Wynn, 
Walter  Causington,  Mary  Syarlocke. 

MR.  JOHN  FLEET,  200  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  28  Jan.  1652,  p.  156.  Upon 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  N.  W.  upon 
land  of  David  Fox  &  S.  E.  along 
Powells  Cr.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  George 
Light,  Fra.  Wheeler,  their  second  ad- 
venture,  Mathew  Smalwood. 

NICHO.  SEABORNE,  100  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  in  Eliz.  Riv.  Parish,  6  Dec. 
1652,  p.  157.  Beg.  on  the  head  of  the 
Wetneck  branch  &c.  Trans,  of  2  pers: 
John  Arrundell,  Margarett  Greene.  By 
assignment  from  Mr.  Richard  Conquest. 

HENRY  SNAILE,  97  acs.  Low.  Norf. 
Co.,  23  Aug.  1652,  p.  157.  Bounded 
with  his  own  land  on  the  S.  side,  land 
of  Capt.  Thorowghgood  heir  (?)  on  the 
N.  side  &  the  Little  Cr.  on  the  E.  side. 
50  acs.  by  virtue  of  the  right  of  a  patent 
granted  him  for  soe  much,  dated  23 
Nov.  1637,  &  surrendered;  &  47  acs. 
for  trans,  of  Henry  Gordan. 

MR.  EDWARD  TRAVIS,  196  acs. 
in  James  City  Island  near  black  Poynt, 
10  Mar.  1652,  p.  158.  Bounded  N. 
upon  the  back  river,  E.  upon  the  same, 
S.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Chyles  &  Goose 
hill  Marsh  &  W.  upon  David  Ellis  & 
Mr.  Crossbys  land.    24  acs.  granted  un- 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


271 


to  John  Southerne;  16  acs.  formerly  be- 
longing unto  Thomas  Passmore;  12  acs. 
formerly  granted  unto  John  Senior,  in 
all  52  acs.,  which  is  since  purchased  by 
Travis;  &  144  acs.  adj.  to  the  former 
land,  due  for  trans,  of  3  pers:  Thomas 
Bryan,  John  Hall,  George  Thomas. 

THOMAS  GREY,  800  acs.  Surry  Co., 
on  S.  side  of  James  Riv.  at  the  head  of 
Smiths  Fort  Cr.,  14  Mar.  1652,  p.  158. 
Upon  land  of  John  Kemp.  400  acs. 
granted  sd.  Grey  30  July  1639  &  400 
acs.  formerly  granted  Samuel  Abbott, 
10  Apr.  1644  &  purchased  by  sd.  Grey. 

FRANCIS  TOWNSHEND,  650  acres 
in  Chas.  Riv.  Co.,  between  Marteaws 
Cr.  &  Townshends  Cr.,  10  Mar.  1652, 
p.  159.  N.  W.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Wil- 
liam Prior  &  S.  E.  upon  land  of  Capt. 
Marteaw,  the  land  marks  for  the 
division  beg.  at  the  S.  W.  branch  of 
Capt.  Marteaws  Cr.  butting  N.  E.  upon 
Charles  Riv.  &  S.  W.  into  the  main 
land.  Granted  Capt.  Richard  Town- 
shend,  10  Mar.  1639  &  due  sd.  Francis 
as  sonn  &  heire,  &  for  trans,  of  15 
pers.* 

JAMES  FOSTER,  &  ANDRY,  (or 
Audry)  BONNY,  800  acs.  on  the  head 
of  the  S.  branch  of  Nansemund  Riv. 
18  Feb.  1652,  p.  159.  Trans,  of  16 
pers:  Thomas  Best,  Wm.  Penington, 
John  Lawrence,  John  Wilcockes, 
Michael  Carrington,  Mary  Bacon. 

WILLIAM  ROBERTS,  200  acs. 
Glocester  Co.,  29  Nov.  1652,  p.  160. 
Upon  N.  side  of  York  Riv.  &  N.  W. 
side  at  the  mouth  of  Joneses  Cr.  &  N. 
upon  land  of  Edward  West.  Trans,  of 
4  pers.* 

JOHN  BUTLER,  470  acs.  on  S.  side 
of  Yorke  Riv.,  behind  John  Murseries 
land,  and  abutting  Mr.  Croshaws  land 
in  the  Narrows.  17  Feb.  1652,  p.  160. 
Due  by  virtue  of  the  rights  of  a  patent 
granted  unto  Timothy  Lodall,  27  Feb. 
1649,  which  he  assigned  unto  Joseph 
Croshaw,  who  assigned  to  James  Turner 
&  by  Turner  to  sd.  Butler  &  by  him 
surrendered  into  the  office. 

MRS.  HANAH  CLERKE,  800  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,  10  Feb.  1652,  p.  161.    Upon 


S.  side  &  within  the  freshes  of  Yorke 
Riv.,  N.  W.  upon  a  swamp  dividing 
this  &  land  of  Col.  Phillip  Huniwood, 
&  S.  E.  upon  land  of  Joseph  Croshaw. 
Trans,  of  16  pers.* 

SAME.  1300  acs.  Same  location, 
date  &  page.  Upon  a  swamp  divding 
this  &  land  of  Col.  Phillip  Hunnywood. 
Trans,  of  26  pers.* 

MR.  GEORGE  CLAPHAM,  670  acs. 
on  S.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.,  in  the  Nar- 
rowes,  behind  land  of  Mr.  Vause.  24 
Dec.  1652,  p.  162.  Trans,  of  14  pers: 
Thomas  Bridd,  Eliza.  Street,  John 
Latham,  Richard  Hill,  George  Chapman, 
John  Rosse,  Reese  Ruffe,  Rog.  Penn, 
John  Westone,  James  Spencer,  Mary 
Blake,  Samuel  Ellis,  Israeli  Ellis,  John 
Crafford. 

RICE  HUGHES,  200  acs.  on  N.  side 
of  Yorke  Riv.,  behind  land  of  George 
Gills  &  upon  land  of  George  Smith. 
8  Mar.  1652,  p.  162.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
John  Williams,  Richard  Symons,  Tho- 
mas Price,  Hugh  Griffin. 

GEORGE  SMITH,  200  acs.  on  S. 
side  of  Yorke  Riv.  behind  land  of 
George  Gills  &  upon  land  of  Rice 
Hutcheson.  8  Mar.  1652,  p.  163. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  George  Smith,  Phill. 
Crafford,  John  Crafford,  Elizab.  Craf- 
ford. 

MR.  EDWIN  CONNAWAY,  700 
acs.  lying  on  the  Northermost  side  to- 
wards the  head  of  Corotoman  (?)  River, 
beg.  on  a  poynt  at  the  mouth  of  Conna- 
ways  Cr.  6  Dec.  1652,  p.  163.  Trans, 
of  14  pers:  EdwinConnaway  3  tymes, 
Martha  his  wife,  John  Calvary,  Dennis 
Lyell,  John  Roberts,  Senr.,  John  Roberts, 
Jr.,  Mary  Garner,  Wm.  Lucas,  William 
Roberts,  John  Walker,  John  Whoop, 
Math.  Welbeloved,  A  child. 

SAME.  300  acs.  on  Cattatawoman 
Riv.,  on  the  Northermost  side  nigh  the 
head,  adj.  his  own  tract  of  700  acs. 
Same  date,  p.  164.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
James  Langworth,  Eliza.  Morris,  Eliza. 
Savill,  Richard  Smith,  John  Sutton, 
Alice  Ellis,  Anne  Roberts.  Land  due 
for  the  last  name. 


272 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


THOMAS  BELL,  84  acs.  Glocester 
Co.,  6  Dec.  1652,  p.  164.  Upon  N.  W. 
side  of  Poropotanke  Cr.  &  N.  E.  side 
of  Bennetts  Cr. ;  &  bounded  with  land 
of  John  King,  John  Bennett  and  Tho- 
mas Leechman.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Tho- 
mas Hickman,  Thomas  Wheeley,  Wil- 
liam Watts.  Land  due  for  the  last  right. 

FRANCIS  BROWN,  300  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  1  Jan.  1652,  p.  165.  On  S. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  &  bounded  on  the 
S.  E.  with  Sandy  Poynt  Cr.  Due  by 
virtue  of  the  rights  of  a  former  patent 
by  him  relinquished. 

HENRY  TYLER,  254  acs.  lying  in 
the  Middle  plantation,  Chas.  Riv.  Co., 
7  Jan.  1652,  p.  165.  Bounded  S.  E. 
upon  the  Pallisadoes,  S.  W.  upon  land 
of  George  Lake  &  N.  E.  upon  Capt. 
Popeley.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Henry 
Tyler,  Mary  his  wife,  Anne  Sherman, 
Thomas  Day,  David  Legume,  Ja. 
Muskatina.  46  acs.  remaining  due  upon 
the  last  name. 

THOMAS  LEECHMAN  &  JOHN 
BENNETT,  200  acs.  Glocester  Co.,  13 
Jan.  1652,  p.  166.  Upon  N.  side  of 
Yorke  Riv.,  from  S.  E.  side  of  a  Cr. 
dividing  this  &  land  surveyed  for  Robert 
Huberd,  and  N.  E.  upon  Tankes  Cr. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  William  Jones,  John 
Clerke,  Richard  James,  Henry  Lodwell. 
Note:  "Wrong  Enter'd  instead  thereof 
is  Wm.  Porter,  Robert  Dorfield,  Rob. 
Lane,  Richd.  Wilkins." 

CAPT.  FRANCIS  MORGAN  & 
RALPH  GREEN,  500  acs.  Gloster  Co., 
13  Jan.  1652,  p.  166.  Upon  S.  E.  side 
of  Mattapony  Riv.  &  S.  S.  W.  side  of 
Arsantans  Cr.  running  N.  N.  W.  &c.  to 
head  of  Aratoco  Cr.  &c.  Trans.  16  pers: 
Gregory  Bashpoole,  Nicho.  Heale,  Tho- 
mas Morley,  Symon  Wady,  George 
Evans,  Peter  Starky,  Hump.  Tompkins, 
Fra.  Reade,  Stephen  Boyer,  Dennis 
Connier,  James  Turney,  (or  Turvey), 
Wm.  Jones,  Joseph  Clerke,  Richd. 
James,  Hen.  Lodwell,  Thomas  Jarvis 
(or  Harvis). 

MR.  THOMAS  BRICE,  1650  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  27  Oct.  1652,  p.  167.  On 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  being  part  of 


an  Indian  Habitation  called  Old  Mora- 
ticond  &  on  Nwd.  side  of  the  mouth  of 
Harrises  Cr.,  adj.  Edward  Harris  &c.  to 
the  deviding  Cr.  of  Cattowoman  River, 
etc.  to  Faireweathers  Cr.  &c,  crossing 
Brices  Cr.  &c.  700  acs.  by  patent  dated 
15  Aug.  1642,  &  200  acs.  by  patent 
dated  18  Apr.  1650;  &  the  residue  for 
trans,  of  15  pers:  Christopher  Jones, 
Richard  Godfrey,  George  Beachly,  Mary 
Hancocke,  Phill.  Chycott,  James 
Beamast,  Peirce  Cornewall,  John  Pott, 
Martha  Brice,  Fra.  Robinson,  Thomas 
Barker. 

EDWARD  WILLS,  200  acs.  upon 
Deep  Cr.  in  Ware  Riv.  in  Mockjack 
Bay,  adj.  his  own  land.  6  Dec.  1652,  p. 
168.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Edward  Wills, 
John  Wills,  Katherin  Wills,  Susana 
Wills. 

JOHN  SMITHY,  100  acs.  in  a  branch 
of  Milford  Haven,  beg.  at  George  Bil- 
lops  land  on  the  Cr.  side,  running  S. 
S.  W.  &c.  6  Dec.  1652,  p.  168.  Trans, 
of  2  pers:  Elizabeth  a  Maid  servant, 
&  Another  maid  servant.  Assigned  by 
Lt.  Col.  John  Walker. 

WILLIAM  RATTON  &  RICHARD 
FLINT,  200  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  29  Nov. 
1652,  p.  169.  Upon  W.  side  of  Coro- 
toman  Riv.,  N.  N.  W.  upon  land  of 
William  White,  S.  S.  E.  upon  land  of 
Henry  Hacker  &  E.  N.  E.  upon  a  branch 

dividing  this  &  land  of  William  

Jr.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Mary  Flint, 
Marga.  Leathott,  Marga.  Robinson,  Job. 
Townsend. 

ANDREW  MUNROW  (MON- 
ROW),  440  acs.  Northumberland  Co., 
29  Nov.  1652,  p.  169.  N.  E.  upon  a 
Cr.  issueing  out  of  Potomack  Riv.  & 
S.  E.  upon  his  own  plantation  &c. 
Trans,  of  9  pers:  William  Longe, 
James  Brice,  William  James,  George 
Dale,  John  Teagg,  Edis  Kleg,  John 
Hodin,  Wm.  Brice,  James  Longe. 

EDWARD  REVELL,  500  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  27  Nov.  1652,  p.  170.  A 
neck  of  land  parted  by  a  branch  of 
Pongotege  Cr.  from  land  of  Anthony 
Hoskins.  Due  by  assignmt.  from  his 
father  Randall  Revell  of  the  survey  & 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


273 


trans,  of  10  pers:  Joyce  Smith,  Robt. 
Huston,  James  Gardner,  George  Dale, 
John  Teagg,  Edis  Kleg,  Wm,  Fernice, 
Wm.  Matter,  Fra.  Pope,  Richard 
Browne. 

GEORGE  PACE,  507  acs.  Chas.  City 
Co.,  6  Dec.  1652,  p.  170.  On  S.  side 
of  James  Riv.  &  E.  side  of  Powells  Cr. 
Trans,  of  10  pers:  Arkady,  An- 
drew Gourd,  Thomas  Bigs,  Ben.  Bourne, 
Sa.  Torner,  Tho.  Stroud,  Andrew 
Walker,  Thomas  Bayley,  Wm.  Besse, 
Wm.  Hencill. 

MR.  JAMES  WARRADINE,  1070^4 
acs.  Chas.  City  Co.,  13  Oct.  1652,  p. 
171.  On  S.  side  of  James  Riv.,  next  to 
John  Chaplins,  S.  S.  E.  &c.  to  head  of 
Richards  land,  bounded  from  his  own 
land  S.  by  W.  &c.  cross  an  Indian  feild 
comonly  called  Mr.  Mathews  his  upper 
Indian  field  &c.  470^4  acs.  by  patent 
July  8,  1647  &  the  residue  for  trans. 
of  12  pers:  Robert  Burgess,  Thomas 
Hutt  (or  Hatt),  Henry  Barker,  John 
Moore,  Joyce  Amis,  (or  Amis),  Da. 
Ludicus,  Eliz.  Ludicus,  Tho.  Battle, 
Tho.  Godson,  John  Harlow,  Edward 
Gibson,  Alex  Davis. 

COL.  THOMAS  PETTUS,  Esqr.,  one 
of  the  Councill  of  State,  1,000  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  10  Feb.  1652,  p. 
171.  Nly.  upon  Potomeck  Cr.  &  Ely. 
upon  land  of  Sir  Thomas  Lunsford. 
Trans,  of   20  pers.* 

CHRISTOPHER  ROBINSON  & 
JOHN  STURDEVANT,  600  acs.  Hen- 
rico Co.,  23  Feby.  1652,  p.  172.  Upon 
the  heads  of  the  Eastern  run  of  Swift 
Cr.  known  by  the  name  of  Mr.  Hatchers 
run  &c,  towards  the  Ashen  Swamp,  etc. 
Trans,  of  12  pers:  Wm.  Hayward, 
Elianor  his  wife,  John  Kendall,  James 
Hewes,  James  Sturdey,  Robt.  Kinge, 
Edward  Bayle,  Tho.  Edwards,  Hester 
Paulwin.  2  rights  by  assignmt.  from 
Mihill  Masters. 

MR.  DAVID  FOX,  600  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co.,  25  Nov.  1652,  p.  172.  Upon 
S.  S.  E.  side  of  Morroticon  Cr.  &c.  S. 
W.  upon  land  of  Lam.  Lambettson  & 
Richard  Hatton.  Due  by  virtue  of  the 
rights  of  a  former  patent  by  him  relin- 
quished. 


ROBERT  LEND  ALL,  150  acs.  on  N. 
side  of  the  Eastermost  river  in  Mock- 
jack  Bay.  18  Oct.  1652,  p.  173.  (Re- 
cord incomplete)  Trans,  of  3  pers: 
Joane  Maning,  Anne  Moseley. 

MRS.  ELIANOR  BROCAS,  wife  of 
Capt.  Wm.  Brocas,  Esqr.,  700  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  2  Jan.  1652,  p.  173.  Upon 
S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  upon  head  of 
Lady  Chichleys  land,  now  in  possession 
sd.  Brocas.  Trans,  of  14  pers:  James 
Draper,  Richard  Moore,  Francis  Pett, 
Tymothy  Turton,  Elizabeth  Angle,  Joane 
Cannon,  Fra.  Crame,  Tho.  Innervald, 
Edward  Tiballs,  John  Pye,  Peter  Caper, 

Tomazin    Drue,    Benjamin   ,   Mary 

Ashwell. 

TOBY  SMITH,  Gent.,  900  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  8  Feb.  1652,  p.  174.  Upon 
S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  near  land  of 
Thomas  Payne  &c.  opposite  Toteske  Cr. 
550  acs.  formerly  granted  in  two  patents 
to  Capt.  Moore  Fantleroy  200  acs.  dated 
18  Apr.  1650,  &  350  acs.  dated  22  May 
1650,  &  assigned  to  sd.  Smith;  &  350 
acs.  for  trans,  of  7  pers.* 

EDWARD  WILDER,  200  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  9  Mar.  1652,  p.  174.  Beg. 
on  a  point  in  the  broad  Cr.  &  running 
N.  &c.    Trans,  of  4  pers.* 

JOHN  SOWSEY,  150  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  9  Mar.  1652,  p.  175.  Trans, 
of  3  pers.* 

MRS.  JOHANNA  YATES,  300  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  page  175.  No  date. 
Trans.  6  pers.* 

RICHARD  KING.  150  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  9  Mar.  1652,  p.  176.  Adj. 
John  Sowsyes  land.  Trans.  3  pers:  John 
Chandler,  Edmund  Madgnell,  Thomas 
Kelly. 

THOMAS  BROWNE,  250  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co..  in  Linhaven  Parish,  on  broad 
Creek,  9  Mar.  1652,  p.  176.  Trans,  of 
5  pers.* 

NICHO.  SEABURNE,  170  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  9  Mar.  1652,  p.  177.  (Re- 
cord incomplete.) 

THOMAS  GREENWOOD,  300  acs. 
Isle   of  Wight   Co.,    23    Feb.    1652,   p. 


274 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


177.  Wly.  upon  land  of  John  Oliver  & 
Ely.  on  land  of  Pharo.  Flinton.  Trans, 
of  6  pers:  John  Gaylor,  John  Allen, 
John  Mooringe,  Thomas  Whittngton, 
William  Mason,  Robert  Scott. 

HENRY  BARLOW,  350  acs.  in 
the  Southerne  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  run- 
ning down  Julians  Cr.    9  Mar.  1652,  p. 

178.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  Henry  Barlow 
3  tymes,  Thomas  Barlow,  Abra.  Pan- 
craft,  Eliz.  Pancraft,  William  Starky. 

MR.  THOMAS  GUTHERIDGE,  700 
acs.  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  up  the  S.  branch 

of  Eliz.  Rv.,  Mar.   1652,  p.  178. 

Trans,  of  14  pers:  Thomas  Turner, 
Richard  Chapman,  Pascoe  Champion, 
Ficler  Windett,  Math.  Hall,  Hen.  Gutts, 
Weston  Browe,  Tho.  Evans,  Steph. 
Callowe,  Tho.  Luscome,  Rob.  Smith- 
wood,  Tho.  Austine.  This  patent  is  as- 
signed to  Peter  Sexton  who  hath  relin- 
quished it  and  made  use  of  the  rights 
for  another  tract. 

GREGORY  PARRETT,  300  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  16  Mar.  1652,  p.  179.  Up 
the  S.  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.  against  John 
Maning,  N.  N.  W.  along  Julians  Cr. 
&c.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Thomas  Parker, 
Richard  Hunter,  Wm.  Wilson,  Phill. 
Weston,  Will.  Lemon,  James  Smith. 

FRANCIS  FLEETWOOD,  300  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  16  Mar.  1652,  p.  179. 
Lying  in  Pussell  Point  Cr.  over  against 
William  Robinsons  land  &c.  Trans,  of 
6  pers:  John  Leidge,  Robt.  Sorrell, 
John  Sorrell,  Edward  Dorsey,  Richard 
Starnell,  John  Scibbs. 

WILLIAM  ROBINSON,  500  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  10  Mar.  1652,  p.  180. 
Up  the  S.  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.  nye 
Pussell  Point  &c.  Trans,  of  10  pers.* 
(Incomplete.) 

JOHN  OLIVER,  100  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  23  Feb.  1652,  p.  180. 
Bounded  Wly.  by  land  of  Major  Faw- 
den  &  Ely.  with  land  of  Thomas  Green- 
wood. Trans,  of  2  pers:  John  Can- 
ninge,  John  Dobson. 

THOMAS  STEEVENS  ( Stevens ) , 
150  acs.  lying  in  Nutmeg  quarter,  run- 
ning E.  by  the  white  Marsh  &c.    5  Mar. 


1652,  p.  181.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Charles 
Walshway,  Walter  Rouse,  Nicho. 
Netherwitt,  (or  Nethercott). 

THOMAS  STEEVENS,  120  acs.  War- 
wick Co.,  5  Mar.  1652,  p.  181. 
Bounded  Wly.  upon  land  of  Robert 
Gillett.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  William 
Kemp,  John  Barron,  (or  Barton), 
William  Matham. 

HUMPH.  HARWOOD,  2,070  acs. 
Warwick  Co.,  26  Nov.  1652,  p.  182. 
On  Skeaths  Cr.,  near  land  of  Capt. 
Nath.  Hurd.  1350  acs.  part  of  patent 
granted  to  Capt.  Thomas  Harwood,  7 
Nov.  1637;  the  other  500  acs.  now  be- 
longing to  sd.  Hurd;  100  acs.  by  virtue 
of  the  rights  of  a  patent  for  soe  much 
granted  to  Richard  Atkins  &  since  pur- 
chased by  Capt.  Thomas  Harwood;  & 
620  acs.  for  trans,  of  13  pers.*,  and 
descending  to  said  Humph,  as  being  son 
&  heir  to  sd.  Capt.  Harwood. 

THOMAS  TODD,  450  acs.  lying  in 
Winter  Harbour,  beg.  at  John  Smiths 
land,  running  E.  N.  E.  &c.  27  Oct. 
1652,  p.  182.  Trans,  of  9  pers:  John 
Radford,  John  Rowlinson,  Hen.  Alwood, 
(or  Atwood),  Edmd.  Morenhana,  Tho- 
mas Hughes,  Giles  Webb,  Richard 
Roote,  Eliza.  Cooper,  Thomas  Smith. 

SAME.  Same  date.  Page  183.  150 
acs.  lying  on  Ewd.  side  of  the  Eastermost 
river  n  Mockjack  bay,  bet.  William 
Hampton  &  Phill.  Hunly.  Trans,  of  3 
pers:  Geo.  Boore  (or  Boone),  Hewett 
Gepperson. 

THOMAS  CARTWRIGHT,  300  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  1  Dec.  1652,  p.  183. 
Near  the  Eastern  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv., 
beg.  at  miles  end  of  John  Porter  near 
the  main  swamp,  running  W.  bv  S.  by 
Humph.  Belts  &c.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
Mathew  Hones,  Huldy  Chase,  Robert 
Lushby,  (or  Lashby),  Wm.  Nicholson, 
John  Taylor,  Eliza.  Collins. 

MRS.  ANNE  HARWOOD,  150  acs. 
upon  the  Ewd.  of  Skeaths  Cr.,  beg.  at 
old  Coxes  Poynt  &c.  to  the  Green 
branch,  etc.  &  to  Humphry  Harwood  &c. 
10  Mar.  1652,  p.  184.  Trans,  of  3 
pers.* 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


275 


MRS.  JANE  HARMER,  2,000  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  date  blank,  1652, 
p.  184.  Nly  upon  Potomeck  Riv.  alias 
Potomeck  Cr.,  Ely.  upon  a  branch  of 
same  dividing  this  &  land  of  John  Rook- 
wood,  Gent.,  commonly  called  the  Fort 
land  &c.  Trans,  of  40  pers:  Charles 
Gregory,  Elizab.  Dobson,  Sackfield 
Brew,  John  James,  John  Smith,  Wm. 
Christian,  Richard  Ford,  Roger  Hobson, 
George  James,  Elizab.  Richards,  Lane. 
Sewell,  Wm.  Jackson,  John  Oxford, 
Mary  Winchly,  Wm.  Abbeys,  James 
Cunny,  Fra.  Hewett,  Tho.  Sharpe,  Wm. 
Jones,  Mich.  Sawyer,  James  Cole,  James 
Tute,  (or  Tate),  Richd.  Lowen,  Wm. 
Farley,  Wm.  Hopkins,  Arth.  Collins, 
John  Towmes,  John  Nurton,  Mich.  Batt, 
Hump.  Adrey,  John  Goldings,  Patr. 
Tallin,  David  Davis,  John  Vaughan 
Henry  Daniell,  Edmd.  Clowman,  Wm. 
Williams,  John  Metcalfe. 

LIEUT.  COL.  BELLEW  &  JEROM 
HAME  (Ham),  1,050  acs.  James  City 
Co.,  19  Feb.  1652,  p.  185.  N.  E.  upon 
Chicohamony  Riv.,  S.  E.  upon  land  of 
Mr.  Smith  &  N.  W.  upon  land  of  Mr. 
William  Fry,  including  the  island  in 
Otterahan  Swamp.    Trans,  of  21  pers.* 

PETER  SEXTON,  350  acs.  in  the 
Southern  Br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.  adj.  land 
called  the  Southerne  plantation  &  adj. 
William  Pell.  Last  of  March,  1653,  p. 
185.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  Tho.  Goodrich, 
Anne  Goodrich,  five  Negros. 

THOMAS  SAWYER,  400  acs.  in 
Pussell  Poynt  Cr.,  S.  branch  of  Eliz. 
Riv.,  Last  of  Mar.  1653,  p.  186.  Trans, 
of  8  pers:  Johan  Bigg,  Joseph  Hutt, 
Marg.  Yellow,  Wm.  Heath,  Marg.  Car- 
ter, John  Beringe,  Anne  Sayer,  Fra. 
Ellyott. 

WILLIAM  MOSELEY,  540  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  in  Linhaven  Parish,  17  Feb. 
1652,  p.  186.  Trans,  of  11  pers:  Wil- 
liam Moseley,  Susanna  Moseley,  Wm. 
&  Arthur  his  sonns,  Susanna  Robinson 
alis.  Corker,  Elizabeth  West,  Anne  Lam- 
bert. 200  acs.  purchased  from  William 
Julian. 

HENRY  WATTS,  457  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  26  Nov.  1652,  p.  187.    300 


acs.  on  S.  E.  side  of  Pagan  Cr.,  Sly.  on 
land  of  Mr.  John  Moone,  &  157  acs. 
being  the  plantation  he  lives  on,  N.  W. 
upon  land  of  Peter  Knight.  Said  300 
lately  belonging  to  John  Speckman  & 
now  purchased,  &  157  acs.  granted  sd. 
Watts  by  patent  dated  18  Oct.  1643. 

THEO.  HOANE,  Gent.,  130  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  on  N.  side  of  Rappa. 
Riv.,  22  Feb.  1652,  p.  187.  (Record 
incomplete).  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Robert 
Gorsuch,  Richard  Gorsuch,  Anne  Gor- 
such. 

SAME.  720  acs.  on  N.  side  of  Rappa. 
Riv.,  beg.  on  Ewd.  side  of  a  branch  run- 
ning out  of  the  head  of  Cosotawaman 
Riv.  &c.  Same  date,  p.  188.  Trans,  of 
15  pers:  Elizabeth  Gorsuch,  Charles 
Gorsuch,  Lovelace,  Gorsuch,  Kath.  Gor- 
such, Sarah  Chandler,  Daniel  Chandler, 
Alice  Stanley,  Mary  Clerke,  Elizabeth 
Kitchin,  Thomas  Penn,  Daniel  Smith, 
William  Penn,  Row.  Beamond,  Richard 
Smith,  Tho.  Forecraft. 

RICHARD  ALLEN,  85  acs.  Eliz. 
City  Co.,  10  Mar.  1652,  p.  188.  Beg. 
at  utmost  bounds  of  William  Houlder 
&c.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Elizabeth  Gillett, 
Susanna  Haines. 

NATHANIEL  BACON,  1,075  acs. 
Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  23  Mar.  1652,  p. 
189.  Upon  a  branch  of  Pagan  Cr.,  beg. 
at  Southermost  point  of  Cross  Cr.  where 
Anthony  Jones  land  begins  &c.  to  where 
William  Smiths  lands  begins  &c.  to 
miles  end  of  John  Sparkes  land  &c. 
Trans,  of  22  pers:  Richard  Morganson, 
William  Harwood,  Henry  Bisshop, 
Robert  Hall,  Robert  Glan,  Thomas 
Hyett,  Tho.  Charles,  John  Grymes,  Row. 
Happ,  Hector  Hutchinson,  Wm.  Crawle, 
Duning  Glasse,  Fra.  Armstrong,  James 
Wilson,  Andre.  Hutchinson,  Oneale 
Stuart,  John  Ward,  John  Banks.  Mary 
Walker,  John  Appleby,  John  Bridge, 
James  Hunter,  Dudgill  Martin,  William 
Parry.    125  acres  due. 

m  JOHN  NEEDLES,  300  acs.  on  N.  E. 
side  of  a  Cr.  near  Home  Harbour  &c. 
to  Mrs.  Morrysons  marked  tree,  etc.  &c. 
10  Mar.  1652,  p.  190.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
John     Wiseman,     Joane     Curie,     John 


276 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Needles,  Abbalto  a  Negro,  John  Cooke, 
Eliza,  his  wife,  John  Cooke  his  sonn. 
Land  due  for  last  right. 

EDWARD  CANNON  &  THOMAS 
ALLEN,  520  acs.  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  in 
Linhaven  parish,  11  Mar.  1652,  p.  190. 
Beg.  on  a  branch  of  Mr.  Woodhouse's 
dam.  Trans,  of  11  pers:  Isaac  Worgan, 
Mary  Shewell,  Anne  Littleton,  Tho. 
Allen,  Griffin  Gwin,  Geo.  Beasly,  Henry 
Shade,  Sarah  a  maid  servant,  John 
Maiden,  Richard  Lee,  Thomas  Anthony. 

COL.    WILLIAM    TAYLOR,    Esqr., 

one  of  the  Council  of  State,  1,050  acs. 
called  Rocahock,  Glocester  Co.,  on  N. 
side  of  Mattapony  Riv.  18  Apr.  1653, 
p.  191.  Trans,  of  21  pers:  Jane  Pinor, 
Jno.  Evans,  Will.  Cooke,  Roger  Win- 
shaw,  John  Stale,  David  James,  Kath. 
Kinkee,  Will.  Smith,  Leo.  Hathorne, 
Henry  Lambert,  Robert  Middleton,  John 
Axtill,  Peter  Key,  Sarah  Ridmore,  Mar- 
garet   

TENKIN  PRICE,  100  acs.  Northam- 
pton Co.,  10  Mar.  1652,  p.  191. 
Bounded  on  the  N.  by  Nondui  Cr.,  E. 
by  his  own  land,  W.  by  the  main  bay  & 
runing  Slv.  towards  land  of  Mr.  Thomas 
Teagle.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Jenkin  Price, 
John  Drummen. 

"In  the  name  of  the  Keepers  of  the 
Liberty's"  &c.  give  &c.  grant  unto 
CAPT.  GILES  BRENT,  300  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  4  May,  1653,  p.  192. 
Abutting  N.  E.  upon  Quiriough  (Quini- 
cough)  Riv.  &  S.  E.  upon  his  own  land. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Tho.  Conapsacke, 
Anne  White,  Fra.  Kinge,  Fra.  Anchile, 
Richard  Collesfored,  John  Bookwood. 

MR.  WILLIAM  FRY,  750  acs.  near 
the  head  of  Chichamony  Riv.  on  S.  W. 
side  thereof,  7  Apr.  1653,  p.  192.  Beg. 
at  Fleets  quarter  includeing  a  small  In- 
dian feild  &c.  Trans,  of  15  pers:  Giles 
Carter,  Ralph  Spendlowe,  Jane  Walker, 
Miles  Noble,  Anne  Williams,  William 
Brooke,  Ralph  Burton,  Andrew  Miller, 
Alice  Archer,  the  sd.  Frys  wife  &  his 
three  children;  Dorothy  Miller,  Wm. 
Hoccadie. 

MR.  RICHARD  BARNHOUSE,  Jr., 
200  acs.  Glocester  Co.,  27  Apr.  1653,  p. 


193.  On  S.  side  of  Mattapony  Riv.,  2 
mi.  above  the  Indian  ferry,  bounded 
upon  land  of  Capt.  Robert  Abrahall, 
Apostique  Cr.  &  Mr.  William  Wyatt. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  William  Allen,  Mary 
Collier,  Robert  Yates,  John  Greenshan. 

FRANCIS  JORDAN,  100  acs.  Surry 
Co.,  11  Mar.  1652,  p.  193.  Lying  upon 
the  river  betwixt  land  of  Mr.  Charles 
Foard  &  Mr.  Benjamin  Harrison.  Trans, 
of  2  pers:  Richard  Hewes,  William 
East.    Assigned  by  Col.  Flood. 

ROBERT  BOUTH,  880  acs.  Yorke 
Co.,  14  Apr.  1653,  p.  194.  Bounded 
from  S.  E.  side  of  old  Warrany  Town 
&c.  to  land  of  Thomas  Homes.    Trans. 

of   18   pers:    Man,   John  Wayne, 

Mary  Wayne,  Mary  Turner,  George 
Turner,  Thomas  Taylor,  Francis   (&  or 

ux)    ,   Mary  Foster,   Mary  Deane, 

John  Wright,  John  Hill,  Eliza.  Crouch, 
John  Clarke,  Tho.  Sweno,  John  Wil- 
liams, Rob.  Greenwill. 

CAPT.  FRANCIS  MORGAN,  510 
acs.  Gloster  Co.,  upon  E.  side  of  Poro- 
potank  Cr.  27  July  1652,  p.  194.  Adj. 
his  own  land,  S.  E.  &c.  to  the  head  of 
Atapotamoies  Cr.  Trans,  of  10  pers: 
Henry  Wilson,  Wm.  Porter,  Ro.  Dor- 
field,  Rob.  Lane,  Richd.  Wilkins,  Eliza. 
Smith,  Geo.  Court,  Jno.  Parker,  Richd. 
Parker,  Robt.  Borden,  Eliza.  Parry. 

THOMAS  GLASCOCK.  600  acs. 
Lancaster,  28  July  1652,  p.  195.  Upon 
N.  side  of  Morratico  Cr.,  running  to 
land  of  Nicholas  Ferman,  etc.  200  acs. 
by  rights  of  a  former  patent,  surren- 
dered; &  400  acs.  for  trans,  of  8  pers: 
Fra.  Brumly,  Alice  Bird,  Henry  Cosham, 
John  Barrom,  Thomas  Dison,  John 
Ingram,  James  Ororke,  Thomas  West; 
Sarah  Parsons  land  due  for.  Note:  The 
patent  surrendered  is  dated  30  Aug. 
1643  for  land  in  Peyanketanke. 

DAVID  FOX,  300  acs.  Lancaster  Co., 
upon  S.  side  of  Rappa.  River,  bounded 
on  W.  N.  W.  with  a  Cr.  dividing  this 
from  land  of  Francis  Browne  &  E.  S. 
E.  upon  a  Cr.  dividing  this  from  land 
of  Richard  Parrett.  27  July  1652,  p. 
195.  Due  by  part  of  the  rights  of  a 
patent  granted  him  for  1,050  acs.,  dated 
6  Apr.  1650,  &  relinquished. 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


277 


SAME.  80  acs.,  same  county  &  date, 
p.  196.  Upon  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
adj.  his  devdt.  of  1,050  acs.,  &  running 
to  the  mouth  of  Farewethers  Cr.  Due 
as  above.    670  acs.  yet  due. 

DANIELL  WELCH,  530  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  9  Aug.  1652,  p.  196.  S. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  &  N.  side  of  Sun- 
derland Cr.  &  extending  against  land  of 
Richard  Lewis.  Trans,  of  11  pers: 
Magery  Paine,  James  Katon,  Miles 
Moore,  John  Boswell,  Anne  Taberer, 
Eliza.  Harvey,  Eliza.  Wiggs,  John  Ads- 
don,  Eliza.  Bennell,  Edward  Gibbs,  John 
Short. 

SAME.  600  acs.,  same  Co.  &  date, 
page  197.  Upon  S.  side  of  Parretts  Cr., 
extending  along  land  of  Mr.  David  Fox 
to  a  Cr.  opposite,  dividing  this  &  land  of 
Richard  Lewis.  Trans,  of  12  pers:  John 
Sadler,  Dorothy  Sadler,  Roger  Sadler, 
John  Sadler,  William  Denson. 

MR.  PETER  KNIGHT,  700  acs. 
Gloster  Co.,  25  Aug.  1652,  p.  197. 
Cr.  Upon  Eastermost  side  of  Poropo- 
tank  Cr.  towards  the  head  of  same,  beg. 
at  a  branch  dividing  this  &  land  of  Mr. 
Blunt  &c.  Trans,  of  14  pers:  John 
Ball,  Alex,  and  Richard  Weston,  John 
Henton,  Thomas  Cobb,  Tho.  Taberer, 
Richard  Lathberry,  James  Clarke,  Saml. 
Clarke,  Margery  Chamber,  Thomas 
Miller,  Kath.  Huse,  Arthur  Carpenter, 
John  Simson. 

THOMAS  JOHNSON,  JR.,  450  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  10  May  1652,  p.  198. 
At  Pongotegue  Cr.,  beg.  at  Pocomoke 
Branch  of  the  same.  Trans,  of  9  pers: 
Gilbert  Henderson,  James  Camer  (or 
Carner),  John  Elson,  George  Andrews, 
Debora  Dutton,  John  Croply,  William 
Croply,  Joane  Boote,   Thomas  Bullock. 

WILLIAM  DUDLEY,  400  acs.  on 
Wwd.  side  of  the  N.  river  in  Mockjack 
Bay,  20  Sept  1652,  p.  198.  Beg.  oppo- 
site five  pine  Island,  running  Sly.  &c.  to 
head  of  Ginger  Cr.  &c.  Trans,  of  8 
pers:*  Note:  This  patent  by  reason  of 
a  mistake  is  surrendered  and  relin- 
quished, and  one  for  350  acs.  recorded 
in  the  name  of  the  aforesaid  Dudley 
dated  as  this  above  written.  Test:  R. 
Huberd  Clk. 


GEORGE  LIGHT,  200  acs.  upon  W. 
side  of  Porotanke  Cr.,  13  May  1652,  p. 
199.  Beg.  at  the  mouth  of  a  small  creek 
which  devideth  this  from  land  of  Tho- 
mas Leechman  &  John  Bennett  &c.  Be- 
ing part  of  a  patent  granted  unto  Wil- 
liam Cainhoe  &  purchased  by  sd.  Light 
of  John  Underwood,  who  married  the 
relict  of  said  Cainhoe,  as  by  deed  under 
his  hand  dated  6  Oct  1650  may  appeare. 

MR.  HENRY  SOANE,  450  acs.  in- 
cluding marsh,  on  S.  side  of  Rappa. 
Riv.,  opposite  land  of  Mr.  James  Wil- 
liamson. 3  Sept.  1652,  p.  199.  Trans. 
of  9  pers:  William  Glade,  William 
Rilby,  Thomas  Woolest,  Fra.  Thomas, 
Dorothy  Miller,  "Dermon  of  Collum," 
John  Mills,  Sarah  Anderson,  Richard 
Reynolds. 

HENRY  NICHOLLS,  200  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  29  July  1652,  p.  200.  Upon 
N.  W.  side  of  the  S.  W.  branch  of 
Sunderland  Cr.  opposite  land  of  Dennis 
Conniers  &  Evan  Davis,  &  on  S.  side 
of  Rappa.  Riv.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Henry 
Covell,  Edward  Nash,  Thomas  Hard- 
inge,  William  Wright.  Assigned  by 
Mr.  Moone. 

MRS.  JANE  BLAND,  late  the  wife 
of  Edward  Bland,  dec'd.,  4,300  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  near  the  head  of  upper 
Chipoaks  Cr.  9  May  1652,  p.  200. 
Bounded  from  the  division  of  the  maine 
middle  run  of  sd.  Creek  &c,  &  upon  a 
path  leading  from  Swann  Bay  to  the 
Indian  Feilds  &c.  3,000  acs.  granted 
unto  Thomas  Hill,  Gent,  1  Dec.  1643 
&  purchased  of  him  by  sd.  Edward 
Bland,  Merchant;  1300  acs.  granted  sd. 
Bland  10  Mar.  1647,  by  order  of  the 
Govr.  &  Councill  to  be  joined  in  one 
patent  in  the  name  of  the  sd.  Jane. 

MR.  ROBERT  BOUTH,  400  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,  p.  201.  Being  a  neck  of 
land  upon  S.  side  of  Queens  Cr.  &  a 
branch  of  same  leading  upon  the  land 
of  Mr.  Robert  Vaus,  Merchant.  Record 
incomplete,  "the  same  with  that  which 
followeth."  (See  second  abstract  follow- 
ing-) 

RICHARD  RICKLESSE,  300  acs.  on 
S.   side  of  James   Riv.   at  the  head   of 


278 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


land  of  John  Senior,  &  running  along 
land  of  Henry  Meadows  &c.  1  July 
1652,  p.  201.    Trans,  of  6  pers.* 

MR.  ROBERT  BOUTH,  400  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,  3  July  1652,  p.  202.  Being 
a  neck  of  land  upon  S.  side  of  Queens 
Cr.  &  a  branch  of  same  leading  upon 
land  of  Mr.  Robert  Vaus,  Merchant,  & 
a  branch  which  divides  this  &  land  of 
John  Uty,  now  in  occupation  of  Robert 
Lewis,  William  Cooks  &  George  Gill. 
Due  as  follows:  100  acs.  by  patent  to 
John  Bell  1  Oct.  1639;  200  acs.  to 
William  Rennolls  15  Aug.  1639;  50 
acs.  to  John  Wilson  8  Oct.  1639  &  50 
acs.  to  Ralph  Green  19  Apr.  1649,  all 
of  which  were  purchased  by  sd.  Bouth. 

MR.  PETER  RANSON,  300  acs.  East 
upon  the  broad  Cr.,  S.  upon  land  of 
Marke  Johnson  &  N.  upon  Thomas 
Watts.  6  May  1652,  p.  202.  Trans,  of 
6  pers.* 

AUGUSTINE  MOORE,  650  acs.  on 
N.  E.  side  of  Peyanketank  Riv.,  opposite 
to  New  Chiskack  &c,  29  June  1652,  p. 
203.  Trans,  of  13  pers:  His  own, 
Anne  his  wife,  Augustine  his  sonn, 
Henry  Shevarne,  Joane  Newton,  Anne 
White,  Phill.  Stevenson,  Dennis  Cole, 
Mathew  Taylor,  John  Wilson,  Daniell 
Vehen.  By  assignment  from  John  Gibbs, 
one  hundred  acres. 

WILLIAM  GINSEY,  302  acs.  Gloces- 
ter  Co.,  upon  S.  E.  side  of  Porropotank 
Cr.,  9  Sept.  1652,  p.  203.  Upon  N.  E. 
side  of  a  swamp  dividing  this  &  land  of 
Isaac  Richeson  &  extending  along  same 
dividing  this  &  land  of  John  Day. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Patrick  Criste,  James 
Johnson,  Gabriell  Coox,  Anne  Burton, 
Thomas  Williams,  James  Engler. 

MRS.  ANNA  BARNETT,  700  acs. 
Gloster  Co.,  2  July  1652,  p.  204.  Part 
thereof  upon  the  head  of  Jones  his  Cr., 
Ely.  upon  Rappahannock  horse  path, 
Sly.  upon  land  of  Col.  Richard  Lee  & 
Hugh  Doudinge  (?),  &  Wly.  upon  sd. 
Cr.  &  opposite  land  of  Samuel  Sollace; 
the  other  300  acs.  abutting  N.  W.  upon 
land  of  Capt.  Lee,  dec'd.,  &  S.  W.  upon 
Mr.  William  Prior,  dec'd.  Trans,  of 
20    pers:    Mr.    Richard    Barnett,    Mrs. 


Anna  Barnett,  Ellinor  Corderoy,  Eliza. 
Barnett,  Corderoy  Barnett,  Richard  Bar- 
nett, Wm.  Cordroy,  Edwd.  Cordroy, 
Wm.  Ironmonger,  Fra.  Ironmonger, 
Eliza.  Ironmonger,  Eliza.  Parry,  Isabell 
Ashton,  John  Smith,  Thomas  Feild, 
Joseph  Bacon,  Anne  Whitelock,  John 
Fuller,  Leo.  Lett,  Henry  Fablett. 

THOMAS  PRESTON,  son  of  Thomas 
Preston,  dec'd.,  500  acs.  lying  on  W. 
side  of  the  Eastermost  river  in  Mock- 
jack  Bay.  2  Aug.  1652,  p.  204.  Trans. 
of  70  pers:  William  Senter,  Henry 
Barrow,  Peter  Farlin,  James  Land,  John 
Groves,  Richard  Neale,  Thomas  Farnill, 
John  Barber,  Walter  True,  A  negro 
child;  by  assignment  from  Thomas 
Conniers. 

NICHO.  GEORGE,  THOMAS 
TABERER  &  HUMPHRY  CLARKE, 
900  acs.,  Aug.  14,  1652,  p.  205.  Beg. 
at  the  mouth  on  N.  side  of  a  branch 
where  Francis  England's  land  endeth 
&c.  cross  the  branch  &c.  to  the  great 
swamp,  being  the  first  branch  of  the 
black  water,  etc.  Trans,  of  18  pers: 
Jane  Bayley,  Willm.  Thomas,  John 
Mackan,  Thomas  Walker,  Mary  Burdy- 
ken  (?),  George  Mountford,  Robert 
Giles,  Hannah  his  wife,  Hannah  his 
daughter,  Thomas  Holmes,  Mary  Johns, 
Thomas  Gayne,  John  Corvent,  Sarah 
Dugort,  John  Sheeres,  Richard  Dauson, 
John  Dalton,  Joshua  Taberer. 

THOMAS  HARRIS,  40  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  14  Aug.  1652,  p.  205.  At 
the  head  of  one  of  the  branches  of 
Pagan  Cr.,  bounded  with  his  own  land 
on  N.  E.,  Fran.  Smith  on  S.  W.,  Tho- 
mas Prichard  on  S.  E.  &  John  Davis 
on  N.  W.    Trans,  of  Peeter  Bell. 

THOMAS  TABERER  &  FRANCIS 
HIGGINS,  250  acs.  Isle  of  Wight  Cr., 
on  head  of  the  first  swamp  of  black- 
water,  beg.  at  marked  trees  of  Christo- 
pher Lewis;  etc.  14  Aug.  1652,  p.  206. 
Trans,  of  5  pers.* 

CAPT.  THOMAS  HACKETT,  800 
acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  9  June  1652,  p.  206. 
Upon  N.  W.  side  of  Corotoman  Riv., 
N.  E.  upon  Mr.  John  Senior  &  S.  W. 
upon   William   Ciapham,    now   in   pos- 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


279 


session  of  Thomas  Powell.  Trans,  of 
16  pers:  Elinor  Ellis,  John  Middleton, 
Edward  White,  John  Waters,  Dudgell 
Martin,  James  Nutter,  John  Bridge, 
John  Axelby,  Mary  Walker,  John  Banks, 
John  Ward,  Nell  Stanford. 

JOHN  SENIOR,  800  acs.  upon  heads 
of  the  main  branches  of  Up.  Chipoaks 
Cr.  &c,  along  land  late  Mr.  Edward 
Blands  &c.  1  Sept.  1652,  p.  207.  Trans, 
of  16  pers.* 

MR.  JOHN  PHILLIPS,  200  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
2  Sept.  1652,  p.  207.  Upon  head  of  300 
acs.  surveyed  for  Mr.  David  Fox,  abutt- 
ing N.  W.  upon  land  of  Fr.  Browne  & 
Oliver  Carver  &  E.  upon  a  creek  divid- 
ing this  &  land  of  Mr.  Richard  Parrett. 
Trans,  of  4  pers.* 

RICE  JONES,  88  acs.  Lancaster  Co., 
2  Sept.  1652,  p.  208.  Upon  N.  side  of 
Rappa.  Riv.,  N.  &  W.  upon  land  of 
Edward  Harris,  decM.  &  S.  &  by  E. 
upon  a  Cr.  dividing  this  &  land  of 
Richard  Coleman.  Trans,  of  2  pers: 
George  Slight,  Robert  Parry. 

ENOCH  HAWKER  &  ANTHONY 
DONEY,  1,000  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  29 
July  1652,  p.  208.  Upon  N.  W.  branch 
of  Corotoman  Riv.  &  S.  E.  along  land 
of  John  Nichols.  Trans,  of  20  pers: 
William  Powell,  Mathia  a  Negro,  Lan- 
cett  Cocker,  Tony,  Negro,  Maria,  Negro, 
Mary  Morgan,  William  Smith,  Tytus 
Beckett,  Anne  Crew,  Katherine  Winne, 
Robt.  Raynes,  Geo.  Reinolds,  Phill. 
Stowther,  Eliza.  Lee,  Symon  Singlewood, 
Robert  Cooper,  James  Neale,  William 
Jones,  Richard  Smith,  Thomas  Williams. 

EVAN  GRIFFETH,  100  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co.,  2  Sept.  1652,  p.  209.  Upon  N. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  &  E.  S.  E.  upon  a 
creek  dividing  this  &  land  of  Mr.  David 
Fox,  etc.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Evan  Jones, 
William  Humphry. 

MR.  THOMAS  CURTIS,  542  acs. 
lying  on  N.  side  of  Ware  Riv.  in  Mock- 
jack  Bay,  beg.  at  E.  side  of  Browns  Bay, 
running  up  same  &c.  to  Basses  Cr.  &c. 
20  Sept.  1652,  p.  209.  400  acs.  by 
patent,    15    Aug.    1642,    &  residue   for 


trans,   of   3   pers:    John  Trace,   Joseph 
Pye,  Anne  Parry. 

MR.  GILES  BRENT,  Junr.,  800  acs., 
being  on  S.  side  of  Potomeck  Riv.  op- 
posite against  the  Indian  Town  of  Pus- 
cattaway.  11  Sept.  1653,  p.  210.  Trans. 
of  16  pers.* 

JOHN  KNOTT,  130  acs.  in  Poto- 
meck Riv.,  about  2  mi.  up  Hallowes  Cr., 
bounding  N.  by  W.  upon  land  of  Wil- 
liam Freeke,  E.  by  N.  on  land  of  An- 
drew Munrow  &  S.  by  E.  on  land  of 
Mr.  John  Hallowes.  11  Sept.  1653,  p. 
210.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Michaell  Phil- 
lips, Richard  Hewes,  Edward  Daughly 
(?)• 

MR.  ANTHONY  LANGESTONE 
(Langstone),  1,303  acs.  Gloster  Co.,  6 
Sept.  1653,  p.  211.  On  N.  side  of 
Yorke  Riv.,  N.  W.  right  against  Ric- 
kocke,  bounded  N.  E.  by  E.  to  Mr. 
Hammonds   land.    Trans,   of  26  pers.* 

WILLIAM  FREEKE,  100  acs.  on 
Hollowes  Cr.  in  Potomeck  Riv.,  &  N. 
W.  upon  his  own  plantation.  11  Sept. 
1653,  p.  211.   Trans,  of  2  pers.* 

SAME.    200  acs.    Same  location,  date 

&    page.    Bounding    on    land    of    

Vaughan.    Trans,  of  4  pers.* 

MRS.  MARY  BRENT,  600  acs.  in 
Potomeck  Riv.,  bounding  N.  W.  by  N. 
upon  Mathias  Poynt  &  S.  W.  by  S.  to 
land  of  Mrs.  Jones.  11  Sept.  1653,  p. 
212.  Trans,  of  12  pers:  John  Saysell, 
Thomas  Gugson,  Richard  Ridges,  John 
Anderson,  Gran:  Woodroofe,  Anne  Bad- 
ger, John  Coleman,  Rachell  Ashton. 
Renewed  in  a  patent  of  1150  acs. 

MR.  JOHN  PAGE,  Merchant,  850 
acs.  situated  on  S.  side  the  freshes  of 
Yorke  Riv.,  adj.  land  of  Mr.  Anthony 
Langstone.  Date  blank.  Page  212. 
Trans,  of  17  pers:  Sam:  Smith,  Jno. 
Binias  (?),  Alice  Page,  Eliza.  Page, 
Mary  Page,  Thomas  Twinn,  (or  Winn), 
Thomas  Wadlowe,  Marius  Garrett,  An- 
drew Coster,  George  Beachill,  Mary 
Middleton,  Joane  Vallin,  Anne  Hill, 
Anne  Cooper,  Eliza.  Parsons. 


280 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


MR.  HENRY  SOANES,  700  acs. 
Gloster  Co.,  on  Eastermost  side  of 
Mettapony  Riv.,  last  of  July  1653,  p. 
213.  Bounding  from  Capt.  Abrahalls 
plantation,  upon  Matchepongo  Cr.  &c. 
to  Mr.  William  Wiatts  land  &c.  160 
poles  of  sd.  land  is  called  the  White 
Marsh.  Trans,  of  14  pers:  Antho. 
Carr,  David  Jenkin,  Ashwell  Batty, 
John  Broadly,  Arrundill  Parris,  Allin 
Cuddington,  Richard  Ingram,  James 
Hare,  Jane  Hutcheson,  Thomas  Hackett, 
Kath.  Davis,  Peter  Stafford. 

MR.  JAMES  TOOKE,  178  acs.  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  upon  head  of  one  of  the 
black  water  branches,  14  Sept.  1653,  p. 

213.  Beg.  near  Thomas  Pritchard's 
cartway.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Robert  Reve 
(or  Rene),  Wm.  Terry,  Lydia  Trinball, 
Jane  Crosse. 

SAMUEL  TAYLOR,  1,050  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,   9  Sept.   1653,   p. 

214.  Bounding  Nly.  upon  Potomeck 
Riv,  Sly.  &  Ely.  upon  Chotanke  Cr.  & 
S.  W.  upon  land  of  John  Waltham. 
Trans,  of  21  pers.* 

WILLIAM  MEMUX  &  DEMETRE 
MURREEN,  100  acs.  in  the  W.  branch 
of  Eliz.  Riv.,  14  Dec.  1653,  p.  214. 
Trans,  of  2  pers:  George  Camnell, 
Elinor  Sivilian. 

GEORGE  ALLUMBY,  100  acs.  in 
the  Wester  branch  of  Nansimum  Riv., 
beg.  near  the  Indian  Point  (or  Path), 
running  S.  S.  W.  &  adj.  land  of  Michell 
Brinkly  &c.  and  land  of  William  Allum- 
by.  14  Dec.  1653,  p.  215.  Trans,  of 
2  pers:  George  Allumby  &  Diana  his 
wife. 

PATRICK  MAGRAFFE,  150  acs.  at 
the  head  of  Symons  Cr.,  a  branch  of  the 
Western  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  14  Dec. 
1653,  p.  215.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Wil- 
liam Webb,  John  Roose,  Edward  Cran- 
dell. 

JOHN  BATTELL  (BATTLE),  200 
acs.  in  the  W.  branch  of  Nansimum 
Riv.,  adj.  land  of  Thomas  Babb.  14 
Dec.  1654,  p.  216.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
John  Battle,  Elizabeth  Battle,  Thomas 
Nowell,  Robert  Wolfe. 


JOHN  BLACK,  300  acs.  in  Mathews 
Cr.,  a  branch  of  the  Southern  branch  of 
Nansemum  Riv.,  14  Dec.  1654,  p.  216. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  John  Blake,  Willm. 
Blake,  Tho.  Woodyard,  John  Jenkins, 
David  Kerny,  Anne  White. 

JOHN  BOLES  &  THOMAS  DYER, 

400  acs.  in  the  Wester  branch  of  Eliz. 
Riv.,  adj.  Mr.  Thomas  Brown.  No  date. 
Page  217.    Record  incomplete. 

JOHN  MADDISON,  600  acs.  Gloster 
Co.,  on  N.  side  of  Metopony  Riv.,  4  Jan. 
1653,  p.  217.  Beg.  at  Col.  Taylors  Cr., 
running  down  the  river  E.  to  Mr.  Adam 
Hollands  Cr.,  thence  N.  N.  E.  etc. 
Trans,  of  12  pers:  Thomas  Baker, 
Richard  Griffin,  Abra.  Rigie,  Tho. 
Tholinson  (Thomlinson  ?),  Nicholas 
Hele,  Robert  Forst,  Law.  Baker,  Thomas 
Wade,  Robt.  Wilson,  Nicho.  Webster, 
Robert  Allen,  John  Madison. 

JOHN  MADISON,  80  acs.  on  Ewd. 
side  of  Mundins  (?)  Cr.,  beg.  at  a 
marked  pine  &  running  to  a  small 
branch  E.  by  N.  &c.  23  Nov.  1653,  p. 
217.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Mary  Card, 
Mathew  Everson  (or  Evason.) 

RICHARD  BUDD,  400  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  betwixt  the  two  branches 
of  the  verry  head  of  Dennis  his  Creeke, 
Nly.  upon  a  branch  of  same,  divding 
this  &  land  of  Mr.  George  Fletcher  & 
Sly.  upon  another  branch  towards  land 
of  one  Howett.  1  Dec.  1653,  p.  218. 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  Thomas  Blunt,  James 
Scott,  Peter  Claton,  Henry  Castle,  John 
Dalnies,  Samuel  Yates,  Elizabeth  Gray, 
Edy  Legg. 

SAME.  150  acs.  Same  location,  page 
&  date.  Ely.  upon  the  bay  towards  the 
mouth  of  great  Wicocomico  Riv.,  Wly. 
adj.  his  own  land  &  N.  Ely.  upon  a 
creek  dividing  the  same  from  land  of 
one  Prickett,  and  upon  the  woods  & 
land  of  Abraham  Bryan.  Trans,  of  3 
pers:  William  Steevens,  Joice  Waldron, 
John  Hoskins. 

THOMAS  READ,  300  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  1  Dec.  1653,  p.  219.  Adj. 
land  of  JefTery  Gouch  at  Vulcanes  Cr., 
on  S.  side  of  great  Wicocomico  Riv.  & 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


281 


W.  N.  W.  upon  land  of  Henry  Wicker. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  William  Bruham, 
Edmund  Land,  (or  Lund,)  Tower  Hill, 
Edward  Mothell,  Oliver  Daniell,  Wil- 
liam Thomas. 

COL.  FRANCIS  EPPS,  Esqr.,  one  of 
the  Councill  of  State,  280  acs.  Chas. 
City  Co.  on  S.  side  of  James  Riv.  &  S. 
side  of  Appamattock  Riv.,  23  Jan.  1653, 
p.  219.  Bounded  Sly.  on  Capt.  Batts, 
Nly.  on  the  heads  of  Walter  Brookes, 
Natha.  Tatum  &  John  Bakers  land  & 
Ely.  on  his  own  1700  acs.  Trans,  of  6 
pers:  Thomas  Mather,  Thomas  Riplye, 
Fra.  Price,  William  Johnson,  Thomas 
Price,  Avis  Jealy. 

CHRISTOPHER  BOYCE,  602  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  28  Nov.  1653,  p. 
220.  Abutting  S.  E.  upon  Matchotique 
Riv.  &  Nly.  upon  land  surveyed  for  An- 
drew Farmer.  Trans,  of  12  pers:  George 
Holmes,  Jane  Holmes,  David  Carrell, 
Fra.  Brooker,  Kath.  Kempe,  Geo.  Trut- 
ton,  George  Doller,  Eliza.  Burle,  Eliza- 
beth   ,  James,   George,   and  Mary, 

Negroes. 

OLIVER  SEGAR,  200  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  last  of  Jan.  1653,  p.  220.  Towards 
the  head  of  Coxes  Cr.  upon  the  N.  side 
&  beg.  at  a  small  branch  dividing  this 
&  land  of  Robert  Young.  Trans,  of  4 
pers:  Thomas  Boare,  Jame  (Jane  ?) 
Wood,  James  Lodwell,  Thomas  Harris. 

SAME.  250  acs.  Same  county  & 
date,  p.  221.  Upon  the  head  of  Coxes 
Cr.  running  &c.  to  land  of  William 
Johnson,  thence  to  Daniell  Johnson  &c. 
Trans,  of  5  pers:  Thomas  Hine,  (or 
Hive),  John  Bryant,  Kath.  Cullaine, 
Da.  Morriell,  William  Tall. 

OLIVER  SEGAR  &  FR.  BROWN, 
200  acs.  lying  on  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
adj.  land  of  John  Moore,  running  to 
Sandy  Point  Cr.  &c.  Last  of  Jan.  1653, 
p.  221.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Darby 
Hawranly,  Hanafitts  Charlett.  Note: 
100  acs.  by  virtue  of  soe  much  rights 
relinquished  by  Fra.  Browne  in  a  patent 
of  500  acs. 

ROBERT  TOMLIN,  350  acs.,  lying 
on  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  between  lands 


of  Thomas  Brice  &  Epaphraditus  Law- 
son.    27  Apr.   1654,  p.  222.    Trans,  of 

7  pers:  Burkett, Broad,  Wm. 

Eailes,    (or  Earles),   Miles  Rich,   Geo. 
Blackgrove,  Jane  Willis. 

JOHN  BISHOP  &  JAMES  MASON, 
50  acs.  Surry  Co.,  on  S.  side  of  James 
Riv.  &  on  S.  E.  side  of  Tapahanock  Cr., 
27  Feb.  1653,  p.  222.  Trans,  of  1  per: 
Mary  Wade.  Mary  Mason,  land  due 
for. 

JOHN  HANSFORD,  950  acs.  Glos- 
ter  Co.,  on  N.  side  of  the  Narrowes  of 
Mettapony  Riv.,  beg.  at  a  Creek  by  Mr. 
Diggs  lower  devdt.  &c.  16  Dec.  1653, 
p.  223.  Trans,  of  19  pers:  John  Hans- 
ford, Eliza.  Hansford,  Richard  Hukes, 
(or  Hickes),  John  Bide,  Mannes  Carew, 
Dan.  Morrin,  Patrick  Allen,  Hugh 
Horim,  Thomas  Hatfeild,  Mary  Pawan, 
Pru.  Worshipp,  Alice  Taylor,  Joseph 
Bates,  Joane  Trotter,  Eliza.  Search,  Han- 
nah Stone,  Joseph  Tayloe,  Peter  Adams, 
Jonathan  Higby,   (or  Higly). 

WILLIAM  CO  ALE,  100  acs.  Gloster 
Co.,  23  Nov.  1653,  p.  223.  On  S.  side 
of  Mattapony  Riv.,  upon  the  N.  W.  & 
Near  land  of  Edward  Simpson,  etc. 
Trans,  of  2  pers.* 

CAPT.  WILLIAM  BROCAS,  800  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  2  Feb.  1653,  p.  224.  Up- 
on S.  side  &  at  the  mouth  of  Rappa. 
Riv.,  bounded  on  E.  S.  E.  with  the  main 
bay  &  including  Goat  Island,  S.  S.  E. 
with  Pyanck  bay,  W.  N.  W.  with 
Wadeing  Cr.  Formerly  granted  unto 
Mrs.  Elinor  Brocas,  his  wife,  10  Oct. 
1652,  &  consented  to  by  her  to  be  al- 
tered &  made  in  the  name  of  sd.  Brocas. 

SAME.  950  acs.,  same  county,  page 
&  date.  Upon  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
part  of  which  adj.  land  of  Lady  Chich- 
ley,  now  in  possession  of  sd.  Brocas, 
etc.,  &  part  along  Peyanketanke  River, 
etc.  Formerly  granted,  under  two 
patents,  as  above. 

CAPT..  ROBERT  ABRALL  (Arall), 
1010  acs.  on  the  N.  N.  E.  side  of 
Mattapony,  part  above  &  part  behind 
land  of  Mr.  Richard  Barnhouse,  beg.  at 
the  mouth   of  Apostoquo  Cr.,   running 


282 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


up  the  river  N.  W.  by  W.  to  Quinte- 
nocke  Cr.  &c,  to  upper  end  of  an  In- 
dian feild  &c.  23  Nov.  1653,  p.  225. 
Trans,  of  20  pers:  Stafford  Bilson, 
Dan:  Mecannick,  Henry  Hall,  Isabel! 
Patrick,  Mathew  Cripps,  Anne  Moore, 
Eliza.  Haies,  Jos.  Woodrow,  Thomas 
Minnies,  (or  Minines),  John  Steevens, 
John  Johnson,  Thomas  Drout,  William 
Home,  Elizabeth  Rich,  Eliza.  Walters, 
Robt.  Bright. 

RICHARD  VARDY,  650  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  last  of  Nov.  1653,  p.  225. 
On  N.  E.  branch  of  Powetan  Swamp, 
beg.  upon  the  bottom  of  the  broad  neck, 
running  by  Lady  Lunsford's  markt  trees, 
etc.,  by  Poetan  Beaver  Swamp,  etc.,  to 
land  of  Mr.  Richard  Foard,  to  Price's 
corner  &  to  Capt.  Popelyes  land.  Being 
part  of  a  patent  granted  unto  John  Shep- 
pard  &  Lucy  his  wife  &  by  them  as- 
signed unto  John  Bromfeld,  who  assigned 
same  to  sd.  Vardy;  &  250  acs.,  the  resi- 
due, for  trans,  of  5  pers:  Elizabeth 
Vardy,  Mary  Bloodstone,  Rachell  Brig- 
ton,  Robert  Markason,  Henry  Underhill. 

HOPKIN  HOWELL,  400  acs.  Nanse- 
mond  Co.,  12  Jan.  1653,  p.  226.  Upon 
the  head  of  New  Towne  haven  Riv.  200 
acs.  part  near  the  beavor  dams  &  bor- 
dering land  hereafter  mentioned,  run- 
ning by  John  Thomas'  land  &c;  and  100 
acs.  beg  from  the  first  mentioned,  etc. 
200  acs.  granted  unto  Peter  Johnson, 
23  May  1642  &  purchased  of  the  as- 
signees of  sd.  Johnson;  &  200  acs.  for 
trans,  of  4  pers:  Andrew  Pearle,  Neale 
Mattrum  (or  Mattonn),  John  Vonibly 
(?),  Henry  Laine. 

JOHN  LEVISTONE,  400  acs.  Glos- 
ter  Co.,  16  Dec.  1653,  p.  227.  On  the 
W.  side  of  Poropotank  Cr.,  behind  land 
of  John  Thomas,  etc.  Trans,  of  8  pers: 
Anne     Silke,     Jno.     Backster,     Barbery 

Scott,     Ralph     Bottock,     James     , 

Joane,  ,  Rose  Allen,  Wm.  Lamb. 

RICHARD  BRAINE  (BRAYNE) 
300  acs.  Chas.  City  Co.,  25  Nov.  1653, 
p.  227.  On  S.  side  of  James  Riv.  upon 
N.  W.  side  of  Upper  Chipoaks  Cr., 
running  by  George  Burchers  markt  trees, 
&  towards  the  head  of  Mr.  Nicholas 
Perry's    land    &c.    Trans,    of    6    pers: 


Steeven  Yates,  Eliza.  Bauldwin,  Wil- 
liam Glendorier  (or  Glendoner),  Mar- 
tin Williams,  Alice  Siropp,  Thomas 
Lue.  ( ? ) .    Land  due  for  the  last. 

CHARLES  GRIMES,  600  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  16  Nov.  1653,  p.  228. 
Bounded  on  N.  W.  side  with  Nyem- 
cock  Cr.,  S.  W.  upon  a  swamp,  etc. 
Trans,  of  12  pers:  William  Ward, 
Henry  French,  Thomas  Wells,  Thomas 
Bauldwin,  Henry  Day,  Richard  Foard, 
Edward  Ashbournham,  And.  Markinlton, 
(?),  Arunges  Whithorne,  Mathew  Wel- 
bourne,   Richard   Sexton,   John   Fowler. 

PETER  KNIGHT  &  BAKER  CUTT, 
1850  acs.,  13  Oct.  1653,  p.  228.  Bound- 
ing Sly.  upon  Capt.  Brent's  land,  Ely. 
upon  Potomeck  Riv.  &  Nly.  upon 
Chapawansick  Cr.  Trans,  of  37  pers: 
William  Clayre,  John  Sysone,  (or  Sip- 
sone),  James  Westbrooke,  William 
Valence,  Elinor  Ramzee,  John  Fairbanke, 
Fra.  Mott,  Richard  Spurnell,  Rice  Mor- 
rice,  Robert  Knott,  Eliza.  Lawrence, 
Eliza.  Morrice,  James  Barber,  John 
Drap,  Toby  Ingram,  Wilmott  Jones, 
Adam  Daniell,  Thomas  Charnold,  Mary 
Davis,  Michael  Poope,  John  Fuller, 
John  Robinson,  John  Spreatt,  Susan 
Pungly,  Rice  Thompson,  Christopher 
Bennett,  Eman.  Wille,  Elizabeth  his 
wife,  &  6  children;  Wm.  Murdure, 
Georg  Airea  (or  Acrea),  3  Negros: 
Robt.,  Sampsons  &  Thorn,  &  one  Indian 
Thomas.    The  three  last  names  due. 

JOHN  GILLETT,  400  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  on  S.  E.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  4 
Feb.  1653,  p.  229.  Near  the  head  of 
Hoskins  Cr.,  beg.  on  N.  W.  side  thereof 
&c.  by  a  line  of  markt  trees  dividing 
this  &  land  of  Bartho.  Hoskins  &c. 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  Sarah  Gunney,  Giles 
Webb,  John  Smith,  Richard  Reekes, 
Henry  Michell,  John  Willis,  Anne 
Willis,  James  Nailes,  Anne  Harris, 
Margarett  Hamlin.  Two  last  land  due 
for.  Marginal  Note:  "March  the  18th 
1663  this  patent  was  renew'd  in  Thomas 
Buttons  name  marrying  Gilletts  " 

SAME.  200  acs.  Same  location,  date 
&  page.  On  S.  W.  of  Gilsons  Creek, 
etc.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Giles  Webb, 
Wm.    Eles,    Neale    Peeterson,    Thomas 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


283 


Powell,  Fra.  Sagent,  Geo.  Cockham,  Fra. 
Trush,  (or  Truth),  Thomas  Granger; 
Land  due  to  him  in  all  300  acs. 

CAPT.  RICHARD  BARNHOUSE,  33 
acs.  James  City  Co.,  near  head  of  Keths 
Cr.  in  Martins  Hundred,  comonly  called 
by  the  name  of  Halls  Land,   23  Nov. 

1653,  p.  230.  Bounded  N.  &  W.  upon 
land  of  Robert  Hudson,  S.  by  W.  upon 
Mr.  Staffords  land  &  E.  upon  Kifes  Cr. 
Trans,  of  John  Fisher. 

SAME.  Same  county,  date  &  page. 
160  acs.  near  the  head  of  Kiffs  Cr.,  N. 
E.  upon  land  of  George  Holmes,  W. 
upon  Joell  Unger,  S.  upon  land  of  Mr. 
Peter  Ridly  &  N.  E.  &  S.  E.  upon  his 
own  former  devdt.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
Richard  Brignoll,  William  White,  Anne 
Coales,  John  Perrine.    40  acs.  due. 

Assignment  of  the  above  patent  unto 
his  son,  Law.  Barnhouse,  excepting  par- 
cell    sould    to    John    Turner.    11    Mar. 

1654,  p.    230.    Test:    Henry   Blagrave. 

FRANCIS  EMPEROR,  200  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  18  Feb.  1653,  p.  231.  Being 
a  neck  of  land  in  Eliz.  Riv.  formerly 
called  Watkins  land.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
Tho.  Lock,  Walter  Meares,  Richard 
Woolman,  Anne  Stoout. 

WILLIAM  EGBROUGH,  300  acs. 
upon  the  heads  of  Upper  Chipoakes 
devdt.,  beg.  in  a  line  of  a  former  devdt. 
of  sd.  Egbrough  &  running  N.  E.  by  N. 
to  Jeremy  Clements  &c.  24  Jan  1653, 
p.  231.   Trans,  of  6  pers.* 

GEORGE  COLLINS,  350  acs.  on  E. 
side  of  the  E.  Riv.  of  Mockjack  Bay, 
abutting  Sly.  upon  Pudding  Cr.  and 
Nly.  on  a  creek  dividing  this  from  land 
of  Robert  Langdall.  25  Nov.  1653,  p. 
232.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  His  own  ad- 
venture twice;  John  Brown,  Edward 
Uggins,  Griff  Richards,  Richard  Mort, 
Thomas  Renells. 

WILLIAM  KNOTT,  112  acs.  Surry 
Co.,  20  Nov.  1653,  p.  232.  On  S.  side 
of  James  Riv.  &  S.  E.  side  of  Up. 
Chipoaks  Cr.,  bounded  N.  W.  on  Ed- 
ward Oliver,  N.  upon  William  Thomas, 
E.  on  George  Gibson  &  S.  E.  on  Mr. 


Fisher.    Trans,  of  3  pers:    James  Wat- 
son, Jno.  Forehead,  Anne  Cranfeild. 

WILLIAM  WYATT,  400  acs.  Glos- 
ter  Co.,  upon  S.  E.  side  of  Mettapony 
Riv.,  20  Dec.  1653,  p.  233.  About  7 
mi.  up  the  river,  bounded  from  a  branch 
dividing  this  &  a  tract  surveyed  for 
William  Ginsey.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  An- 
thony Parrs,  Giles  Dukenson  (or 
Dickenson),  Robt.  Tompkins,  George 
Littleton,  James  Hutton,  Richard  Dede- 
wate,  John  Sparks,  Fra.  Heynes,  Sarah 
Palmer.    Land  due  for  the  last. 

JOHN  KING,  480  acs.  Surry  Co.,  25 
Nov.  1653,  p.  233.  On  S.  side  of  James 
Riv.  &  on  S.  E.  side  of  Up.  Chipoaks 
Cr.,  bounded  Ely.  on  William  Symons, 
Wly.  on  William  Lees  land  &  Nly.  on 
William  Gapeing.  Trans,  of  10  pers: 
Eman  Gaudge,  Geo.  Watson,  Peter  Gil- 
ford, David  Dyer,  Bastian  Degens, 
Miller  Garrett,  Jane  Davis,  Alice  Rus- 
sell, Mary  Morslay,  Jane  Stokes. 

RICHARD  HACKER,  100  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  26  Feb.  1653,  p.  234. 
Bounded  on  W.  N.  W.  with  a  branch 
dividing  this  &  land  known  as  Mr. 
Blands  Land,  W.  S.  W.  against  the 
mouth  of  Blands  Cr.  &  Peyanketanke 
Riv.  &  E.  S.  E.  upon  another  branch  of 
sd.  Riv.,  dividing  this  &  another  tract 
of  sd.  Hacker,  assignee  of  Thomas 
Bourne.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Richard 
Kaddle,  Robert  Browne. 

ABRAHAM  MOONE,  500  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  23  Feb.  1653,  p. 
234.  Beg.  towards  the  head  upon  N. 
side  of  great  Wicocomico  Riv.,  extend- 
ing to  land  of  John  Edwards,  Cooper, 
&  near  land  of  Martin  Coale.  Trans,  of 
10  pers:  Richard  Welborough,  James 
Hart,  Thomas  Davis,  Anne  Land,  Ste- 
phen Watts,  John  Owen,  Mary  Wil- 
liams, Fra.  Lambert,  George  Garrett, 
Anne  Powell. 

SAME.  800  acs.,  same  Co.  &  date, 
p.  235.  Upon  the  head  of  Moraticon 
Cr.,  E.  upon  Matchemapps  branch, 
dividing  this  &  land  surveyed  for  John 
Sharp  &c.  Trans,  of  16  pers:  James 
Brice,  Richd.  Hackley,  James  Welch, 
John  Joanes,   Patrick  Scott,  Joane  Lacy 


284 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


(or  Lucy),  Robt.  Hackson,  Mary 
Nowell,  Fra.  Jewett,  Lucy  Robinson, 
Wm.  Church,  Thomas  Vaughan,  Willm. 
Weworth,  Wm.  Steephens,  Madg: 
Joanes,  Henry  Barnes. 

HUMPHREY  HAGGETT,  450  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  30  May  1654,  p.  235. 
Upon  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  bounded 
on  N.  N.  W.  with  land  of  William 
Tidner,  E.  N.  E.  with  land  of  Thomas 
Dale,  &  S.  S.  E.  with  a  branch  of  Bon- 
ners  Cr.  Which  said  land  is  by  the 
said  Humph.  Haggett  made  choice  of 
in  1200  acres,  according  to  an  order  of 
the  quarter  Court  of  10  Mar.  1653,  & 
due  for  trans,  of  9  pers:  Anne  Aucoate, 
John  Right,  Anne  True,  Susan  Mascull, 
Richard  Hendry,  Thomas  Hughes,  Wil- 
liam Venner,  John  Dolton,  William 
Nokes. 

THOMAS  HAWKINS,  2,500  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  26  Feb.  1653,  p. 
236.  Upon  S.  side  of  Potomeck  Riv. 
Record  incomplete,  description,  how- 
ever, mentions  Herringe  Creek  &  Major 
George  Read.    Part  of  this  tract  assigned 

by Kemp  unto  Mr.  Nicho.  Gerrard, 

who  assigned  same  unto  Thomas  Haw- 
kins; and  1000  acs.  part  formerly 
granted  unto  Mr.  Thomas  Garrard  & 
assigned  to  sd.  Hawkins.  1000  acs.  for 
trans,  of  20  pers:  Richard  Bridge, 
Robert  Landson,  Joane  Elcocke,  William 
Daniell,  John  Jefferys,  Mary  Arnoll, 
Willm.  Prout,  Martha  Brice,  John  Mar- 
tin, Mary  Baker,  James  Loid,  Wm. 
Powell,  Winifred  Powell,  David  Wil- 
kins,  Richard  Britts,  John  Smith,  James 
Johnson,  Wm.  Reynolds,  William  Bur- 
ton, James  Rash. 

MAJOR  WILLIAM  LEWIS,  640  acs. 
Gloster  Co.,  25  May  1654,  p.  237.  On 
N.  E.  side  of  Mettapony  Riv.  behind 
the  land  of  Mr.  Arthur  Price  &  Mr. 
William  Wyatt.    Trans,  of  13  pers.* 

SAME.  1200  acs.  Same  county,  date 
&  page.  Trans,  of  24  pers.*  (Incom- 
plete). 

MR.  ROBERT  VAUS,  550  acs.  Yorke 
Co.,  upon  Queens  Cr,  25  Ju:  1654,  p. 
238.  400  acs.  along  Hartwells  Cr.,  up- 
on land  formerly  Mr.  Boothes,  divided 


from  this  land  by  Maiden  Swamp  Cr., 
which  bounds  are  according  to  a  bill  of 
sale  made  to  Robert  Vaus  &  Tobias 
Freer  by  John  Hartwell,  deed.;  100  acs. 
adj.  his  own  land,  along  land  of  Capt. 
Taylor,  leading  along  Ewd.  side  of  the 
Labour  in  Vaine  Spring  upon  land  of 
Richard  Jones  &c.  400  acs.  by  patent 
17  Sept.  1647  &  150  acs.  by  patent  dated 
10  July  1651. 

MAJOR  WILLIAM  LEWIS,  200  acs. 
Gloster  Co.,  25  May  1654,  p.  238. 
On  N.  E.  side  of  Mettapony  Riv.,  adj. 
land  of  Ralph  Green.  Trans,  of  4 
pers.*     (Incomplete.) 

MRS.  ANNE  BARNETT,  900  acs. 
Gloster  Co.,  on  the  N.  E.  side  of  Yorke 

Riv.,  date ,  p.  239.  Extending  along 

land  of  Hugh  Doodinge  to  land  of 
Samuel  Sollis,  to  Rappahannock  Path 
&c,  to  land  of  William  Thorne,  as- 
signee of  Col.  Richard  Lee.    Incomplete. 

JOHN  ROBINSON,  250  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co., Nov.  1652,  p.  239.    Upon 

S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  &  unto  land  of 
John  Sharpe.  Trans,  of  5  pers:  James 
Murbee,  Alex.  Smith,  Richard  Hacke, 
Tho.  Blancke.    Incomplete. 

RICHARD  LEWIS,  300  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co.,  29  Nov.  1652,  p.  240.  Upon 
S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  upon  the  head 
of  Bertram  Oberts  land,  beg.  upon  the 
W.  N.  W.  side  of  a  path  which  goeth 
to  head  of  Nimcock  Cr.  Trans,  of  6 
pers.* 

CAPT.  THOMAS  HACKETT,  400 
acs.  on  Eastermost  side  of  Corotoman 
River.,  bounded  with  land  of  Mr.  Edwin 
Connaway  &  John  Nicholls.  Incomplete. 
29  Nov.  1652,  p.  240.  Trans,  of  8  pers: 
William  Kendall,  John  Willett,  Richard 
Bryan,  John  Thomas,  John  Joanes,  Ed- 
ward Wilkins,  Thomas  Price,  Wm. 
Knight. 

WILLIAM  LANGLY,  200  acs.  Nor- 
folke  Co.,  in  the  head  of  Indian  Town 
Branch,  of  Daniel  Taners  Cr.  16  Apr. 
1653,    p.    241.    Incomplete.    Trans,    of 

pers:    George  Kempe,  &  Mary  his 

wife,  Lawrence  Richard,  Tho.  Ash- 
brooke. 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


285 


THOMAS  RENALLS,  100  acs.  in 
the  E.  branch  of  Dan.  Taners  Cr.,  on 
the  S.  W.  side  thereof.  16  Apr.  1653, 
p.  241.  Due  sd.  Rennells  for  trans,  of 
2  pers:    William  Hall,  Thomas  Dunton. 

SYMON  PEETERS,  100  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  16  Apr.  1653,  p.  242.  At 
the  head  of  Daniel  Tanners  Cr.,  upon 
Indian  Town  Branch.  Incomplete. 
Trans,  of  2  pers:    Alice  Springwell. 

RICHARD  PINNER,  150  acs.  in 
Eliz.  Riv.,  between  the  two  main 
branches  of  Church  Cr.,  bounded  from 
the  Timber  Neck  Swamp  along  the 
Northermost  main  branch  of  sd.  Cr., 
N.  E.  thence  S.  E.  parallel  to  the  great 
swamp  &c.  20  Apr.  1653,  p.  242. 
Trans,  of  3  pers:  Richard  Pinner, 
Sarah  Terry,  Milicent  Simons. 

WILLIAM  BEDLAM,  150  acs.  lying 
on  the  N.  side  of  Home  Harbour  Cr., 
beg.  at  marked  tree  of  Fran.  Hales,  run- 
ning N.  N.  E.  to  Winter  Harbour, 
thence  E.  &c.  1  July  1653,  p.  243. 
Trans,  of  3  pers.* 

THOMAS  HOLMES  (or  HOMES), 
25  acs.  of  marsh  land  opposite  to  plan- 
tation of  sd.  Homes,  bounded  N.  E. 
towards  the  river,  S.  E.  upon  a  Cr. 
dividing  this  &  land  of  Richard  Jackson, 
S.  W.  upon  the  high  land  &  N.  W. 
upon  the  Hauke  pen  Poynt.  3  July 
1653,  p.  243.    Trans,  of  1  pers.* 

GEORGE  HACK,  400  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  at  Matchotank  Cr.,  1  July 
1653,  p.  244.  Bounded  on  W.  by  land 
of  Nicholas  Waddilow,  on  S.  by  sd. 
Cr.  &  running  Nly.  towards  Anancock. 

Trans,    of    pers:    John    Parsons, 

Will.  Benge,  Xpr.  Achman,  (?),  Will. 
Combay,  (or  Conibay),  George  Davis, 
Thomas  Crumpe,  John  Evans,  Tho. 
Hickhocke. 

JENKIN  PRICE,  150  acs.  Northamp- 
ton Co.  at  Nondue  Cr.,  1  July  1653,  p. 
244.  Beg.  at  land  of  John  Major  thence 
extending  Wly.  &c.  Trans,  of  3  pers: 
James  Harris,  Elizabeth  Case,  Tho. . 

GEORGE  CLARKE,  (Clark),  son  of 
George  Clarke,  dec'd.,   100  acs.  North- 


ampton Co., of 1653,  p.  244. 

Bounding  on  land  of  Jarves  Jackson  & 
the  Gleab  Land.  Trans,  of  2  pers.* 
Incomplete. 

MR.  THOMAS  HAMPTON,  550  acs. 
upon  E.  side  of  Chichamony  Riv.,  upon 
Tyescan  Branch,  toward  Timber  Swamp. 
6  Apr.  1653,  p.  245.  Trans,  of:  Alex. 
Reddock,  Neale  Sunkler,  (or  Sinckler), 
Sam.  Marecroft,  Wm.  Scott,  John 
Wiloxes,  Jane  Crosse,  Gilbert  Johnson, 
Charles  Rawlins,  Richard  Floyd,  Isaac 
Williamson,  Mary  Downes.  Incomplete. 

JOHN  MASHALL,  50  acs.,  being  a 
neck  of  land  between  Daniel  Tanners 
Cr.  &  Queens  grave  Cr.,  abutting  S.  W. 
on  land  of  William  Johnson,  etc.  16 
Apr.   1653,  p.  245.    Trans,  of  1  per.* 

EDWARD  HARRINGTON  (Haring- 
ton),  450  acs.  Northampton  Co.,  4  July 
1653,  p.  246.  Near  Mathepongoe, 
bounded  on  the  N.  by  Phillips  Cr.,  etc. 
Trans,  of  9  pers:  Morrice  Mathews, 
Edward  Holt,  John  Joanes,  Thomas 
Moore,  Robert  King,  Henry  Peare,  John 
Peare,  Elizabeth  Peare,  Edward  Peare. 
Incomplete. 

SAMPSON  ROBINS,  700  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  4  July  1653,  p.  246.  At 
Pongotegue  Cr.,  beg.  at  a  little  branch 
on  the  S.  side  parting  this  from  land  of 
George  Hack.  Incomplete.  Trans,  of 
14  pers:  Sampson  Robbins,  Alice  Rob- 
bins,  Edward  Moore,  Phill.  Mathews, 
Hugh  Daniell,  Sam.  Robins,  Tho.  Phil- 
lips, John  Nicholls,  Nicho.  Nicholls, 
Dan.  Chadwell,  Elinor  Nicholls,  Elinor 
Nicholls. 

RICHARD  ALLEN,  100  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  (no  date),  p.  246. 
Bounded  Wly.  on  a  great  swamp  be- 
tween Hungars  Cr.  &  Nuswattock  Cr. 
&  Nly.  on  land  of  Roger  Joanes.  In- 
complete.   Trans,  of  2  pers.* 

ROBERT  WARREN,  100  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  (no  date),  p.  247.  Incom- 
plete. Mentions  Kings  Cr.  &  Mr.  John 
Cotton.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Jane  Sher- 
wood, Rebecca  Harswell. 

AGNES  BARNES,  150  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  4  July   1653,  p.  247.    In- 


286 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


complete.  Wly.  on  land  of  Edmond 
Bebey,  Ely.  on  William  Mellinc  &  Nly. 
on  Kings  Cr.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Symon 
Foskett,  Elizabeth  Foskett,  Anne  Jordin. 

JOHN  TOULSON,  400  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  4  July  1653,  p.  247.  On 
Matchepongo    Cr.    Trans,    of    8    pers.* 

JASPER  HOGKINSON,  500  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  16  Apr.  1653,  p.  248. 
In  the  Eastern  branch  of  Daniell  Tan- 
ners Cr.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Mary 
Evans,  Barbara  Carter,  Anne  Blake, 
James  Millicent,  Dan.  Southerby,  Tho. 

Shrews,    Allestred    (?)    ,    Andrew 

Walson,  John  Green,  John  Pate. 

JOHN  BLACKBOURNE,  151  acs. 
Surry  Co.,  11  Mar.  1652,  p.  248.  Near 
Col.  Flood's  land,  bet.  Mr.  Foards  &  the 
Sunken  Marsh,  etc.,  S.  to  the  barren 
Neck  Swamp,  etc.  Incomplete.  Men- 
tions John  Flood  &  Richard  Baven. 
Trans,  of  3  pers:  Tho.  Ackerman,  Tho. 
Benleye. 

JOHN  BARROW,  386  acs.  Surry 
Co.,  3  May  1653,  p.  249.  S.  W.  side 
of  Upper  Chipoakes  Cr.,  S.  side  of 
James  Riv.,  bounded  from  George  Bur- 
chers  markt  trees  &c.  Trans,  of  8  pers: 
William  Murrall,  Toby  West,  Antho. 
Borley,  Richard  Branie,  (or  Brame), 
Anne  Morrall,  Susan  Harrington. 

WILLIAM  HAVETT,  300  acs.  upon 
the  S.  side  of  Wards  Cr.  above  John 
Wall.  7  Apr.  1653,  p.  249.  Trans,  of 
6  pers:  John  Parker,  Fra.  Clerke,  Richd. 
Buckham. 

CHARLES  SCARBURGH,  the  sonn 
of  Edmond  Scarburgh,  3050  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  10  May  1652,  p.  250.  Beg. 
at  first  little  branch  of  Pongotegue  Cr. 
on  the  N.  side,  etc.  Trans,  of  61  pers., 
assigned  him  by  his  father:  Rowland 
Evans,  Edward  Evans,  John  Jones,  Mar- 

garett    Tillett,    William    Tomlin,    

Tilley,  Tho.  Browne,  Carev.  Jone 

Parrett,    John   Pitcher,    Thomas   Wood- 

feild,    Hewes    ,    Mary    Williams, 

Jonath.  Showell,  (or  Stowell),  Marga. 
Pannell,  Hoell  Gladeing,  Jenkin  Luel- 
lin,  Lewis  Rowland,  Phill.  Parricoat, 
Cesser    Yeomans,    Kath.    Smith,    Susan 


Foster,  John  Martin,  Anne  Doby,  Mary 
Edaw,  (or  Edan),  William  Skinner, 
Mary  Edger,  Walter  Wood,  Alice  Price, 
Tho.  Coller,  Fra.  Knight,  Lucretia  Pott, 
Edward  Cowen,  William  Hollis,  Mary 
Bachelor,  Owen  Williams,  Edward  Ser- 
moner,  Maurice  Mathews,  Edward  Holt, 
Dorothy  Barnes,  Tho.  up  Williams, 
James  Harris,  Elizabeth  Case,  Thomas 
Browne,  Domingo,  Sarah,  Paconia, 
Negros;  John  Jones,  Thomas  Moore, 
Robert  King,  John  Renny,  John  Mar- 
veil  John  Hordwell,  Thomas  Major, 
Wm.  Adsworth,  (or  Oldsworth),  Mary 
Griffeth,  Thomas  West,  Thomas  Cowen, 
Kath.  Brumfield,  Jane  Davis,  John 
Carey. 

JOHN  ROBINS,  (ROBBINS),  700 
acs.  Northampton  Co.,  10  May  1652,  p. 
251.  At  Pungotegue  Cr.  100  acs.  by 
virtue  of  the  rights  of  a  patent  of  soe 
much,  dated  15  Nov.  1654  &  surren- 
dered; 600  acs.  for  trans,  of  12  pers: 
Stephen  Costen,  Anne  Costen,  John 
Wilox,  (or  Wilcox),  Marg:  Courser, 
George  Smith,  Vernitt  James,  Anne 
Winn,  Eliza.  Winn,  John  Mauday,  (or 
Munday),  Elizabeth  Barnett,  Walter 
Hawes,  James  Virer,  (or  Viser). 

ARTHUR  UPSHOTT,  300  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  10  May  1652,  p.  251. 
At  the  head  of  Occahannock  Cr., 
bounded  on  N.  upon  land  of  William 
Tailor,  on  S.  by  a  small  branch  parting 
this  from  land  of  Roger  Johns.  Trans, 
of  6  pers:  John  Roberts,  George 
Roberts,  Susan  Dowrigg,  Richard  Star- 
nell,  Mary  Joiner,  Mary  Jones. 

ELIAS  HARTREE,  200  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  (no  date),  p.  252.  Bounded 
Sly.  on  the  main  branch  of  Hungars  Cr., 
N.  upon  Richard  Jacobs  land,  etc.  Trans. 

of    pers:    George    Smith,     John 

Dickeson,  Richard  Allen,  Edw.  Hassor. 
Incomplete. 

ROBERT  BAYLEY,  300  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  4  July  ,  p.  252.    On 

N.   side   of   Nuswattock   Cr.,   Wly.    on 

land  of  William  C ,  &  Sly.  on  land 

of  James  Joanes.  Incomplete.  Trans,  of 
6  pers:  Robert  Bayly,  Anne  Wilmott, 
Richard  Custis,  Henry  Garrett,  Susan 
,  Marg. .    Incomplete. 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


287 


WILLIAM  MELLIN,  500  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  July   1653,   p.   252. 

Incomplete.  Mentions  Stubbins  branch 
&  Capt.  Rooper.  Trans,  of  10  pers: 
William  Melling,  Anne  Melling,  Agnis 
Barnes,   Mary  ,  John  ,   Hugh 


ROBERT    BRADSHAW,     345     acs. 

Northumberland  Co.,   8  Mar.   165 , 

p.  253.  Incomplete.  Abutting  upon 
Mattapony,  tanx  Yeocomico  Riv.,  &  his 
own  land.    Trans,  of  7  pers.* 

BARTHOLOMEW  HOSKINS,  400 
acs.  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  29  Apr.  1653,  p. 
253.  In  Broad  Cr.,  a  branch  of  the 
Eastern  Br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  &  adj.  his  own 
land.  Incomplete.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  2 
Scotchmen,  Walter  Denham. 

MICHAEL  RICKETT,  200  acs, 

July,  1653,  p.  253.  Incomplete.  Wly. 
on  land  of  Thomas  Wyatt  &  mentions  a 
branch  of  Hungars  Creek.  Trans,  of 
pers.* 

EDWARD  HALL,  390  acs.  in  Lin 
Haven  parish,  Low.  Norf.  Co,  11  May 
1652,  p.  254.  Incomplete.  Mentions 
Cypruss  branch  &  William  Dyer's  land. 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  Daniel  Needham, 
John  Jenkins,  Daniel  Doone,  Ann 
Graves,  Wm.  White,  John  White,  Eliz. 
Huttibell,  Kath  Simpson. 

HENRY  WOODHOUSE,  275  acs.  in 
Linhaven  Parish,  Low.  Norf.  Co,  11 
May,  1652,  p.  254.  Beg.  at  the  head  of 
a  Beavor  damm,  running  E.  N.  E.  &c. 
to  his  old  ground  &c.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
John  Smith,  Peter  White,  Edw.  Parrett, 
James  Richards,  Mary  a  Servt,  Jno. 
Hopswood. 

WILLIAM  CAPPS,  (100)  acs.  in 
Linhaven  Parish,  Low.  Norf.  Co,  11 
May,  1652,  p.  255.  Incomplete.  Men- 
tions Linhaven  Riv,  &  adj.  Hugh  . 

Trans,  of  2  pers:  Dorcao  Seyton,  Hona 
Maria  (?)  Hendrickson.  Assigned  by 
Mr.  Woodhouse. 

HENRY  SMITH,  Junr,  200  acs, 
(county  blank)  5  May  1652,  p.  255. 
Abutting  Nly.  upon  land  of  Thomas 
Darrow,  &  S.  E.  upon  Edward  Coales. 


Trans,     of     4     pers:    Thomas     Davis, 
George  Pew,  John  Child,  John  Hill. 

WILLIAM  KNOTT,  200  acs.  in 
Surry  Co,  on  S.  side  of  James  Riv, 
about  V/i  mi.  from  same.  Last  of  Mar. 
1653,  p.  256.  S.  W.  by  S.  into  the 
woods,  cross  the  reedy  Swamp  runn,  on 
the  N.  W.  by  W.  side  of  Mr.  Benjamin 
Harrysons  devdt,  by  the  round  island, 
and  N.  W.  by  W.  towards  upper  Chip 
Oakes  Cr.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  William 
Rose,  &  his  wife,  Anto.  Wightman, 
Dorothy  Woofe. 

BEE  it  knowne  unto  all  men  by  these 
presents  that  I  Wm.  Knott,  of  the  par- 
rish  of  Southwark,  in  Virginia,  planter, 
doe  Acknowedge  that  I  have  Surveyed 
and  Since  patterned  the  Sum  of  two 
hundred  Acres  of  Land  through  the  mis- 
take of  Certaine  Marked  trees  within 
the  bounds  &  Pattern  of  Mr.  John  Dib- 
dall,  Minister,  lying  in  the  parrish  of 
Southwark  aforesaid,  and  to  relenquish 
all  pretence  of  right  to  the  said  two 
hundred  Acres  of  Land  by  vertue  of  the 
said  Pattent  or  Otherwise,  and  doe 
promise  and  Engage  my  Self  to  deliver 
to  Mr.  Dibdall  or  his  Assignes  the  said 
Pattent  to  be  anihilated  and  made  void, 
and  also  doe  by  these  presents  before 
the  partyes,  whose  names  are  under 
written,  Certifye  the  Error  and  mistake 
in  the  said  Survey  and  pattent,  hereby 
humbly  presenting  to  the  right  honble. 
the  Governor  and  Councell,  now  setting 
at  the  Quarter  Court  at  James  Towne, 
my  acknowledgmt.  of  my  Error  &  mis- 
take, that  the  record  of  the  said  pattent 
in  the  Office  of  the  said  Court  may  be 
Oblicerated  thereby  to  stay  all  further 
Suites  which  may  happen  between  me 
and  the  said  Mr.  Dibdall  or  his  As- 
signes by  reason  of  the  said  land  for  the 
future.  In  Witness  whereof  I  Subscribe 
my  hand  this  sixth  day  of  March  1653. 
The  marke  of  Wm.  Knott.  Read,  Sub- 
scribed &  Delivered  in  the  presence  of 
Wm  Gaping  Rab:  (or  Rob.)  Wood, 
George  B  Boucher. 

LITTLETON  SCARBROUGH,  10 
May  1652,  p.  257.  (Incomplete.) 
Mentions  Curratuck  Cr,  &  Occahannock 
Cr.  Trans,  of  20  pers:  Peter  Cole,  Wm. 
Chilcurne,    John    Gwin,    Brian    Clarke, 


288 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


George  Andrew,  John  Watson,  Francis 
Knight,  Thomas  Edwards,  Francis  Gar- 
land, Wm.  Reeves,  Edward  Yeomans, 
Robt.  Huntley,  John  Thompson,  Charles 
Barcrefe,  Alexand.  Matricks,  William 
Branch,  Thomas  Moone,  Tho.  Mus- 
grove,  John  Younge,  Walter  Lane. 

JOHN  ASHLY  &  HAMPER, 

10  Mar.  1653,  p.  258.  Trans.  6  pers: 
Richard  Stephens,  Andrew  Hogg,  Ann 
Wyatt,  Wm.  Stephens,  Rob.  Armstronge, 
Matthew  Wate.    (Incomplete.) 

ALEXANDER  ADDISON,  10  May, 
1652,  p.  258.  Mentions  Occahannock 
Cr.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  Abm.  Heath, 
Amey  Heath,  Jno.  Heath,  John  Will- 
ford,  John  Osbourne,  Robt.  Higgenson, 
Richard  Hewes.    (Incomplete.) 

Pages  259,  260,  261  &  262  are  blank. 
(Original  record  evidently  too  badly 
mutilated  to  transcribe.) 

ROBERT  WILD,  800  acs.  York  Co., 
10  June  1654,  p.  263.  Lying  on  E.  N. 
E.  side  of  the  Old  Mill  Swamp  at  head 
of  Queens  Cr.,  running  along  the  back 
of  Mr.  Davis'  devdt.,  by  Mr.  Dan. 
Parks,  to  the  Old  Mill  path,  by  land  of 
Mr.  Bourne,  by  Richohock  path  &c.  700 
acs.  granted  to  Joseph  Croshaw,  20 
June  1646  &  assigned  to  sd.  Wild;  & 
100  acs.  granted  to  Phillip  Chesly  11 
Oct.  1653  &  by  him  consented  to  be 
made  in  the  name  of  sd.  Wild. 

DAME  ELIZ.  LUNSFORD,  500  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  8  June  1654,  p.  263. 
Upon  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  &  upon 
W.  by  S.  side  of  Matchepungo  Cr.,  run- 
ning to  an  oake  dividing  this  &  land  of 
Col.  Ralph  Wormly,  dec'd.  &  an  oak  on 
S.  branch  of  said  creek  dividing  this  & 
land  of  John  Benton,  dec'd.  Assigned 
by  Samll.  Abbott  to  whom  it  was 
granted  22  Dec.  1642  &  confirmed  by 
the  Govr.  Sec. 

MARY  HEY  &  ROBERT  HEY,  1200 
acs.,  part  being  two  necks  comonly 
known  as  Pyny  Point  Neck,  containing 
408  acs.,  &  Chekoes  Neck  containing 
335  acs.,  the  rest  lying  at  the  head  of 
them,  both  in  James  City  Co.,  on  E. 
side    of    Chychohominy    Riv.,    6    Apr. 


1654,  p.  263.  Bounded  by  Chekroes 
Cr.  &  land  of  Major  Rob.  (Robins  ?). 
Granted  unto  John  Felgate,  3  July  1640 
&  accrueth  due  unto  Mary  Hey,  Wid. 

6  Robert  Hey,  her  son,  as  being  Exors. 
of  Wm.  Felgate,  who  was  Exor.  of  sd. 
John  Felgate. 

FRANCIS  LAND,  1020  acs.  in  Lyn 
Haven,  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  6  June  1654,  p. 
264.  400  acs.  lying  N.  E.  upon  Chese- 
pian  Riv.  ah.  Lyn  Haven;  150  acs.  N. 
E.  upon  a  Cr.  &  N.  W.  upon  land  of 
Mr.  Cob  Howell;  270  acs.  at  the  head 
of  Francis  Land's  devdt.,  along  Thos. 
Watts  devdt.  in  Lyn  Haven  parish,  etc., 
towards  Lancaster  Lemitts  (or  Levitts) 
Sec.    400  acs.  granted  to  Cob:   Howell, 

7  May,  1638  &  assigned  unto  sd.  Land; 
150  acs.  granted  unto  Tho.  Watts  26 
July  1638,  &  assigned  unto  Tho.  Keel- 
ing, by  whom  it  was  assigned  unto  sd. 
Land;  270  acs.  granted  sd.  Land  14 
Mar.  1649,  &  200  acs.  the  residue  for 
trans  of  4  pers:  Darby  Browne,  Tho- 
mas Wilson,  William  Sissell,  Ann 
Gatricke. 

MARMADUKE  MARRINGTON, 
250  acs.,  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  on  Gaythers 
Cr.  a  branch  of  the  Swd.  br.  of  Eliz. 
Riv.,  6  June  1654,  p.  264.  Due  by  pur- 
chase from  John  Yates,  to  whom  it  was 
granted  20  Feb.  1643. 

FRA.  GREY,  1,000  acs.  on  S.  sideof 
of  Potomeck  Riv.,  16  July  1654,  p.  264. 
675  acs.  on  the  head  of  Rosyers  Cr., 
abutting  land  of  Tho.  Bowyer  &  Mr. 
John  Hillier;  250  acs.  N.  E.  upon  sd. 
Riv.,  &  S.  E.  upon  sd.  Cr.  Trans,  of 
20  pers:  Giles  Tavernor,  Marke  Provo, 
John  Patlyon,  Nich.  Reman,  Peter 
Sneed,  Nich.  Hama,  Hen.  Robinson, 
Wm.  Bolton,  Marg.  Wood,  Edwd. 
Bowles,  John  Lawren,  Robert  Morley, 
Margaret  Robinson,  Humphrey  Meares, 
Ann  Meares,  Conninghan  Banton,  Rich- 
ard Pitts,  One  Negro,  John  Lee,  George 
Rush. 

ORPHENS  OF  JOHN  DENNIS,  400 
acs.  Northumberland  Co.,  16  July  1654, 
p.  265.  350  acs.  N.  upon  a  branch  of 
great  Wicocomoco  Riv.,  called  Dennis 
his  Cr.,  S.  E.  upon  a  branch  dividing 
this  from  land  of  Tho.  Gascoyne  &  N. 


An    example    of   the   present    mutilated    condition    of    many    of   the    pages    in    the 

original  Patent  Books.    Found   in  old  Patent  Book  5.    This  folio  is  one  of  several 

which,    through   error,    has   heen   included    hetween   pages   64    and    65.    This   folio 

belongs  in  Patent  Book  6,  pages  22-23. — Cavaliers  and  Pioneers,  page  AoG. 


trp- 


Of 


**y 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


289 


W.  upon  land  of  Wm.  Spicer;  &  50 
acs.  bounding  N.  E.  upon  the  same,  etc. 
350  acs.  due  by  the  decease  of  their 
father  John  Dennis  who  pattented  it  15 
Sept.  1649;  &  50  acs.  for  trans,  of 
William  Dingley. 

RICHARD  WALKER,  16  July  1654, 
p.  265.  (Incomplete.)  Trans,  of  12 
pers:  Wm.  Pryce,  Tho.  Howard,  Richd. 
Deane,  Mary  Deane,  Gilbert  Wright, 
Anto.  Hill,  John  Rowlson,  James 
Clerke,  Peter  Lee,  Sarah  Bagnall,  Susan 
Evans,  1  Negro  from  Grayes  certificate. 

TOBY  HORTON,  350  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  1  Feb.  1653,  p.  266.  Betwixt  two 
maine  creeks  issueing  out  of  Fleetes 
Bay,  next  to  land  of  John  Taylor,  dec'd., 
bounding  S.  W.  upon  one  of  the  creeks 
deviding  this  from  land  of  Eppy.  Boni- 
son,  etc.,  and  bounding  N.  E.  upon  the 
one  towards  the  Indian  Towne.  Trans. 
of  7  pers:  Ann  Thorp,  Mary  Parr, 
Susan  Moore,  Wm.  Abbott,  James 
Allen,  Morrice  Tirrall,  Robert  Massey. 

EPPY.  BONISON,  400  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  1  Feb.  1653,  p.  266.  Upon  S.  W. 
side  of  the  main  Cr.  issuing  out  of 
Fleets  Bay,  dividing  this  from  land  of 
Toby  Horton  &  John  Taylor,  S.  E.  upon 
a  creek  next  to  land  "seated  by  Tho. 
Salisbury  formerly  but  now  Capt.  Fleets 
people  are  there,"  S.  W.  etc.  Trans,  of 
8  pers:  Eppy  Bonison,  Ever.  Peterson, 
Derrick  Johnson,  Silvester  Liver,  James 
Bonner,  John  Clerke,  John  Barrett, 
Richard  Jones. 

THO.  COMERS,  550  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  8  June  1654,  p.  266.  Nly. 
upon  Potomeck  Riv.  Granted  unto 
Wm.  Parry,  11  Nov.  1651,  assigned  to 
sd.  Coniers,  &  ordered  renewed  by 
Govr.  &c.    (Incomplete). 

THO  BROOKS,  500  acs.  James  City 
Co.,  9  June  1654,  p.  266.  On  Chycho- 
hominy  Riv.,  S.  W.  upon  land  of  Mar- 
garett  Barrett,  N.  E.  on  Tvascun  &  N. 
W.  etc  .  Trans,  of  10  pers.*  (Incom- 
plete.) 

COL.  TRISTRUM  NASWORTHY, 
100  acs.  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  10  June  1654, 
p.  267.  Upon  E.  side  of  the  S.  E. 
branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.    Incomplete. 


JOHN  HULL,  500  acs.  Northumber- 
land Co.,  6  June  1654,  p.  267.  Upon 
S.  side  of  the  deviding  Cr.,  abutting  S. 
upon  land  of  Geo.  Collclough.  Former- 
ly granted  to  him  by  patent  6  June 
1651,  &  order  granting  renewal  thereof 
dated  herewith. 

WILL:  SMITH,  200  acs.  James  City 
Co.,  8  Aug.  1654,  p.  267.  Upon  E. 
side  of  Chycohominy  Riv.,  bounded  S. 
and  E.  on  Major  Holt,  Nly.  on  Mathew 
Williams,  &  Wly.  on  Rich:  Jones. 
Trans,  of  4  pers.* 

EDWARD  GILLA,  200  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  6  June  1654,  p.  267.  Upon 
E.  side  of  Chycohominy  Riv.,  S.  W. 
upon  Tyascon  &  S.  E.  on  Tho.  Brooks. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  Edward  Harrison, 
John  Bussen,  Edward  Jones,  Susan 
Gilla. 

HUMPHRY  BELT,  220  acs.  Linhaven 
Parish,  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  8  June  1654, 
p.  268.  Beg.  at  Tho.  Matins  Cr.,  run- 
ning along  by  E.  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv., 
adj.  to  Goldsmith's  land  &  by  Mr.  Sid- 
neys land.  Trans,  of  5  pers:  Mary 
Craggs,  Randall  Hewett,  John  Cooper, 
Simon  Robinson,  Geo.  Gay. 

WALTER  PRITCHARD,  250  acs.  in 
Winter  Harbor,  beg.  on  the  bay  side, 
running  Wly.  up  the  Cr.,  N.  W.  by 
markt  trees  dividing  this  from  land  of 
Robert  Grigg  &  to  markt  trees  of 
Charles  Sallace.  6  June  1654,  p.  268. 
Trans,  of  5  pers:  Rowland  Ellis,  Tho. 
Husman,  Alice  Watkins,  Bridges 
Griffen,  Tho.  Russell. 

MARK  FOSTER,  100  acs.  upon  the 
head  of  Pudden  Cr.  in  the  Eastermost 
River  of  Mockjack  bay,  beg.  at  tree  of 
Phillip  Hunleys  &c.  6  June  1654,  p. 
268.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Rich:  Rose, 
Ann  Jnoson  (Johnson  or  Iveson). 

PETER  RIBGY,  186  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  last  day  of  July  1654,  p.  269.  On 
N.  side  of  Pyanketank  Riv.,  upon  Mat- 
trons  Cr.  &  running  to  the  head  of 
Uteys  Cr.    Trans,  of  4  pers.* 

COL.  ARGOLL  YARDLY,  2,000 
acs.    in   Ackomack    in   Northpton.    Co., 


290 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


8  June  165 ,  p.  269.    Bounded  on 

the  Westerne  pts.  on  a  former  devdt. 
of  sd.  Yardly,  S.  on  land  of  Lt.  John 
Savidge  &  Nly.  on  land  of  Capt.  Stone. 
Trans,  of  40  pers:  Scippia  Hackerly, 
Wm.  Band,  Robt.  Tower,  James  Pal- 
mer, Wm.  Richards,  And.  Gread,  Hen. 
Peirce,  Nich.  Graddon,  John  Wilson, 
Joan  Packer,  Thorand  Thomas,  Geo. 
Demey,  Joan  Demey,  Edm.  Krimy, 
Walter  Blake,  Roger  Bushe,  Mich. 
Hawkins,  Wm.  Lane,  John  Webber, 
John  Poole,  John  Lee,  Richard  Phillips, 
Gilbert  Welch,  John  Gill,  Zach. 
Downman,  Cressell  Downman,  Elias 
Hackerly,  Wm.  Mule,  Hum.  Jeckleston, 
John  Beckett,  Rice  Rammell,  Rob.  Parra- 
more,  Phil.  Cantrel,  Anto.  Towton, 
Robt.  Gayny,  Samll.  Sellick,  Win.  Sweet, 
Hum.  Sayne,  Howel  Merrick,  Rob. 
Roberts. 

RICHARD  BURTON,  360  acs.,  on 
the  N.  side  of  Queens  Cr.,  near  the 
head,  beg.  at  the  mouth  of  Kings  Cr., 
running  to  trees  of  Edm.  Welch.  20 
Dec.  1653,  p.  269.  Trans,  of  8  pers: 
Benj.  Mathews,  John  Lunn,  Ann 
Glouce,  John  Smith,  Eliz.  Bristow,  Ann 
Substance,  Edw.  Harbrough,  Andrew 
Wmson.  (Williamson),  Ann  Loyd, 
Wm.  Latham. 

ED.  WELCH,  900  acs.  at  the  head 
of  Queens  Cr.  in  Pyan.(ketank)  Riv., 
beg.  at  corner  tree  of  Rich.  Caryes 
devdt.  &c.  to  land  of  Richard  Burton. 
Date  blank,  1654,  p.  270.  Trans,  of  18 
pers:  Nich.  Browne,  twice,  his  wife, 
twice,  Nich.  Dean,  John  Bradshaw, 
Dan.  Tavernor,  John  Thickpenny,  Anto. 
Mark,  Edwd.  Jelfe,  Robt.  White,  Eliz. 
Palmer,  Dennis  Mackernall,  (or  Mack- 
errall),  Joseph  Preston,  Ann  Aurllott, 
Wm.  Smith,  Sarah  Browne,  Anne 
Browne. 

THO.  PRESTON  &  HENRY  PRES- 
TON, 650  acs.  on  the  W.  side  of  the 
Eastermost  Riv.  in  Mockjack  Bay,  7 
June  1654,  p.  270.  500  acs.  by  patent 
to  Thomas  Preston  2  Aug.  1652,  &  sur- 
rendered into  the  office;  150  acs.  for 
trans,  of  3  pers:  Ed:  Lucas,  John 
Beard. 

LT.  COL.  ROB.  PITT,  1200  acs. 
Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  7  June  1654,  p.  271. 


Beg.  at  branch  of  Newtowne  haven  Riv. 
&c.  to  Mr.  Prestwoods  corner  tree,  &c, 
to  Mr.  Seawards  land  &  adj.  his  own 
land.  600  acs.  granted  to  Thomas 
Davis,  19  Apr.  1648  &  assigned  unto 
Rob.  Sharpe,  who  assigned  same  to  sd. 
Pitt;  300  acs.  by  vertue  of  the  rights  of 
a  patent  granted  unto  him  3  July  1648 
&  by  him  relinquished,  &  300  acs.  by 
patent  19  Apr.  1648. 

ANDREW  GILSON,  450  acs.  upon 
S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  adj.  his  patent 
land,  &  beg.  at  Westermost  bounds  of 
same.  Last  of  July  1654,  p.  271.  Trans, 
of  9  pers:  Watt  the  Plowman,  Ann 
Price,  John  Clortes,  Sam.  Sloper,  Will: 
Wignoll,  Geo.  Whitell,  James  Garves, 
Tho.  Cartell,  Walter  Read. 

VALLENTINE  PATTEN,  1000  acs. 
Westmoreland  Co.,  6  June  1654,  p. 
272.  Upon  the  S.  &  N.  at  the  head  of 
Oqui  River,  W.  S.  W.  along  land  of 
Richard  Codsford,  etc.  Trans,  of  20 
pers:  Gowry  Macalster,  John  Macal- 
ster,  Hector  Macalster,  Daniel  Grey, 
John  Wright,  John  Cook,  Tho.  Levin, 
Wm.  Gage,  Robt.  Poynter,  Joan  Hoote, 
Henry  Odell,  Ann  Childe  (a  Childe  ?), 
Rich.  Welch,  Wm.  Ginings,  Mich.  Up- 
church,  Fra.  Shelton,  Tho.  Green,  John 
Barkeworth,  James  Collett,  Thomas 
Wood. 

COLL.   WILLIAM  CLAYBOURNE, 

Secty.  of  State,  750  acs.  Northumber- 
land Co.,  14  June  1653,  p.  272.  Abutt- 
ing Sly.  upon  the  severall  plantations  of 
Martine  Cole,  Geo.  Heale,  Tho.  Saffron 
&  John  Larrett,  &c,  Nly.  upon  branches 
of  Wicocomoco  Cr.  &c.  Trans.  15  pers.* 

JOHN  WALTON  &  JOHN  BAG- 
NALL,  3,900  acs.  Westmoreland  Co., 
10  June  1654,  p.  273.  1600  acs.  upon 
Petomack  Riv.,  beg.  at  the  mouth  of 
Petomack  Cr.,  700  acs.  bounding  Nly. 
on  sd.  River,  Wly.  upon  a  line  from  the 
Riv.  &  dividing  this  from  land  of  Nich. 
Merywether;  &  1600  acs.  adj.  these  two 
tracts,  Ely.  upon  a  line  dividing  same 
from    land    of    Rob.    Maphee    &    Mr. 

Turne &    Sly.    upon    Matchotwick 

Towne.  Trans,  of  78  pers:  Thomas 
Winn,  Eliz.  Renolls,  Joseph  Harry, 
Nich.     Smith,     Marg.     Barton,     Joseph 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


291 


Stonard,  (or  Steuard),  Eliz.  Yorke, 
Sarah  Redder,  Jane  Colson,  Johne  Blay, 
Eliz.  Johnson,  John  Knight,  Robert 
Wright,  Miles  Grey,  Jane  Williams, 
Ann  Smith,  Marg.  Manner,  Eliz.  Har- 
mon, Issabell  Heath,  Judith  Dale,  Lyd. 
Easterfeild,  Eliz.  Vincent,  Fra.  Eaton, 
John  Hill,  Hanna  Pice,  (or  Tice),  Sam. 
Jackson,  Mar.  Wilkenson,  Wm.  Russell, 
John  Turner,  Tho.  Booth,  Mabill  Jones, 
Mary  Heiward,  Rich.  Armstrong,  Tho. 
Swindall,  Sarah  Cowles,  John  Fisher, 
Devorux  Brown,  Joan  Armitage,  Eliz. 
Clisse,  Eliz.  Neale,  Fra.  Tonevy,  Wm. 
Eaton,  Lewis  Five,  Fra.  North,  Ann 
North,  Eliz.  Wade,  Robt.  Jnoson 
(Johnson),  Eliz.  Hay,  Jno.  Truman, 
Denamere,  Fra.  Calvin,  Ben.  Jones, 
Mary  Jnoson,  Tho.  Tull,  Abra.  Taylor, 
John  Mill,  Tho.  Grimstone,  John  Elsey, 
Robert  Hawkins,  John  Farmer,  Brid: 
Easthop,  Mary  Palmer,  Eliz.  Dany,  Alice 
Watson,  Wm.  Hemsley,  Edward  Whit- 
by, Sy.  Carpenter,  Jno.  Pritchard,  Eliz. 
Wright,  Eliz.  Pardy,  Tho.  Tucker,  Mich. 
Hooton,  Hen:  Stott,  (or  Scott),  Edw. 
Saunders,   James   Wells,    Fra.   Glissow. 

PHILLIP  CHESLY  &  DAN.  WILD, 
(Wilde),  750  acs.  York  Co.,  10  June 
1654,  p.  274.  On  S.  W.  side  of  York 
Riv.,  beg.  in  Tho.  Smiths  line  on  the 
maine     swamp     branch     of     the     old 

M (Mill)     on    Queens     Cr.,    up 

Skemino  Swamp  to  Ricohock  path  &c. 
Trans,  of  15  pers:  Eliz.  Larkin,  John 
Rabb,  Wm.  Snodell,  Hen.  Robins, 
Alice  Sparrow,  Tho.  Wilkenson,  Wm. 
Deane. 

SIR  HENRY  CHICKLY,  Knight,  950 
acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  9  June  1654,  p.  274. 
On  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  450  acs.  op- 
posite land  of  Mr.  James  Wmson 
(Williamson);  500  acs.  at  thehead  of 
a  devdt.  of  Toby  Smith,  running  to  a 
small  creek  dividing  this  &  land  of  Mr. 
Soanes.  450  acs.  granted  unto  Mr. 
Hen.  Soane  &  assigned  to  sd.  Chickly, 
&  500  acs.  for  trans,  of  10  pers:  6 
Negroes  bought  of  Capt.  Townsend  & 
Mr.  Burnham;  John  Smith,  Mary  Bar- 
tran,  Nich.  Sexton,  Cuthberd  Potter. 

RICHARD  HAWKINS,  500  acs. 
Westmoreland  Co.,  6  Sept.  1654,  p. 
275.    On    S.    side    of    Potemeck    Riv., 


bounded  on  S.  with  Quancico  Cr.  Trans, 
of  10  pers:  Richard  Hawkins,  Kat. 
Willowby,  Sam.  Challenge,  Margery 
Challenge,  Edmd.  Larkin,  Eliz.  Hart, 
James  Hare,  Tho.  Green,  Robt.  Stone, 
Alex.  Hinde. 

JOHN  PHILLIPS  &  JOHN  BATTS, 

500  acs.  Lancaster  Co.  on  N.  side  of 
the  freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  about  14  mi. 
above  Nanzemum  Towne,  7  Sept.  1654, 
p.  275.  Beg.  at  a  small  gutt  dividing 
this  from  land  surveyed  for  John  Weyre. 
Trans,  of  10  pers:  Eliz.  Dutchfeild, 
Richard  Thomas,  Elin.  Rich,  Tho. 
Rogers,  Jacob  Bridgman,  Use  (?)  Off- 
dale,  Finla  Heresa,  Tho.  Stockwell,  John 
Cobb. 

MRS.  MARGT.  (Margaret)  BRENT, 
700  acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  within  the 
freshes  of  Potomack  Riv.,  6  Sept.  1654, 
p.  275.  Beg.  at  mouth  of  Hunting  Cr. 
Trans,  of  14  pers:  John  Rainalls,  Wm. 
Bence,  Robt.  Lawrence,  David  Kellin, 
Walter  Donell,  Wm.  Burt,  Bryan 
MarfTe,  James  Donnell,  Wm.  Wright, 
James  Bryce,  Rich.  Conniers,  Rich. 
Coleman,  James  Ramsy,  John  Major. 

EDWIN  CONAWAY,  1250  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  at  S.  E.  side  of  Corotoman 
Riv.,  6  Apr.  1654,  p.  276.  Beg.  at  the 
mouth  of  a  small  creek  which  divides 
this  &  land  of  Capt.  Tho.  Hackett  &c. 
to  a  hill  of  Iron  Mine,  etc.  1,000  acs. 
formerly  granted  by  two  patents  dated 
6  Dec.  1652;  &  250  acs.  for  trans,  of 
5  pers:  Wm.  Collins,  Edw.  Bennett, 
Alice  Elles,  Ann  Roberts,  Samuel 
Coleman. 

LT.  COL.  SAM:  MATHEWS,  2,000 
acs.  in  the  freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  about 
a  mile  above  Nansemum  Towne,  beg. 
at  an  oake  standing  by  the  river  divid- 
ing this  from  800  acs.  surveyed  for 
Vincent  Stanford.  7  Sept.  1654,  p.  276. 
Trans,  of  40  pers.* 

RICHARD  BROWNE,  200  acs. 
Westmoreland  Co.,  13  Sept.  1654,  p. 
276.  Nly.  upon  Hollis'  Cr.,  including 
a  small  island  in  a  marsh,  Wly.  upon 
land  of  Tho.  Blag,  Ely.  towards  land 
of  Little  Browne  &  Sly.  upon  a  swamp 
by  Nungeocicoe  path.  Trans,  of  4 
pers.* 


292 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


HEN.  ROACH,  850  acs.  upon  Lower 
Matchotix  Riv.,  towards  land  of  John 
Wood  &  Geo.  Watts.  13  Sept.  1654, 
p.  277.  300  acs.  granted  unto  Richard 
Searle,  16  Sept.  1651  &  assigned  to  Ri. 
Maddox,  who  assigned  same  to  sd. 
Roach;  &  550  acs.  for  trans,  of  11  pers.* 

JOHN  ROGERS,  50  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  13  Sept.  1654,  p.  277. 
Bounding  Nly.  upon  Cloughtons  Cr., 
issuing  out  of  Chicokoone  Riv.,  Ely. 
upon  land  sd.  Rogers  bought  of  the 
assignees  of  sd.  Cloughton  &  Wly.  upon 
the  Gleab  land,  being  200  acres  ap- 
poynted  for  a  Church  &  Sly.  upon  land 
of  Mr.  Hugh  Lee.    Trans,  of   1   per.* 

SAME.  250  acs.  Same  county,  date 
&  page.  Near  land  of  John  Kent. 
Trans,  of  5  pers.* 

MATH.  RHODUM,  350  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  13  Sept.  1654,  p.  278. 
280  acs.  N.  E.  upon  a  branch  of  a  Cr. 
issuing  out  of  Chycokoon  Riv.,  called 
Kings  Cr.,  adj.  land  of  Mr.  Hugh  Lee; 

6  70  acs.  adj.  the  sd.  land.    Trans,  of 

7  pers.* 

THO.  FRIZZ AR,  300  acs.  Westmore- 
land Co.,  13  Sept.  1654,  p.  278.  Bound- 
ing Sly.  upon  Hollis'  Cr.  &  Ely.  upon 
land  of  Wm.  Freak.    Trans,  of  6  pers.* 

MARTIN  CO  ALE,  300  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  on  the  S.  side  of  great 
Wicocomoco  Riv.,  at  the  head  of  a 
creek  dividing  the  lands  of  Thomas 
Salisbury  &  Hen.  Huss  (or  Hup)  &  E. 
S.  E.  upon  land  of  Tho.  Kidby.  1  July 
1654,  p.  278.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  John 
White,  Tho.  Fawne,  Geo.  Middlemore, 
William  Blunt,  Reynard  Anderson, 
Joseph  Harper. 

THOMAS  SALISBURY,  1100  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  13  Sept.  1654,  p. 
279.  On  S.  side  of  great  Wicocomoco 
Riv.,  Nly.  upon  the  same  &  Fishing 
Cr.,  Ely.  upon  a  Cr.  dividing  this  from 
land  sd.  Salisbury  now  lives  on  &  land 
of  Martin  Coale  &  Wly.  upon  land  of 
Gervace  Dodson,  bought  of  the  as- 
signees of  John  Essex,  &  Sly.  upon  land 
of  John  Fawcett.  150  acs.  granted  to 
John  Hawkins,  16  Sept.  1651  &  as- 
signed to  sd.  Dodson  by  Abra.  Byrum, 


legatee  of  sd.  Hawkins;  &  950  acs.  for 
trans,  of  19  pers.* 

NATH.  (Nathaniel)  POPE,  1000 
acs.  on  S.  side  of  Potomack  Riv.,  West- 
moreland Co.,  6  Sept.  1654,  p.  279. 
Upon  Chapawansick  Cr.,  E.  &  N.  upon 
land  of  Col.  Mathews,  etc.  500  acs.  on 
the  N.  &  500  acs.  on  S.  side  of  sd. 
Creek.  Trans,  of  20  pers:  James  John- 
son, Wm.  Wright,  James  Blany,  John 
Bratson,  Wm.  James,  John  Jones,  James 
Floid,  James  Margret,  Rob.  Bouch,  Mary 
Paine,  Eliz.  James,  Tho.  Jenkens,  Wm. 
Fowkes,  Wm.  Browne,  James  Hart, 
James  Hart,  Rich.  Rawlins,  Rich.  James, 
Wm.  Hatton,  Rich.  Jones. 

ROBT.  YEO,  650  acs.  Westmoreland 
Co.,  6  Sept.  1654,  p.  280.  N.  W.  upon 
land  of  Gabriel  Odgar,  N.  E.  &  S.  E. 
upon  Herring  Cr.,  which  divides  this 
&  land  of  Major  Geo.  Read.  Trans,  of 
13  pers:  Mary  Draper,  Augimye  a 
Scot,  Dubo  a  Scotchman,  Martha 
Wright,  Sarah  Sparke,  Wm.  Claybourn, 
Geo.  the  Smith,  John  Cosby,  John 
Howard,  Eliz.  Shippard,  Ann  Grey, 
Step.  Coree,  Tho.  Lewis. 

ABRA.  MOONE,  2500  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  within  the  freshes  &  upon  the  S. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  opposite  to  Nanze- 
mum  Neck  &c.  to  head  of  Pasatinck  Cr. 
6  Sept.  1654,  p.  280.  Trans,  of  50 
pers:  Tho.  Webb,  Rich.  Wells,  Davy 
Jones,  James  Jnoson,  Grace  Thomas. 

WM.  WARREN,  650  acs.  on  N.  side 
of  Charles  Riv.,  being  a  peninsula,  beg. 
at  the  first  Pyny  Poynt  &c.  to  marsh  on 
W.  side  of  the  Cr.  leading  into  Mock- 
jack  Bay  &c.  23  Jan.  1653,  p.  281. 
Granted  to  Wm.  Warren  by  patent  10 
Aug.  1642  &  assigned  to  Xphr.  Allen 
&  Rice  Maddox;  sd.  Maddox  assigned 
his  share  to  Nath.  Warren  &  becomes 
due  to  sd.  Wm.  as  sonn  &  heir  to  Nath. 
The  other  half  accruing  due  unto  the 
said  Wm.  by  intermarrying  with  Fra. 
Allen,  the  only  heir  now  living  of  Xphr. 
Allen. 

JOHN  SHARPE,  500  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  7  Sept.  1654,  p.  281.  On  N.  side 
of  Rappa.  Riv.  &  on  Wwd.  side  of 
Moraticon  Cr.,  beg.   on  N.   E.  side  of 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


293 


600  acs.  surveyed  for  Mr.  Tho.  Glas- 
cock, extending  to  land  of  Mr.  Wm. 
Withy,  Nich.  Ferman  &  Tho.  Stephens. 
Trans,  of  10  pers:  Robert  Hensly  (or 
Horsly),  John  Fookes,  Peter  Shadock, 
Wm.  Lenton,  Mary  Wilkenson,  Rob. 
Peyston,  Wm.  Sharp,  Rog.  Rawlins, 
Wm.  Wilson. 

FRANCIS  PLASE  (Place),  300  acs. 
on  the  N.  side  of  the  freshes  of  Rapp. 
Riv.,  about  10  mi.  above  Nanzemum 
Towne,  S.  W.  upon  a  devdt.  surveyed 
for  Nich.  Merywether  &  upon  the  main 
branch  of  dividing  creek.  7  (Sept.) 
1654,  p.  282.    Trans,  of  6  pers.* 

CLEMENT  THURUSH,  150  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Rappa. 
Riv.,  at  the  head  of  a  devdt.  surveyed 
for  Barth.  Hoskins,  extending  to  trees 
dividing  same  from  land  of  John  Gillett 
&c.  7  Sept.  1654,  p.  282.  Trans  of  3 
pers:  Wm.  Jenison,  Harbert  Powell, 
James  Atkins. 

JOHN  GILLETT,  1,000  acs.  on  N. 
side  of  the  freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  about 

6  mi.  above  Nanzemum  Towne,  beg.  at 
a  creek  dividing  same  from  land  of 
Vincent  Stanford.  7  Sept.  1654,  p.  282. 
Trans,  of  20  pers.* 

JOHN  HALLOWES,  300  acs.  West- 
moreland Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Petomeck 
Riv.,  adj.  his  own  land.  6  Sept.  1654, 
p.  283.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  James  Law- 
rence, Thomas  Younge,  Wm.  Bryce, 
James  Roe,  Wm.  Rennells,  Wm.  Lacke. 

JOHN  WYRE,  JOHN  GILLETT, 
ANDREW  GILSON  &  JOHN  PHIL- 
LIPPS,  4,000  acs.  on  the  S.  side  in  the 
freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  about  12  mi. 
above  Nanzemum  Towne,  on  Ewd.  side 
of  a  navigable  creek  called  Wyre  Cr., 

7  Sept.  1654,  p.  283.  Marginal  Note: 
These  bounds  being  now  surveyed  by 
Lt.  Col.  Toby  Smith  do  not  amount  to 
above  2,000  acs.  but  was  formerly 
granted  to  other  men  therefore  40  of 
these  rights  do  not  accrue  due  unto  Jno. 
Wyer  who  hath  sold  them  unto  Jno. 
Gillett  for  600  acs.  &  400  acs.  for  Ed- 
ward Ruckly.  Due  for  trans,  of  80 
pers:  Lawrence  Longe,  Jonathan  Bos- 
tock,  Ann  Taylor,  Blanch  Randall,  Wm. 
Dingley,  John  Morris,  Barth.  Harrison, 


Joyce  Treffe,  Sam  Newman,  John  Fisher, 
John  Barrow,  Jno.  Hutchinson,  Wm. 
Demster,  John  Crag,  Tho.  Grey,  Sus. 
Lysemy,  Eliz.  Stiles,  Ann  Mason,  Jno. 
Meekins,  Alice  Welby,  Anthony  Jeni- 
son, Tho.  Atkins,  John  Green,  Eliz. 
Green,  Mary  Tracy,  Jeremiah  Bendall, 
Steph.  Donaway,  Roger  Mossey,  Henry 
Wilson,  Wm.  Porter,  Robert  Dorfeild, 
Robt.  Lane,  Richard  Wilkins,  Eliz. 
Smith,  Grace  Court,  John  ,  Rich- 
ard Parker,  Robert  Border,  Eliz.  Perry, 
Lawrence,  Fra.  &  Morgan,  3  Negroes; 
Edward  Watkins,  James  Neal,  Tho. 
Newton,  Wm.  Hallyson,  Mary  Harris, 
Joane  Segrave,  Dennis  Johnson,  JefTry 
Willson,  Fra.  Jenkenson,  Robt.  Wood- 
croft,  Wm.  Merreck,  Martha  Wiggen, 
William  Hughes,  Silvester  Lyner,  James 
Alerdine,  Eyver  Peterson,  Derrick  John- 
son, John  Bonas,  Eppy  Berry,  Wm. 
Roberts,  Ja.  Crofts,  Jno.  Medcalfe, 
Jacob  Treamer,  Wm.  Newgent,  Robt. 
Armstronge,  Alex.  ,  Ann  New- 
combe,  Walter  Rouse,  Robt.  Sneade, 
Mary  Crosly,  Kath.  Mealy,  Wm.  Batten, 
John  Jeeves,  John  Phillips,  Elin.  & 
Sarah  Phillips,  George  Cla  (?),  Geo. 
Alen,  Wm.  Clarke,  Ann  Bartlett. 

RICH.  CODSFORD,  400  acs.  West- 
moreland Co.,  6  Sept.  1654,  p.  284.  On 
N.  side  of  Petomeck  Riv.  known  by  the 
name  of  the  Sandy  or  raggett  poynt  op- 
posite to  the  Doges  Plantation.  Trans, 
of  8  pers:  Henry  Willson,  Wm.  Porter, 
Robt.  Dorfeild,  Robt.  Lane,  Rich.  Wil- 
kins, Eliz.  Smith,  Rich.  Porter,  George 
Colt. 

WILLIAM  ROBINSON  &  CORNE- 
LIUS JOHNSON,  400  acs.  Westmore- 
land Co.,  6  Sept.  1654,  p.  284.  On  S. 
side  of  Petomeck  Riv.  &  N.  E.  side  of 
Oquy  Riv.,  bounded  on  E.  side  with 
land  of  Xph.  Boory  &  N.  W.  upon 
Capt.  Giles  Brent.  Trans,  of  8  pers: 
Robt.  Bord.  (?),  Eliz.  Parry,  Lawrence 
Dary,  Fra.  Morgan.  4  Negroes  by  asmt. 
of  Capt.  Morgan. 

RICHARD  COLEMAN,  1400  acs.  on 
N.  side  in  the  freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
about  16  mi.  above  Nanzemum  Towne; 
beg.  at  Hazeltree  poynt,  lying  on  Wwd. 
side  of  a  navigable  creek  called  Ware 
Cr.  &c.    7  Sept.  1654,  p.  284.    Due  by 


294 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


virtue  of  the  rights  of  two  patents  con- 
taining the  same  quantity  granted  to 
him,  11  Jan.  1652  &  by  him  relin- 
quished, etc. 

THO.  HARMANSON  (Hermanson), 
1300  acs.  Northampton  Co.,  being  a 
neck  or  island,  bounded  Ely.  by  Matche- 
pungo  Riv.  &c.  12  June  1654,  p.  285. 
Trans,  of  26  pers:  Wm.  Gibbs,  Jno. 
Square,  Eliz.  Arthur,  Geo.  Lemond, 
Hen.  Corner,  John  Lemond,  John  An- 
drew, Jno.  Waye,  Joan  Andrew  &  her 
sonn,  Mary  Lemond,  John  Wheeler, 
John  Dowry,  John  Ball,  Rich.  Hornett 
(or  Honnett),  William  Kayne,  Pastrow 
Cornwall,  James  Seckbone,  William 
Hill,  Wm.  Drye,  Emanuel  Cross,  An- 
drew Lock,  Biggony  Praise,  John 
Lemon,  John  Poole,  John  Keye. 

MAJOR  MILES  CAREY,  3,000  acs. 
in  Westmoreland  Co.,  5  Oct.  1654,  p. 
285.  Bounded  on  S.  W.  side  with  Oho- 
quin  Riv.,  on  S.  E.  with  land  of  Mr. 
Drayton  &  N.  W.  upon  a  swamp  near 
the  falls  of  sd.  river  dividing  this  & 
land  surveyed  for  Col.  Hump.  Higgen- 
son.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Roger  Daniel, 
Sen.,  Roger  Daniel,  Junr.,  Ann  Taylor, 
Thomas  Heynes,  Ro.  Synsbury,  Robt. 
Heynes,  John  Ledrick,  John  Squire, 
Ann  Whitson,  Marg.  Creese,  David 
Beoan,  Evan  Lewis,  Martin  Cheins, 
John  Berreman,  Ann  Colton,  Sam  Wil- 
bourn,  Andrew  Wyatt,  John  Haynes, 
Mary  Martin,  Mary  Cordecur,  Mary 
Taylor,  Ann  Bennes,  Jno.  Fatherell, 
Jenken  Wotten,  Walter  Johnson,  John 
Clark,  Ann  Madoxs,  Val.  Prentice, 
James  White,  Eliz.  Browne,  Rich. 
Workman,  Ann  Tildamus.  (Note:  This 
should,  no  doubt,  be  for  60  pers., 
although  but  32  names  appear.) 

CAPT.  WM.  WHITTINGTON,  800 

acs.  Northampton  Co.,  11  Mar.  1653, 
p.  286.  Beg.  at  N.  end  of  land  bought 
by  him  from  Capt.  Wm.  Stone,  to  head 
of  Mattawambs  main  branch  &c.  Trans, 
of  16  pers:  Wm.  Harrington,  Sam 
Shewell,  Wm.  Sherland,  Susan  Fowler, 
Cor.  the  Sweed,  Eliz.  Godwin,  Jo.  God- 
win, Devorux  Godwin,  Wm.  Whitting- 
ton,  Mary  his  wife,  Edward  Dru,  Mary 
Uxor  (his  wife),  Richard  Jacob,  Wm. 
Freeman,  Peter  Nowell,  Wm.  Varbread. 


ANTO.  HOSKINS,  400  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  11  Mar.  1653,  p.  286. 
Beg.  at  the  mouth  of  Kings  Cr.,  adj. 
land  of  Edmd.  Bibby  &c.  Granted  unto 
Capt.  Wm.  Epps,  3  Feb.  1626,  by  him 
deserted  &  granted  unto  sd.  Hoskins  by 
order  of  Govr.  &c.,6  Oct.  1653,  &  also 
due  for  trans,  of  8  pers:  Phillip  Risden, 
Henry  Vose,  Mary  Harding,  Derrick 
Jnoson.  (Johnson),  Thomas  Usher, 
Wm.  Willis,  Peter  Derickson,  Richard 
Turner. 

THO.  LOVINGE  (Loving),  400  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  behind  another  tract  of 
sd.  Loving,  in  Martins  hundred  Parrish, 
beg.  at  Northermost  angle  of  George 
Holmes  land,  unto  Capt.  Harwood,  in- 
cluding Abra.  Baker's  land,  to  York 
path.  5  July  1654,  p.  286.  Trans,  of 
8  pers.* 

RICH.  EGLESTONE,  900  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  9  Mar.  1653,  p.  287.  On  N. 
side  of  James  River,  beg.  Sly.  on  George 
Gilberts  devdt.,  Wly.  &  Nly.  on  Poetan 
Swampe  &  Ely.  on  Lady  Lunsfords  land. 
Due  by  purchase  of  a  survey  &  rights 
from  Mrs.  Eliza.  Whetherell,  the  relict 
&  admx.  of  Mr.  Ro.  Wetherell,  for 
trans,  of  18  pers.* 

JAMES  BARNABY,  150  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  2  Oct.  1654,  p.  287.  Adj. 
to  S.  E.  side  of  the  land  of  Peter  Lany, 
Orphant,  extending  along  a  main  branch 
of  Hungars  Cr.  unto  a  branch  dividing 
same  from  land  of  Wm.  Jones,  gent. 
&c.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Ann  Jorden, 
Simon  Foskutt,  Eliz.  Foskutt. 

MR.  WM.  WESTERHOUSE,  500  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  2  Oct.  1654,  p.  287. 
Near  Matchepungo,  Ely.  upon  a  creek 
issuing  out  of  Matchepungo  Riv.,  Nly. 
parted  by  marked  trees  from  the  land 
of  John  Towlson  &  Sly.  from  land  of 
Stephen  Charlton  &c.  Trans,  of  10 
pers:  Wm.  Westerhouse,  Senr.,  Wm. 
Westerhouse,  Junr,  Ledia  Westerhouse, 
Peter  Westerhouse,  Adrian  Westerhouse, 
Barbery  Westerhouse,  Marg.  Schin,  Law. 
Schin,  Winfred  Schin,  John  Martine. 

BENJAMIN  MATHEWS,  600  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  2  Oct.  1654,  p.  288. 
Upon  S.  side  of  Occohanock  Cr.,   300 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


295 


acs.  granted  unto  John  Baldwin,  15 
Sept.  1649  &  assigned  unto  sd. 
Mathewes ;  &  300  acs.  lying  at  the  head 
of  sd.  tract  &  due  for  trans,  of  6  pers: 
James  Towers,  Danl.  Martin,  Wm. 
Grey,   Mathew   Garrett,   Francis   Evans. 

MR.  NICH.  JERNEW,  200  acs.  on  S. 
side  Petomeck  Riv.,  Northumberland 
Co.,  p.  288.  (No  date.)  Beg.  at  a 
Persemon  tree  dividing  this  from  land 
of  Wm.  Rennolls  &c.  to  Pokikerry 
dividing  this  from  land  of  John  Earle, 
etc.  Granted  unto  Thomas  Wilkenson, 
18  Oct.  1650,  by  him  assigned  to  sd. 
Jernew  &  ordered  to  be  renewed  &c. 

RICHARD  WILCHIN,  300  acs. 
Gloster  Co.,  30  Sept.  1654,  p.  289.  On 
N.  E.  side  of  Poropotank  Cr.,  adj.  land 
of  John  Thomas  &c,  to  a  Cr.  dividing 
this  &  land  of  Mr.  Canho  &  Mr.  Vaus. 
200  acs.  by  vertue  of  the  rights  of  a  bill 
of  sale  for  so  much  from  Mrs.  Eliz. 
Vaus,  the  Atty.  of  Robt.  Vaus,  &  con- 
firmed by  Mr.  Hump.  Vaus  &  Mr. 
Joseph  Croshaw;  &  100  acs.  for  trans, 
of  2  pers:  Richard  Wilchin  &  his  wife 
Rachell. 

THOMAS  STRATTON,  257  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  5  Oct.  1654,  p.  289. 
Being  a  neck  called  Aqusca,  Wly.  upon 
Old  Plantation  Cr.,  &  cr.  Nly.  on  John 
Dennis,  &  Sly.  on  Henry  Charlton.  150 
acs.  granted  to  Wm.  Roper,  6  Nov. 
1636  &  assigned  unto  sd.  Stratton,  & 
107  acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Alice  (or 
Alin — altered)    Stratton,   Tho.   Stratton. 

PETER  KNIGHT,  1200  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  on  the  S.  of  great  Wico- 
comoco  Riv.,  2  Oct.  1654,  p.  290.  On 
the  head  of  the  Swd.  branch  of  sd. 
river,  E.  S.  E.  upon  land  of  Tho.  Cog- 
gen  &c.  Trans,  of  24  pers:  Robert 
Burrell,  his  wife  &  3  children  out  of 
Holland;  James  Haly,  Ann  his  wife; 
Fra.  Ann  &  Alice,  their  children;  John 
Foster,  Ruth  Darling,  James  Hill,  James 
Lloyd,  Deborah  Come,  James  Jones, 
John  Jerrell,  Wm.  Bradly,  Wm.  Slin- 
ton,  Jno.  Waddington. 

MATHEW  WILLIAMSON,  150  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  25  Feb.  1653,  p.  290. 
On   E.   side  of  Chycohominy  Riv.,   Sly. 


on  Willm.  Smith,  Wly.  on  Joseph  Kt. 
(Knight),  &  Nly.  on  the  arrow  reedy 
swamp.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Robert  Jones, 
Roger  Williams,  John  Paine. 

CAPT.  JOHN  WEST,  Esqr.,  one  of 
the  Councell  of  State,  3,000  acs.  on 
N.  E.  side  of  York  Riv  &  S.  W.  side 
of  Mettopony,  beg.  at  the  mouth  of 
tanks  Mattedequin,  running  up  the  main 
branch  of  same  to  Warranuncock  path 
&c.  to  the  mouth  of  a  creek  beneath  the 
Ancient  Indian  Ferry  on  Mattapony  &c, 
down  the  river  to  the  point  severing 
Mattopony  from  York  River,  etc.  6 
Mar.  1653,  p.  291.  850  acs.  part 
granted  by  patent,  &  residue  for  trans, 
of  49  pers.* 

WM.  WIGG,  250  acs.  James  City 
Co.,  26  Sept.  1654,  p.  291.  Upon  the 
S.  Wly.  side  of  tancks  Pasbehaies  Cr., 
opposite  land  of  Wm.  Fry  &  John  Dan- 
sey  called  by  the  name  of  Claibanck; 
sd.  land  lying  between  land  of  Brid. 
Freeman,  Gent.  &  Tho.  Rolfe,  adj. 
tanks  Pasbehaies  Cr.,  etc.  Granted  to 
his  father  Wm.  Wigg,  26  Nov.  1640, 
&  due  him  as  son  &  heir. 

SAME.  650  acs.  Same  Co.  and  date, 
p.  292.  In  Chicihomminy  Riv.,  over 
against  pease  hill,  adj.  upon  Warrick 
Cr.,  land  of  Bennett  Freeman,  Job" 
Robins,  Hen.  Porter  &  Ralph  Joyne\ 
Granted  to  his  father  23  Apr.  1641  & 
due  as  above. 

MAJOR  JOHN  CARTER,  1600  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  on  N.  side  of  Rappa. 
Riv.,  6  Sept.  1654,  p.  292.  From  the 
mouth  of  Corotoman  Riv.  extending  E. 
S.  E.  upon  Slaughter  ah.  Johns  Cr. 
N.  N.  W.  upon  a  branch  of  Corotoman 
River,  &  near  tract  of  Wm.  Clapham, 
Senr.  1300  acs.  by  patent  25  Mar.  1642 
&  300  acs.  by  patent  3  May  1652. 

JOHN  GREY,  300  acs.  Northampton 
Co.,  at  Matchepongo,  21  Nov.  1654,  p. 
293.  Bounding  Sly.  on  land  of  John 
Towlson.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Daniel 
Chambers,  John  Rose,  John  Hartopp, 
John  Jones,  John  Walerson,  Wm.  Con- 
nell. 

COL.  GEORGE  LUDLOW,  Esqr., 
186   acs.    being   a    neck   in    Pyanketank 


296 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Riv.,  extending  to  Matrons  Cr.,  &  E. 
by  N.  to  head  of  Utyes  Cr.,  etc. 
Granted  to  Benedict  Barber,  6  Mar. 
1650,  assigned  to  sd.  Ludlow  &  re- 
newed by  order  of  the  Govr.  &c. 

RANDALL  CHAMBLETT,  500  acs. 
upon  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  upon  head 
of  Sharps  Cr.  &  running  behind  land 
formerly  taken  up  by  John  Sharpe.  22 
Nov.  1654,  p.  293.  Trans,  of  10  pers: 
Hen.  Bore,  Mary  Wms.  (Williams), 
Mary  Fry,  Jno.  Haling,  Robt.  Thomas, 
Eliz.  Collinge,  Jno.  Brathard,  Fra. 
Bland,  Tho.  Land,  Jeremy  Hicks.  As- 
signed by  Capt.  Fleet. 

THO.  BELL,  350  acs.  Northampton 
Co.,  21  Nov.  1654,  p.  294.  Near 
Matchepongo,  butting  Ely.  upon  devdt. 
of  Edwd.  Harrington,  late  deed.  Trans. 
7  pers:  Mary  Saunders,  Edward  Barnes, 
John  Williams,  Eliz.  Hobson,  Robert 
Adkins,  Tho.  Broadway,  Alexander 
Couch. 

RICH.  BUNDUCH,  650  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  21  Nov.  1654,  p.  294.  On 
S.  side  of  Pongotgue  Cr.,  Ely.  upon 
Pocomock  Cr.  &  Nly.  on  land  of  Nicho- 
las Waddilow.  Trans,  of  13  pers:  John 
Smith,  Senr.,  John  Smith,  Junr.,  Rich- 
ard Harrison,  John  Clerk,  Phillis  Smith, 
Ann  Smith,  Jno.  Margetts,  Tea.  Wright, 
Mary  Randall,  George  Smith,  Ann 
Hawes,  Shela  Dennis,  Roger  Spin,  (last 
name  abbreviated.) 

RICH.  JNOSON  (Johnson  —  also 
given  as  John),  Negro,  100  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  21  Nov.  1654,  p.  294.  On 
S.  side  of  Pongoteague  Riv.,  Ely.  upon 
Pocomock  Nly.  upon  land  of  John 
Jnoson.,  Negro,  Wly.  upon  Anto.  Jno- 
son.,  Negro,  &  Sly.  upon  Nich.  Waddi- 
low. Trans,  of  2  pers:  Wm.  Ames, 
Wm.  Vincent. 

JOHN  CURTIS,  200  acs.  Accomack 
Co.,  24  Nov.  1654,  p.  295.  On  N.  side 
of  Nuswattocks  Cr.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
John  Wapp,  Hugh  Creeye,  Alexander 
Hall,  Jno.  Glamfeild.  Assigned  to  him 
by  Capt.  Wm.  Whitington. 

LUKE  BILLINGTON,  250  acs.  in 
Accomack  Co.,  24  Nov.  1654,  p.  295. 
On   the   bay   side,    bounded    Sly.    by   a 


devdt.  belonging  to  Col.  Fra.  Yardly, 
Nly.  towards  the  Colemans  branch,  etc. 
Trans,  of  5  pers:  Mary  Cunny,  (or 
Curry),  Morgan  Mackland,  Judith  Gas- 
sett,  Wm.  Jack,  Margt.  Oshulivan. 
Note:  This  patent  is  relinquished  and 
the  rights  assigned  to  Jno.  Wms.  (Wil- 
liams)  Test:    Tho.  Brereton. 

WILLIAM  JOHNSON,  Merchant, 
Taylor,  400  acs.  in  Northampton  Co., 
24  Nov.  1654,  p.  295.  At  Anancock, 
on  W.  side  of  a  creek  parting  this  from 
land  of  Nich.  Waddilow  &  on  E.  with 
a  branch  parting  same  from  land  of 
John  Browne.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Wil- 
liam Johnson,  Symon  Bringley,  Robt. 
Parke,  John  Waller,  Joan  Parker,  Joan 
Steare,   Hen.  Etheridge,  John  Holding. 

WM.  THORNE,  387  acs.  Northamp- 
ton Co.,  at  Occahanock  Cr.,  21  Nov. 
1654,  p.  296.  Adj.  land  of  Richard 
Smith  &  Richard  Kellam.  Trans,  of  8 
pers:  Joan  Mills,  Rich.  Knight,  Tho. 
Stratbridge,  Dorothy  Jordan,  Wm.  Jor- 
dan, Wm.  Marloe,  Sanders  Mitchener, 
John  Thompson. 

JOHN  WILLIAMS,  300  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  21  Nov.  1654,  p.  296.  At 
the  head  of  Hungars  main  branch,  etc. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  John  Edwards,  Mary 
Edwards,  John  Hazlewood,  Robert  Hart, 
Eliz.  Razor,  Margt.  Edwards. 

RICHARD  ALLEN,  500  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  21  Nov.  1654,  p.  296. 
Near  Matchepongo,  called  by  the  name 
of  Aliens  Quarter,  Ely.  on  land  of  Tho. 
Harmison,  Wly.  towards  Occahamack 
Cr.,  &  Nly.  upon  a  branch  parting  this 
from  land  of  Capt.  Fra.  Pott.  Trans,  of 
10  pers:  Edward  Stephens,  Tho.  Bul- 
lock, John  Mapp,  Joane  Taffe,  Sam. 
Young,  Ann  Johnson,  Mary  Union,  John 
Curtis,  James  Edwards,  Ralph  Hacker- 


MR.  CHARLES  GRYMES,  CI. 
(Clerk),  600  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  on  S. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  4  Sept.  1654,  p. 
297.  Beg.  at  a  Pequoson  or  sunken 
land  over  against  the  Douges  land  above 
Nanzemum.    Trans,  of  12  pers.* 

SAME.  Same  acreage,  county,  page 
&  date.    Trans,  of  12  pers.* 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


297 


CAPT.  DAVID  MANSELL,  600  acs. 
Westmoreland  Co.,  upon  S.  side  of 
Pecomeck  Cr.,  6  Oct.  1654,  p.  297. 
Beg.  at  a  branch  of  sd.  creek  dividing 
this  from  land  of  Col.  Tho.  Pettus. 
Trans,  of  12  pers:  Fra.  Hutchins,  Tho. 
Newman,  Ben.  Venison,  Eliz.  Lucas, 
Eliz.  Moales,  Edw.  Phipps,  Hannah 
Huntly,  Tho.  Army,  Clerepian,  Ann 
Jones,  Jane  Mansfeild,  Eliz.  Mansfeild. 

THO.  SALSBURY,  300  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  10  Oct.  1654,  p.  298.    On  S.  W. 

side  of  Haddaways  Cr.  bounding  N.  Ely. 
upon  sd.  Cr.  where  Salisbury  hath  built, 
seated  and  cleared  formerly,  N.  Wly.  on 
land  of  Eppy  Bonison  &  S.  Ely.  towards 
land  of  Humphry  Tabb.  Trans,  of  6 
pers:  Hugh  Yoe,  Wm.  Yoe,  Eliz. 
Rosser,  Oliver  Soreland,  Edwd.  Gunter, 
Tho.  Smith.  By  assignmt.  from  Steph. 
Horsey. 

CAPT.  ROBERT  HENFEILD,  500 
acs.  on  S.  side  of  Petomack  Riv.  &  W. 
side  of  Nomeny  Riv.,  beg.  at  a  branch 
dividing  this  from  land  of  John  Hare. 
24  Nov.  1654,  p.  298.  Granted  unto 
Lewis  Burwell,  10  Oct.  1650  &  assigned 
unto  Tho.  Yowell,  who  assigned  same 
unto  sd.  Henfeild  &  now  renewed  by 
order  of  the  Quarter  Court. 

JOHN  DEBARR,  200  acs.  in  the  W. 
branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  6  Oct.  1654,  p. 
298.  Adj.  Thomas  Wrights  land  & 
Richard  Starlinge.  Granted  unto  sd. 
Debarr  6  Nov.  1653,  &  since  proved 
deserted  land,  as  appears  by  order  of  the 
Co.  Ct.  of  Low.  Norf.,  21  Sept.  1654. 

THO.  HUMPHREYES,  600  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  upon  Nwd.  part 
of  Fleets  Bay,  about  half  a  mile  up 
Haddaways  Cr.  Granted  to  Abra. 
Moone,  3  Aprl.  1651  &  assigned  unto 
Mr.  Robt.  Wetherell,  &  by  Mrs.  Eliza- 
beth Whetherell,  Admx.,  assigned  unto 
Tho.  Duncomb,  who  assigned  unto  sd. 
Humphreyes,  &  now  renewed  by  order 
&c.    Sept.  1654,  p.  299. 

R.  (Rowland)  LAWSON,  400  acs. 
upon  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  at 
Eastmost  extent  of  the  land  of  Geo. 
Eaton,  etc.,  unto  sd.  Lawson's  former 
grant  &c.    6  Oct.  1654,  p.  299.    Trans. 


of  8  pers:  Bernard  Geines,  Eliz.  Geines, 
Mary  Palmer,  Rose  Love,  Fra.  Plumer, 
Thomas  Jones,  Roger  Clatworth,  Dennis 
Foard. 

WM.  BEACH,  700  acs.  Westmore- 
land Co.,  10  June  1654,  p.  299.  On  S. 
side  of  Petomeck  Riv.,  &  N.  side  of 
Petomeck  Creek,  against  land  of  Mr. 
Robt.  Yoe.  Trans,  of  14  pers:  Wm. 
Rathbourne,  James  Hint,  Wm.  James, 
John  James,  Wm.  Long,  Geo.  Saynes, 
Wm.  Remmons,  Rich.  Burton,  Jno. 
Penenton,  Tho.  Elnor,  Tho.  Durant, 
John  Smith;  2  Negroes.  Marginal  Note: 
7  June  1655  Mr.  Fouke,  the  assignee  of 
sd.  Beach,  ackd.  the  sale  hereof  to  Wm. 
Earsby   (or  Earsly). 

ANTHONY  STEPHENS,  500  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  6  Oct.  1654,  p.  300.  On 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  upon  Deep  Cr., 
down  a  branch  parting  this  &  land  of 
John  Place.  Renewal  of  patent  granted 
26  Mar.   1650. 

JOHN  CARR,  150  acs.  near  the  head 
of  the  Southern  branch  of  Nanzemum 
River.  20  Nov.  1654,  p.  300.  Trans. 
of  3  pers:  Wm.  Hardy,  David  Carts, 
Edward  Wirrall. 

JOHN  THOMAS,  174  acs.  Nanze- 
mum Co.,  19  Nov.  1654,  p.  300.  Upon 
Ewd.  side  of  New  Towne  Haven  Riv. 
150  acs.  at  miles  end  of  Humph. 
Scoven,  &  24  acs.  adj.  his  own,  lands 
Mr.  Jordan  &  Tho.  Best.  150  acs. 
granted  to  Peter  Mountegue,  18  Dec. 
1645  &  assigned  to  sd.  Thomas;  &  the 
residue  for  trans,  of  1  pers:  Wm. 
Skeed;  Susan  Jacob,  Edward  Powell, 
Mary  Watkins,  "3  last  due." 

GEORGE  LEDDALL,  Gent.,  1750 
acs.  York  Co.,  25  Nov.  1654,  p.  301. 
On  S.  side  of  York  Riv.  behind  land  of 
Capt.  John  West  called  Chomocken, 
running  by  Black  Cr.  to  Croshaws  Ex- 
tent &c.  Assigned  by  Mr.  Joseph  Cro- 
shaw,  to  whom  it  was  granted  8  Nov. 
1653. 

MR.  THOMAS  FOWKE,  Merchant, 
3,350  acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  10  June 
1654,  p.  301.  Upon  S.  side  of  Peto- 
meck Riv.    Upon  the  head  of  a  branch 


298 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


of  Petomeck  Cr.  dividing  this  &  a  tract 
known  by  the  name  of  the  Fort  land  &c. 
2,000  acs.  granted  to  Mrs.  Jane  Harmer, 
1  Dec.  1652  &  assigned  unto  sd.  Fowke; 
&  1350  acs.  for  trans,  of  27  pers: 
Gerard  Fowke,  Tho.  Fowke,  John  Bay- 
ley,  Robt.  Dycott,  Rich.  Holbar,  John 
Halbar,  Robt.  Mosley,  Wm.  Newell, 
Edwd.  Carey,  Rich.  Granger,  Rob.  Land, 
Tho.  Grey,  Ben.  Price,  Tho.  Hankes  (or 
Haukes),  Charles  Gregory,  Hen.  Hat- 
burn,  Mary  Joyner,   John   Haten,   John 

Dryver,     Hannah    ,     Brid.     Carey, 

Mary  Peneales,  Wm.  Walden,  Rich. 
Horton,  John  Martin,  John  Coule  (or 
Conle). 

MR.  BARTHOLOMEW  HOSKINS, 
800  acs.  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  on  Nwd.  side 
of  broad  Cr.,  1  Dec.  1654,  p.  302.  400 
acs.  on  sd.  Cr.,  being  an  Ewd.  branch 
of  Eliz.  Riv.  The  residue  on  the  miles 
end  of  sd.  tract.  The  first  400  acs. 
granted  to  sd.  Hoskins  6  Mar.  1648,  & 
the  latter  400  acs.  29  Apr.  1653. 

COL.  HUMP.  HIGGENSON  & 
ABRAHAM  MOONE,  2,000  Westmore- 
land Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Petomeck  Riv. 
&  S.  W.  side  of  a  N.  W.  branch  known 
as  Ohoquin  Riv.,  20  Sept.  1654,  p.  302. 
Beg.  at  a  swamp  dividing  this  &  land  of 
Col.  Thomas  Burbage.  Trans,  of  40 
pers:  Mrs.  Hegginson,  Susan  Russell, 
Tho.  Owin,  Do.  Hanerly,  Robt.  Orrey, 
Wm.  Price,  Duntan  (or  Duncan)  Grey, 
John  Wooles,  Eliz.  Hutton,  Tho.  Reley, 
Wm.  Wottson,  Ja.  Wmson.  (William- 
son), Lucy  Phillips,  Tho.  Pottblade, 
Tho.  Clerk,  Peter  Hargrove,  John 
Meares,  And.  Buttler,  John  Orton, 
Nich.  Limbson,  Rich.  Sarson,  Eliz.  Jury, 
Dan.  Rouse,  Eliz.  Barne,  Rich.  Bullerd, 
Tho.  Bullerd,  Wm.  Furbusher,  Negroes: 
John,  Kate,  Thorn.,  Jeny,  Betty,  Ann, 
Humphry,  Franke,  Mow.,  Sugar,  Mihill, 
John  &  Madge. 

WALTER  BROOKES,  460  acs. 
Charles  City  Co.,  12  Mar.  1654,  p.  303. 
In  Bristoll  Parish;  160  acs.  on  Ely.  side 
of  the  Citty  Cr.  &  N.  on  Appamatuck 
Riv;  300  acs.  running  E.  along  the  head 
of  Nath.  Tatums  land  &  N.  to  head  of 
John  Barkers  (or  Bakers)  land.  160 
acs.  purchased  by  John  Howell  of  Nath. 
Tatum,    Sr.   &   sold   to   sd.   Brooks;    & 


300  acs.  for  trans,  of  6  pers:  Peter 
Read,  Eliz.  Richeson. 

LT.  COL.  GILES  BRENT,  1518  acs. 
Westmoreland  Co.,  27  Nov.  1654,  p. 
303.  768  acs.  N.  E.  upon  Petomeck 
Riv.  &  Nly.  upon  Oquioh  Riv;  &  750 
acs.  N.  E.  upon  Petomeck  Riv.,  &  N. 
W.  upon  his  own  land.  768  acs. 
granted  to  him  20  Aug.  1651  &  750 
acs.  granted  to  John  Rookwood,  20 
Aug.  1651,  by  him  deserted  &  granted 
to  sd.  Brent  by  order  &c,  &  for  trans, 
of  15  pers:  Dan.  Gardner,  Barbara 
Hayles,  Morris  Owen,  Xpher.  Gouth, 
(or  Gouch),  Wm.  Milton,  John  Fred- 
erick, William  Williams,  Dorothy 
Lewis,  Hen.  Biggs,  Edw.  Huntly,  Grace 
Browne,  John  Raven,  Richard  a  Welch- 
man,  Jone  ,  John  Coleman. 

HENRY  WALKER,  480  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  16  July  1654,  p.  304.  Adj. 
land  of  Richard  Vardy  &  Lady  Lunsford. 
N.  by  Poetan  Ponds  up  to  his  corner 
tree,  etc.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Ann  Ship- 
pard,  Garrett  Peggis,  Tho.  Pitts,  Mat. 
Goodwin,  Jacob  Browne,  Joan  Wilcox, 
Tho.  Wardly,  Hen.  Baxter,  Henry 
Sherly. 

COL.     HUMPHRY     HIGGENSON, 

one  of  the  Councill  of  State,  &  THO- 
MAS HIGGENSON,  his  sonn,  800  acs. 
Gloster  Co.,  20  Sept.  1654,  p.  304. 
Upon  S.  side  of  Pyanketanck  Riv.,  beg. 
at  the  mouth  of  a  Cr.  dividing  this  from 
land  of  Col.  Hugh  Gwin,  now  in  pos- 
session of  Wm.  Armstead,  500  acs.  by 
assignmt.  from  Col.  Ludlow  of  a  patent 
of  2,000  acres,  &  3000  acs.  for  trans,  of 
6  pers.* 

JAMES  ARTHURS  &  JOHN  BAR- 
DON,  450  acs.  Nanzemum  Co.,  24  Nov. 
1654,  p.  304.  On  the  N.  W.  branch  of 
Nanzemum  Riv.,  being  part  of  an  In- 
dian Towne.  Formerly  granted  unto  sd. 
Arthurs  &  Peter  Ells,  9  Apr.  1648,  pur- 
chased by  &  renewed  by  order,  etc.,  in 
name  of  sd.  Arthurs  &  Bardon. 

SAME.  100  acs.  Same  county,  date, 
page  &  consideration. 

MR.  FRANCIS  HAMON,  (Hamond) 
2,000  acs.  York  Co.,   1   Nov.   1654,  p. 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


299 


305.  Bounded  on  N.  by  Metopony  Riv., 
&  lands  of  Wm.  Lewis  on  E.  S.  E. 
Trans,  of  40  pers:  Robert  Vaus,  Eliz. 
Vaus,  Susan  Vaus,  Hump.  Vaus,  Jane 
English,  John  Clint,  Abig.  Truce,  Jane 
Hodges,  Wm.  Freeman,  Fra.  Lawrenson, 
Senr.,  Fra.  Lawrenson,  Junr.,  William 
Dru,  Charles  Edmonds,  Richard  Howell, 
Rich.  No  vis,  Luke  Peele,  John  Wood- 
ington,  Giles  Brook,  Wm.  Webb,  Fra. 
Hamond,  Mana.  Hamond,  Martin  Clif- 
ford, Jno.  Knatchpoole,  John  Baker,  Ro. 
Parkenson,  John  King,  Henry  King, 
Richard  Payne,  Mary  Paine,  Cor.  Dawl- 
ing,  Wm.  Greeman,  Rich.  Okell,  Rich- 
ard Salter,  Alex.  Southerland,  John 
Miller,  Dave  Bane,  Alex.  King,  Jno. 
Robenson,  Wm.  Peasly,  Thomas  Free- 
man, 

COL.  JOHN  MATROM,  3,609  acs. 
Westmoreland  Co.,  7  Oct.  1654,  p.  306. 
2,109  acs.  butting  Sly.  upon  Petomeck 
Riv.,  this  tract  known  as  the  Doegs  Is- 
land. 1,000  acs.  S.  upon  a  creek  parting 
it  from  sd.  Island,  Wly.  upon  land  of 
John  Jenkins,  Ely.  towards  land  of  Mr. 
Tho.  Speake.  2,109  acs.  granted  to 
Richard  Twiney,  8  July  1651,  &  1,000 
acs.  granted  to  John  Jenkins,  14  May 
1653,  both  of  which  patentees  assigned 
to  sd.  Matrom  &  now  renewed;  &  500 
acs.  due  for  trans,  of  10  pers:  Rob. 
Page,  Dan.  Cortnake,  (or  Cormake), 
David  Price  James  Savage,  Anth.  John- 
son, John  Clay,  Fra.  Rickett,  John  Nor- 
man, Wm.  Luke. 

JOHN  CRUMP,  1250  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  29  Nov.  1654,  p.  306.  By 
Mr.  Batts  landing,  etc.  On  main  branch 
of  the  Gleab  land  Cr.,  etc.  750,  acs. 
granted  to  Rich.  Buck,  20  Jan.  1619", 
500  acs.  granted  to  Peleg  Buck  29  May 
1638  &  descended  unto  sd.  Crump  by 
inheritance;  &  250  acs.  for  trans,  of 
5   pers.* 


Wm.  Charly,  which  by  purchase  be- 
comes wholly  to  sd.  Martin;  &  150  acs. 
by  patent  to  him  dated  18  Sept.  1644; 
&  850  acs.  by  patent  to  him  dated  20 
Oct.  1651. 

CAPT.  MORE  FANTLEROY,  1800 
acs.  in  Rappa.  Riv.  on  the  N.  side.,  6 
Oct.  1654,  p.  307.  Beg.  on  the  Wwd. 
side  of  the  mouth  of  Bushwood  Cr.  & 
adj.  land  of  William  Underwood. 
Granted  sd.  Fantleroy,  22  May  1650  & 
by  him  assigned  unto  Michael  Winds- 
more;  purchased  of  sd.  Windsmore  & 
now  renewed  in  his  own  name. 

LT.  COL.  BRIDGES  FREEMAN, 
1325  acs.,  known  by  the  name  of 
Tomahunn,  in  James  City  Co.,  on  S.  W. 
side  of  Chicihominy  Riv.,  bounded  from 
the  mouth  of  Jureinge  point  Cr.  N.  W. 
&c.  to  Sam  Payne  Cr.  &c.  20  Sept. 
1654,  p.  307.  900  acs.  by  patent  dated 
11  Aug.  1637  &  425  acs.  for  trans,  of 
9  pers.* 

SAME.  1011  acs.  upon  the  S.  side  of 
the  mouth  of  Chycohominy  Riv.,  run- 
ning from  his  own  landing  down  sd. 
Riv.,  S.  S.  E.  to  long  point  at  the  river's 
mouth,  down  James  Riv.  E.  by  S.  to 
Mr.  Harvys  land  &c.  to  Merrymans  Cr., 
against  the  house  in  the  Island  &c. 
round  the  bay  by  the  Woodyard  to  sd. 
landing.  400  acs.  by  patent  1  Oct. 
1630,  renewed  21  Mar.  1643;  100  acs. 
&  150  acs.  by  patents  dated  11  &  12 
Aug.  1637;  100  acs.  by  patent  5  Aug. 
1640;   261   acs.  for  trans,   of  5   pers.* 

CAPT.  GILES  BRENT,  300  acs. 
Westmoreland  Co.,  6  July  1654,  p.  308. 
Bounded  with  land  of  Xpher.  Booze, 
Oqui  Riv.  &  his  own  land,  including 
the  great  rock.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Rich- 
ard Aston,  Richard  Hampton,  David 
Henry,  Robt.  Mathews,  David  Lamkin, 
Walter  Rawlins. 


JOHN  MARTIN,  1400  acs.,  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  in  Lyn  Haven  Parish,  2  Oct. 
1654,  p.  307.  Bounded  on  N.  W.  with 
Bennetts  Cr.,  running  to  Symon  Barrows 
land  &  adj.  land  Adam  Thoroughgood. 
400  acs.  granted  to  Jonathan  Langworth, 
Chyrurgeon,  10  May  1638  &  by  him 
assigned  unto  John  Holmes,  who  as- 
signed  to    sd.    Martin,    Tho.    Cheely   & 


ROBERT,  THOMAS  &  WILLIAM 
MOSS,  Brothers,  800  acs.  Lancaster  Co. 
in  the  freshes  of  the  Rappa.  Riv.  on  the 
S.  side;  20  Nov.  1654,  p.  309.  Beg. 
at  a  creek  dividing  this  &  land  of  John 
Wyere,   etc.    Trans,   of   16  pers.* 

ALEX.  PORTUS  &  THOMAS 
WILLIAMS,  271  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  20 


300 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Nov.  1654,  p.  309.  On  N.  side  of 
Rappa.  Riv.,  at  the  head  of  land  of 
Rawleigh  Travers,  extending  to  Wwd. 
side  of  a  Cr.  dividing  this  &  land  of 
Thomas  Powell  &c.  Trans,  of  5  pers: 
Anth.  North,  John  Smith,  John  Stainin- 
brow,  Henry  Carter,  Eliz.  Minshem. 

ARTHUR  NASH,  950  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  6  Dec.  1654,  p.  309.  400 
acs.  beg.  at  Wly.  branch  of  Propotanck 
main  swamp  on  the  head  of  Poropotanck 
Cr.,  &  550  acs.  on  S.  side  the  main 
swamp  adj.  tract  surveyed  for  Tho.  Cox, 
etc.  Trans,  of  19  pers:  William  Long. 
James  Lewis,  John  James,  John  Stow, 
Alex.  Farlow,  James  Baxter,  Robert 
Just,  Abraham  Warren,  Joan  Price, 
Robt.  Catesby,  James  Cordell,  Nich. 
Woodhouse,  Fra.  Statherd,  JefTry  Smith, 
Hercules  Talbott,  William  Phillips, 
Alex.  Sumpson,  (or  Sampson),  David 
Welch,  Sampson  Carey. 

RICHARD  WHITE,  Cooper,  500  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  12  Dec.  1654,  p.  310. 
Within  the  freshes  of  sd.  river  opposite 
to  Nanzemond  Towne,  adj.  land  of 
Charles  Grymes  &  Abra.  Moone.  Trans, 
of  10  pers.*    Renewed  2  Dec.  1657. 

EDWARD  SIMPSON,  100  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  15  Feb.  1654,  p.  310.  Beg. 
by  Pepeticafcr.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Sarah 
Smith,   Robert   Spence. 

ROGER  WALTERS,  1,000  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  28  Feb.  1654,  p. 
311.  On  N.  side  great  Wicocomoco 
Riv.  upon  two  creeks  of  sd.  Riv.,  the 
one  above  Larretts  Point,  commonly 
called  St.  Johns  Cr.,  &  the  other,  divid- 
ing lands  of  Thomas  Saffall  &  William 
Thomas,  called  SafTells  Cr.,  &  towards 
land  of  Col.  Claybourne.  600  acs. 
granted  him  last  of  Dec.  1653;  &  400 
acs.  for  trans,  of  8  pers:  Nath.  Sheap- 
ard,  Robert  Trasey,  John  Parris,  Rich. 
Bradfort,  Fra.  Gage,  Jno.  Alexander, 
Edmund  Cuspe,  (or  Crispe),  John 
Foulsham. 

MAJOR  WILLIAM  ANDREWS, 
1500  acs.  Northampton  Co.,  at  great 
Nuswattucks  Cr.,  24  Feb.  1654,  p.  311. 
Beg.  at  the  4th  neck  up  sd.  Cr.  & 
parted  by  a  branch  from   land   of  Mr. 


Parker.  Trans,  of  30  pers:  Guiles 
Cope,  Eliz.  Watkins,  Tho.  Norman, 
Tho.  Morris,  Nich.  Squires,  Mar.  Ed- 
wards, Rob.  Renolls,  Y.  Renolls. 

VINCENT  STANFORD,  500  acs.  on 
N.  side  the  freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
about  6  mi.  above  Nanzemum  towne; 
beg.  at  a  swamp  dividing  this  &  land 
of  John  Gillett.  20  Nov.  1654,  p.  311. 
Trans,  of  10  pers.* 

SAME.  800  acs.  Same  location,  & 
date,  p.  312.  Beg.  at  a  marked  oake 
dividing  this  &  land  of  Col.  Saml. 
Mathews.    Trans,  of   16  pers.* 

CAPT.  NICHOLAS  MARTEAW, 
2,000  acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  25  Oct. 
1654,  p.  312.  On  S.  side  of  Petomack 
Riv.,  S.  upon  a  creek  dividing  this  & 
land  of  Col.  Mathews,  E.  upon  sd.  Riv. 
&  N.  upon  Quanticott  Cr.  Trans,  of 
40  pers:  Edward  Beedle,  John  Betts, 
James  Jurne,  John  Beard,  Wm.  Whitby, 
Tho.  Hull,  William  French,  John  Tay- 
lor, Hugh  Rey,  Sarah  Ginsey,  Ellinor 
Sheappard,  John  Jeffryes,  Rich.  Adams, 
Tho.  Griffeth,  Brd.  Prenthrall,  Sym. 
Penifell,  John  Dawson,  Wm.  Perrigoe, 
Godfry  &  Margery  Willis,  Rich.  Whit- 
by, Hen.  Ellyott,  Eliz.  Mucer,  Margery 
Blewett,  John  Cox,  Wm.  Groves,  Wm. 
&  Eliz.  Tyler,  Tho.  Caresy,  Robt.  Caresy, 
Tho.  Cartwright,  Peter  Ingam  (or 
Jugam),  Jno.  Penington,  Tho.  Ellmore, 
Tho.  Durant,  Hen.  Plaine,  Ann  Smith, 
Tho.  Curant,  2  Negroes. 

ROBERT  HUBARD,  1600  acs.  West- 
moreland Co.,  on  S.  side  Petomack  Riv., 
12  Dec.  1654,  p.  313.  Beg.  at  a  branch 
of  Oqui  Riv.  extending  W.  along  land 
of  Capt.  Mason  &c.  Trans,  of  32  pers: 
Gowry  Macalster,  John  Macalster,  Hec- 
tor Macalster,  Dan.  Grey,  John  Wright, 
John  Cook,  Tho.  Levin,  Wm.  George, 
Robt.  Pointer,  John  Foot,  Hen.  Odell, 
Ann  Child,  Rich.  Welch,  Wm.  Ginings, 
Mich.  Upchurch,  Fra.  Shelton,  Tho. 
Green,  Jno.  Barkworth,  James  Collett, 
Tho.  Wood,  Thomas  Cuttler,  Eliz.  Wat- 
son, John  Hall,  Davy  Marlett,  Geo. 
Hilliar,  Wm.  Arnoll,  Tho.  Tooly,  Eliz. 
Browne,  William  Cart,  Wm.  Sar,  Mary 
Wells. 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


301 


RICHARD  MARSHFEILD,  100  acs. 
in  the  W.  branch  of  Nanzemum  Riv., 
adj.  his  own  land,  28  Nov.  1654,  p. 
313.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Eliz.  Johnson, 
Wm.  Grissell. 

JOHN  DRAYTON,  (Draton— Drai- 
ton),  2,000  acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  25 
Nov.  1654,  p.  313.  On  S.  side  of 
Petomeck  Riv.,  E.  S.  E.  upon  a  branch 
dividing  this  &  Doegs  Island,  N.  E. 
upon  a  branch  divid.  this  &  land  Mr. 
Tho.  Speak,  N.  W.  upon  land  of  Mr. 
Miles  Carey  &  S.  W.  upon  Ohoquin 
Riv.  Trans,  of  40  pers:  John  Taylor, 
Robert  Robinson,  Xpher.  Oxford,  John 
Lathrop,  Robert  Crouch,  Robert  Freith, 
William  Pue,  Ann  Saunders,  James 
Hardway,  Root.  Levitt,  John  Ludson, 
John  How,,  Geo.  Oliver,  John  Read, 
Hen.  Hoopes,  Clemt.  Whidon,  Richard 
Mogeredge,  Robt.  Case,  Edward  Lane, 
John  Walton,  Hester  Lucye,  Wm.  Pur- 
nell,  James  Ball,  Dorothy  Dutton,  John 
Draiton,  Tho.  Titus,  Jeffry  Monford, 
Jno.  Gunsby,  Isaac  Towney,  Fra.  Ram. 
(or  Rain),  Adrell  Shippard,  Silvest. 
Remington,  Neale  St.  Clare,  Wm.  Scott, 
Tho.  Gilnett,  Wm.  Barker,  Jno.  Auston, 
John,  Teague,  &  Nicholas  Irishmen. 

THOMAS  EVERIDGE,  200  acs.  in 
Southern  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  beg.  at 
miles  end  of  Thomas  White.  27  Mar. 
1655,  p.  314.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  George 
Glayne,  Mary  his  wife,  George  Glayne, 
Junr.,  Anthony  Clerk. 

JAMES  GEATES  (GATES),  20^  acs. 
on  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  on 
Wwd.  side  of  a  creek  dividing  this  & 
land  of  John  Phillips,  W.  N.  W.  upon 
Powells  Cr.  &  by  land  of  Thomas 
Cooper.  28  Nov.  1654,  p.  314.  100 
acs.  granted  to  Evan  Griffeth,  2  Sept. 
1652;  &  100  acs.  granted  to  John 
Phillips,  8  Mar.  1652,  both  of  which 
sd.  Phillips  assigned  to  Gates. 

JOHN  GUTTERIDGE,  350  acs.  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  23  Mar.  1654,  p.  315. 
Bounding  from  Mr.  Flintons  land  &c, 
175  poles  being  the  Eastermost  part  of 
the  Alpes.  Granted  to  Henry  Hurd,  11 
Nov.  1642  &  assigned  by  Walter  Hurd, 
who  is  possest  thereof,  to  sd.  Gutteridge. 


ELIZABETH  GWIN,  700  acs.  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  23  Mar.  1654,  p.  315. 
About  2  mi.  up  the  lower  bay,  on  the 
W.  side,  beg.  at  a  small  Hand  called 
Bennetts  Park,  adj.  land  of  Sam  Jackson 
&c,  running  to  Goose  Hill  Cr.  &  to 
Seawards  Cr.  Due  as  Exix.  of  Hugh 
Gwin,  who  patented  the  land  3  Mar. 
1640. 

SINKLER  PAGETT,  200  acs.  Nanze- 
mum Co.,  17  Mar.  1654,  p.  315. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  Thomas  Snow,  John 
Bennett,   Richard   Powell,  John   Heifer. 

EDWARD  COOK,  100  acs.  in  W. 
branch  of  Nanzemum  Riv.,  adj.  his  own 
&  land  of  William  Parker.  17  Mar. 
1654,  p.  316.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  James 
Cany,  George  Gourdon. 

ROBERT  BOWERS,  100  acs.  in  the 
W.  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  17  Mar.  1654, 
p.  316.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Wm.  Wash- 
brow,  Edward  Davis. 

SAME.  300  acs.  at  the  head  of 
Symons  Cr.,  a  branch  of  the  W.  branch 
of  Eliz.  Riv.  Same  date  &  page.  Trans, 
of  6  pers:  John  Walker,  Wm.  Saunders, 
Elizabeth  Saunders,  Francis  Harper, 
Symon  Harper  &  his  wife. 

FRA.  SPIGHT,  300  acs.  Nanzemum 
Co.,  17  Mar.  1654,  p.  317.  Trans,  of 
6  pers:  Abraham  Standford,  James 
Prouce,  Alexander  Dunbarr,  John  Jack- 
son, Thomas  Lightoll,  Mary  Wells. 

JOHN  SKERRETT,  300  acs.  in  the 
S.  branch  of  Nanzemum  Riv.,  on  the 
N.  side  thereof,  17  Mar.  1654,  p.  317. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  John  Bates,  Joan 
GrifTen,  Symon  Sickard,  John  Gunn, 
William  Ludlow,  John  Piper. 

CAPT.  AUGUSTINE  WARNER  & 
MR.  JOHN  ROBINS,  594  acs.  on  N. 
side  of  Severnes,  in  Mockjack  Bay;  beg. 
at  the  mouth  of  Lutus  (or  Lucas)  Cr. 
14  Mar.  1654,  p.  317.  Trans,  of  12 
pers:  Wm.  Thomas,  John  Williams, 
Richard  Williams,  Mary  Smith,  Jno. 
Mockay,  1  Negro,  Dan.  Frissell,  Senr., 
Dan.  Frissell,  Junr.  Thomas  

MAJOR  ABRAHAM  WOOD,  406 
acs.  Henrico  Co.,  on  N.  side  of  Appa- 


302 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


mattuck  Riv.,  near  the  falls,  6  Dec. 
1654,  p.  318.  From  the  Riv.  along  Mr. 
Reelyes  land.  Formerly  granted  unto 
Major  William  Bellew,  by  him  deserted 
&  now  granted  by  order  of  Court  &c, 
&  for  trans,  of  8  pers:  Dunkin  Makins, 
Elizabeth  Phillips,  Elizabeth  Evans,  Joan 
Evans,  Sesly  Evans,  Thomas  Barrow. 

WILLIAM  SAVADGE,  100  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  20  Nov.  1654,  p.  318.  On 
S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  &  on  Ewd.  side 
of  Puscaticond  Cr.,  S.  S.  W.  on  land 
of  John  Caple  &  N.  N.  E.  on  land  of 
John  Bebey.    Trans,  of  2  pers.* 

CHRISTOPHER  REGAULT,  600  acs. 
Glouster  Co.,  6  Mar.  1654,  p.  318.  Up- 
on Ewd.  side  of  a  main  swamp  of  Crany 
Cr.,  upon  the  head  of  Breemans  Neck 
&  adj.  devdt.  of  Mr.  Breeman,  etc. 
Trans,  of  12  pers:  Christopher  Regault, 
William  Frost,  Symon  Parrett,  Joan 
Bugg,  Wm.  Woodars,  John  Brashere, 
Thomas  Studdell,  his  wife  &  child, 
William  Risbixt  &  his  wife,  William 
Todd. 

HUMPHRY  GIBBS,  40  acs.  War- 
wick Co.,  on  Swd.  side  of  the  black 
water  swamp,  10  Aug.  1654,  p.  319. 
Beg.  at  Mr.  Bullocks  land,  etc.  Trans, 
of  1  pers:  Elizabeth  Dawkin.  Assignee 
of  Richard  Shootboult. 

MRS.  FRA.  HARRISON,  Widow, 
1,000  acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  6  Oct. 
1654,  p.  319.  On  N.  E.  side  of  Oquy 
Riv.,  W.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Valentine 
Patten,  N.  E.  upon  a  branch  of  Chapa- 
wasick  Cr.  &  S.  S.  E.  upon  land  of 
Capt.  Giles  Brent,  being  a  devdt.  of 
300  acs.  including  the  great  Rock. 
Trans,  of  20  pers:  Dr.  Jeremy  Harri- 
son, Mrs.  Fra.  Harrison,  Mrs.  Elizabeth 
Andrews,  Edward  Moyle,  Joyce  Wilkin- 
son, Anna,  Maria,  Christiana,  Steph. 
Gardner,  Edwd.  Stardy,  Mary  Derrell, 
Jonas  Page,  Thomas  Bull,  John  Duran, 
Robert  Clerke,  Fra.  Mallard,  Henry 
Downer,  James  Wilkenson,  Symon  Roch. 

THOMAS  FRAUNCES,  150  acs.  at 
the  head  of  Dumplen  Hand  Cr.,  a  branch 
of  Nanzemum  Riv.,  at  the  miles  end  of 
his  own  land,  &  adj.  land  of  John 
Oravin.  21  Nov.  1654,  p.  319.  Trans, 
of  3  pers.* 


WILLIAM  CORDEROY,  150  acs.  on 
W.  side  of  the  main  swamp,  upon  the 
head  of  Crany  Cr.,  adj.  land  of  Jeffery 
Bew.    6  Mar.   1654,  p.   320.    Trans,  of 

3  pers:  Daniell  Cadbaty  (?)  &  his 
wife,  Ann  Younge. 

EDWARD  SIMPSON,  600  acs. 
Gloster  Co.,  4  Dec.  1654,  p.  320.  300 
acs.  adj.  his  own,  land  of  Ashwell 
Batten  or  Leo.  Chamberlain  &  upon  the 
head  of  Pepetico  Cr.  Trans,  of  12  pers: 
George  Atkins,  Robert  Weekes,  William 
Wragg,  John  Powell,  Ja.  Muskatina, 
Robert  Ward,  James  Wilson,  Robert 
Foster,  Fra.  Wright,  William  Short, 
James  Davis,  Robt.  Lamb. 

PETER  ASHTON,  400  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  Sly.  upon  Wicocomoco 
Riv.  &  Wly.  upon  a  Cr.  dividing  this 
from  land  of  Capt.  Wm.  Claibourne. 
17  Nov.  1654,  p.  320.  Formerly 
granted  to  him,  15  Dec.  1651. 

CAPT.  THOMAS  WILLOUGHBY, 
2,900  acs.  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  7  Oct.  1654, 
p.  321.  In  Lyn  Haven  Parish.  Includ- 
ing 1500  acs.  for  which  he  has  a  patent. 
(19  Mar.  1643).  1400  acs.  beg.  at  the 
dwelling  house  &c.  against  Hogg  Island, 
to  head  of  Mr.  Mason  Cr.  Trans,  of  28 
pers:  Mary  Bennett,  Alexand.  Bell, 
John  Bell,  John  Gore,  Joseph  Toogood, 
Peter  Bandon,  James  Wichard,  Richard 
Drap,  Jno.  Michallen,  William  Fell, 
Paul  Trigg,  John  Sarrigg,  Dan.  Snoddy, 
Mat  Hancock,  George  Hill,  Mabell  a 
woman,  Tho.  Puckerell,  Willm.  Griffen, 
Alice  Willoughby,  Tho.  Willoughby, 
Eliz.  Willoughby,  Edward  Fitcher,  Ed- 
mund Dowland,  Thomas  Gee,  Wm. 
Griffen,  Jno.  Mickey,  Wm.  Stanly,  Geo. 
Armstrong. 

SARAH  HANCOCK,  of  Lyn  Haven 
Parish,  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  300  acs.,  29 
Nov.  1654,  p.  321.  200  acs.  beg.  at  the 
head  of  Mr.  Moselys  land  near  the  head 
of  Faram  Cr.  &c,  running  N.  N.  E.  etc. 
to  Turkey  ridge,  &  towards  John  Cara- 
ways land;  &  100  acs.  bought  of  Tho- 
mas Holt,  which  was  granted  to  him 
22   May   1637.    200   due   for   trans,   of 

4  pers:  Mary  Stout,  Richard  Belt,  John 
Browne,  William  Piggett.  Assigned  by 
Mr.  Emperor,  assignee  of  Lt.  Col.  Lloyd. 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


303 


THOMAS  FELTON,  150  acs.  Chas. 
City  Co.,  6  Feb.  1654,  p.  322.  On  S. 
side  of  James  Riv.  &  W.  side  of  an 
Indian  Swamp  called  Ohoreek;  beg.  at 
his  own  plantation,  running  along  Mr. 
Leas  line  &c.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Joan 
Binge,  William  Walker,  Dorothy  Upton. 

WILLIAM  LEA,  500  acs.  Chas.  City 
Co.,  6  Feb.  1654,  p.  322.  On  S.  side 
of  James  Riv.  &  W.  side  of  an  Indian 
Swamp  called  Ohoreek;  beg  opposite 
plantation  of  Thomas  Felton.  Trans,  of 
10  pers:  John  Trediskin,  John  Aires, 
Bertrum  Obert,  Thomas  Austen,  his 
wife,  John  Austin,  Richard  Austin,  Ed- 
ward Golbourn,  Jane  Glinn,  William 
Lea. 

HUMPHRY  DENNIS,  200  acs. 
Gloster  Co.,  6  July  1654,  p.  322.  On 
S.  side  of  Kings  Cr.  near  Poropetanke 
(Creek).  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Mary 
Smith,  Tho.  Bourne,  Tho.  Thraile,  John 
Bootwright. 

DANIEL  BOUCHER,  200  acs.  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  21  Nov.  1654,  p.  323. 
On  third  swamp  of  the  black  water, 
beg.  at  Humphry  Clerks  land.  Trans,  of 
4  pers:  Elizabeth  Vaughan,  John  Bon- 
nall,  Sarah  Slaughter,  Jonathan  Bubith. 

THOMAS  DEYNES,  500  acs.  in 
Deep  Cr.,  a  branch  of  the  S.  branch  of 
Eliz.  Riv.,  6  June  1654,  p.  323.  Trans, 
of  10  pers:  Mary  Jackson,  Edw.  Dense, 
Robert  Meal,  Joan  Porter,  Thomas 
Potter,  Edward  Barnes,  Humphry  Hag- 
gist,  Elizabeth  Towers,  Elizabeth  Bevis, 
Elizabeth  Mathy. 

WILLIAM  HOCCADAY,  200  acs. 
York  Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Charles  Riv. 
upon  head  branches  of  Matchemeeds  Cr. 
9  Mar.  1654,  p.  323.  Granted  to  him, 
8  June  1651. 

ROBERT  YOUNGE,  400  acs.  Lan- 
cester  Co.,  9  Nov.  1654,  p.  324.  Upon 
N.  side  of  Puscaticond  Cr.,  bounded 
on  E.  S.  E.  with  land  of  William  John- 
son &  W.  N.  W.  by  an  Indian  path. 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  Anthony  Tilly,  Eliz. 
Morley,  Ann  Dowse,  Hen.  Gibett, 
George  Peirce,  Edward  Steevens ;  Prudux 
Wells  "on  right  Assigned  him  by  Sam. 


Parry    long    since    Delivered    into    the 
Office." 

GREGORY  RAWLINS,  Junr.,  326 
acs.  James  City  Co.,  6  Feb.  1654,  p. 
324.  At  Upper  Chipoakes  Cr.  300  acs. 
adj.  upon  land  of  Jeremy  Dickenson. 
300  acs.  granted  unto  John  Osbourn, 
26  Apr.  1639,  &  by  John  Osbourn,  the 
son  &  heir,  assigned  unto  Gregory 
Rawlins,  Senr.,  &  due  sd.  Gregory  as 
son  &  heir.  26  acs.  for  trans,  of  1 
per.* 

JOHN  COX,  600  acs.  Lancaster  Co., 
28  Nov.  1654,  p.  325.  On  N.  side  & 
in  the  freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  &  bounded 
by  land  of  John  Weyr  &  Richard  Cole- 
man. 50  acs.  due  by  virtue  of  the  rights 
of  patent  for  so  much,  granted  unto 
John  Phillips  in  St.  Johns  Creek,  by 
him  relinquished  &  assigned  unto  sd. 
Cox;  &  357  acs.  for  trans,  of  7  pers: 
David  Phillipps  twice,  Thomas  Hum- 
phry, Elizabeth  Collins,  Tho.  Smithson, 
Thomas  Thorpe,  Mr.  John  Cox. 

PETER  RANSON,  950  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  20  Nov.  1654,  p.  325. 
Upon  the  deviding  Cr.  &  Sly.  upon  land 
of  George  Waterman  &  James  Willes. 
Granted  unto  John  Hany,  30  Jan.  1650, 
assigned  unto  Robert  Phillips  &  ordered 
to  be  patented  in  Ransons  name,  as  be- 
ing the  Admr.  of  sd.  Phillips,  but  be- 
fore this  patent  came  to  be  renewed  sd. 
Hany  relinquished  450  acs.  rights  of 
sd.  land  &  took  up  other  by  it,  which 
450  acs.  rights  is  made  good  by  sd. 
Ranson  for  trans,  of  9  pers.* 

RICHARD  BROWNE,  650  acs.  West- 
moreland Co.,  upon  Petomeck  Riv.,  22 
Mar.  1654,  p.  325.  Beg.  at  the  mouth 
of  a  gutt  dividing  this  from  land  of 
John  Jenkin.  Trans,  of  13  pers.*  Re- 
newed into  Mrs.  Brents  patent  of  1150 
acs.,  May  25  1657. 

MR.  THOMAS  BREEMAN,  600  acs. 
Gloster  Co.,  23  Mar.  1654,  p.  326.  Up- 
on N.  side  of  Severne  Riv.,  adj.  land  of 
Mr.  Robins,  Capt.  Warner  &  It.  Col. 
Waker   (Walker).    Trans,  of  12  pers.* 

ABRAHAM  MOONE,  (Moon),  600 
acs.  upon  S.  side  &  head  of  Pyanketank 


304 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Riv.,  &  N.  W.  upon  land  of  Capt. 
Steph.  Gill.  1  Nov.  1654,  p.  326. 
Trans,  of  12  pers:  James  Morth,  John 
Phillipps,  Peter  Worth,  Richard  Heler, 
William  Bryan,  William  Jones,  Tho- 
mas Box,  Mich.  Floyd,  James  Harren, 
Wm.  Newark,  David  Williams,  Rich- 
ard Parrinter. 

SAME.  300  acs.  in  Gloster  Co.,  upon 
the  head  of  Fenton  Cr.,  which  issueth 
forth  on  the  S.  E.  of  Metopony  Riv.,  1 
Nov.  1654,  p.  326.  Beg.  on  S.  side  of 
Aracyaco  Swamp,  extending  S.  W.  upon 
land  of  Edwd.  Simpson  &  S.  E.  upon 
land  of  Leonard  Chamberlaine  &  Ash- 
well  Batten.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Thomas 
Long,  Richard  Rawlins,  Mary  Browne, 
David  Floyd,  Richard  James,  William 
Browne;  Walter  Rawlins,  land  due  for 
&  placed  to  Lt.  Col.  Brents  patt.  of 
300  acs. 

WALTER  DICKENSON,  800  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  on  N.  side  of  Rappa. 
Riv.,  6  Sept.  1654,  p.  327.  Beg.  next 
to  land  of  William  Yarrett,  along  the 
Riv.  to  an  oak  dividing  this  from  land 
surveyed  for  Mr.  Toby  Smith.  Trans, 
of  16  pers:  Ann  Dixon,  Tho.  Whyting, 
Edwd.  Willett,  Timothy  Blade,  Walter 
Bading,  Tho.  Wynter,  Richard  Painter, 
Willm.  Warrell,  Richard  Painter,  David 
Browne,  Wm.  James,  Ja.  Williams, 
David  Richard,  Willm.  Mansfeild, 
Renold  James,  Willm.  Thomas. 

JOHN  ROSYER,  Clerk,  1,000  acs. 
beg.  near  a  branch  of  Nomeny,  dividing 
this  &  a  tract  surveyed  for  James  Hare, 
now  in  possession  of  Richard  Hawkins. 
6  Sept.  1654,  p.  327.  500  acs.  granted 
to  Major  Lewis  Burwell,  17  Nov.  1650 
&  assigned  to  Thomas  Yowell,  who  as- 
signed to  sd.  Rosyer;  300  acs.  granted 
to  sd.  Yowell  &  assigned  to  sd.  Rosyer 
&  200  acs.  for  trans,  of  4  pers:  Mrs. 
Margarett  Booker,  Mary  her  daughter, 
Phillip  Williams,   Elizabeth  Hues. 

EDWARD  PARKER,  300  acs.  West- 
moreland Co.,  10  June  1654,  p.  328. 
On  S.  side  of  Oquy  Riv.  &  E.  N.  E. 
side  with  a  swamp  dividing  this  &  land 
of  Mr.  Patten,  &  N.  N.  W.  upon  land 
of  Richard  Codsford.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
Robert  Bennett,  Robt.  Heeding,  Thomas 


Cox,  Rich.  Orpwood,  Roger  a  man  ser- 
vant, George  bullock.  Note:  Renewed 
in  name  of  Henry  Footman. 

CHRISTOPHER  BOOR  (Boore),  300 
acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  on  N.  side  of 
Oquy  Riv.,  10  June  1654,  p.  328. 
Bounded  on  S.  E.  with  a  branch  of  sd. 
Riv.  dividing  this  &  land  of  Capt.  Giles 
Brent.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  John  Browne, 
Wm.  Lawson,  Richd.  Bryan,  David 
Willett,  Hen.  Powell,  Ja.  Hunt. 

TOBY  SMITH,  1600  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  on  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  6  Sept. 
1654,  p.  328.  Along  head  of  land  of 
Walter  Dickenson  &  William  Yarrett, 
and  opposite  Colemans  Marsh.  Trans, 
of  32  pers:  Henry  Hawkins,  John  Cole- 
bourne,  Phill.  Wadingham,  John  Dix- 
son,  John  Dear,  James  Williams,  Sarah 
Willett,  Mary  Fox,  John  Redd,  Gyles 
Joyce,  George  Johnson,  Willm.  France, 
Kath.  Ham,  James  Cade,  Jno.  Dellony, 
William  James,  Tho.  Langlin,  James 
Boner,  Thomas  Richard,  William  Row- 
sen,  James  North,  John  Lepord,  Richard 
Bryan,  Thomas  Jones,  William  Kedd, 
Jno.  Serjant,  Tho.  Symons,  John  Meekes, 
John  Harper. 

MRS.  ANN  BERNARD,  1500  acs. 
Westmoreland  Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Peto- 
meck  Riv.,  6  Sept.  1654,  p.  329.  Beg. 
at  Eastermost  side  of  Upper  Matchotick 
Cr.,  adj.  land  of  Tho.  Peake  (or 
Speake).  1,000  acs.  granted  her  3  Apr. 
1651,  &  500  acs.  for  trans,  of  10  pers.* 

JOHN  WILLIAMS,  550  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  27  Nov.  1654,  p.  329. 
Ely.  upon  the  Gleab  land,  Nly.  upon 
head  of  Mettopony  Riv.  Granted  unto 
Robert  Newman,  1  Apr.  1651,  by  him 
deserted  &  granted  unto  sd.  Williams 
by  order  of  Court  &c.  The  following 
names  appear  under  this  record:  Henry 
Subtill,  Sabina  Davis,  Richard  Davis, 
Thomas  Coniers,  a  Negro,  Robert  Smith, 
Mary  Day,  George  Mettom,  (or  Met- 
torn),  Adam  Fawcett;  due  from  the 
assignees  of  Thomas  Stephens,  the 
assignee  of  Thomas  Coniers.  John  Wil- 
liams, Eliz.  Williams. 

RICHARD  EGGLESTON,  62^  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  in  the  maine,  27  Mar. 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


305 


1655,  p.  330.  Bounded  on  S.  W.  side 
with  a  line  of  trees  belonging  to  Daniel 
Lyle,  N.  N.  W.  with  land  of  John 
Flood,  lately  taken  up,  &  with  an  Ely. 
line  of  Horsleys  Swamp.  Annual  rent: 
2  Bbls.  2  Bu.  Indian  Corn  sheld  at  the 
State  House,  yearly  at  the  Nativity  of 
our  Saviour. 

JOHN  NEWMAN,  400  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co.,  on  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  20 
Mar.  1654,  p.  331.  On  the  head  of 
Moraticond  Riv.,  N.  by  W.  by  the  side 
of  a  branch  dividing  this  &  land  of 
Mr.  William  Whitby,  &  S.  by  E.  upon 
land  of  Mr.  David  Fox.  Trans,  of  8 
pers:  Bryan  Turner,  Em.  Turner,  Tho- 
mas Lonell,  George  Lovas,  Elizabeth 
Grimes,  Susan  Newman,  Richd.  Neavor, 
Mary  Reynolls. 

By  Edward  Diggs,  Esq.  Govt.  &c. 

WILLIAM  THATCHER,  300  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  upon  N.  W.  side  of 
Corotoman  Riv.,  17  May  1655,  p.  331. 
Upon  land  of  John  Nicholls  &  George 
Goldsmith.  Granted  to  sd.  Thatcher  & 
Robert  Parfitt,  26  Feb.  1653  "which  said 
Robert  Parfitt  being  dead,  the  said  land 
according  to  the  law  of  England  is  de- 
volved of  right  unto  him  the  said  Wil- 
liam Thatcher.'' 

ANN  TALBOTT,  1  acr.  lyeing  Ely. 
with  land  of  Thomas  Bayly,  Wly.  with 
Mr.  Watson,  Sly.  with  the  main  river 
&  thence  Nly.  to  the  path  leading  to 
Capt.  Moone's  house.  31  Mar.  1655, 
p.  331.  Annual  Rent:  1  Capon  yearly 
at  feast  of  St.  Thomas  the  Apostle. 

COL.  FRA.  MORRISON,  120  acs.  in 
the  maine,  known  by  the  name  of  the 
Race  feild,  S.  S.  W.  on  Mrs.  Perkins 
land,  S.  on  William  Harris,  S.  E.  on 
the  marsh,  E.  on  Cawseys  land,  N.  on 
A  Hersolls  &  W.  on  the  main  river,  6 
June  1655,  p.  331.  Leased  for  21  yrs. 
Annual  rent:  4  bbls.,  4  bu.  Indian  corn 
&c,  from  the  day  of  Nativity  next  en- 
suing, etc. 

GEORGE  WHALLE,  500  acs.  on  S. 
side  of  Petomeck  Riv.,  at  the  mouth  of 
Matchotique  Riv.  &c,  including  two 
small  creeks  lying  within  the  mouth  of 


Matchotix  Riv.  18  May  1655,  p.  332. 
Granted  unto  Thomas  Wilkenson  18 
Oct.  1650,  &  assigned  unto  sd.  Whalle. 
Renewal  by  order  of  Court  &  also  re- 
taken up  by  new  rights  for  trans,  of 
10  pers.,*  the  rights  used  to  make  good 
another  patent  of  sd.  Whalle. 

NICH.  WADDILOW,  1300  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Pongo- 
tegue  Riv.,  bounded  Wly.  on  Pocomock 
Cr.  &  Nly.  by  land  of  John  Robinson. 
2  Apr.  1655,  p.  332.  350  acs.  granted 
unto  John  Robinson  &  assigned  unto 
sd.  Waddilow,  &  950  acs.  for  trans,  of 
19  pers:  Comely.  Cornelison,  Anthony 
Carpenter,  John  King,  Susan  Dowring, 
Mary  Jones,  William  Brimstone,  Mac- 
cum  Macconey,  Doc.  Mackland,  Ann 
Twinn,  And.  Pedigrew,  Roger  Wood- 
ford, Jane  Nicholson,  Mathew  Porter, 
John  Greening,  Xper.  Cox,  Alice  Deane, 
Ralph  Doe,  Mary  Joyner,  Robert  Gibson. 

SAME.  600  acs.  Same  county  &  date. 
Page  333.  On  S.  side  of  Pongotegue 
Riv.,  Ely.  upon  Pocomeck  Cr.,  Nly.  on 
land  of  Richard  Johnson,  Negro,  &  Sly. 
with  land  of  Richard  Bunduch.  350  acs. 
granted  unto  Nicholas  Granger  &  as- 
signed unto  sd.  Waddilow;  250  acs.  for 
trans,  of  5  pers:  Roger  Woodford,  Jane 
Nicholson,  Ann  Borwell.  100  acs.  by 
assignment  of  William  Waters  which  is 
due  to  him  by  an  Ancient  Patent  granted 
to  his  father. 

CHARLES  SCARBURGH,  son  of  Col. 
Edmund  Scarburgh,  3,050  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  at  Pungotegue  Cr.,  3  Apr. 
1655,  p.  333.  Renewal  of  patent,  dated 
10  May  1652,  by  order  of  the  Quarter 
Ct.,  dated  with  these  presents. 

CHRISTOPHER  KNIPE,  418  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  19  May  1655,  p.  334. 
Renewal  of  patent  granted  his  father, 
Bartholomew  Knipe,  &  due  him  as  sonn 
&  heire. 

WILLIAM  BAYLY,  400  acs.  Chas. 
City  Co.,  at  Wards  Cr.,  1  May  1655,  p. 
334.  Nly.  on  the  lower  Cross  Cr.  Part 
of  a  devdt.  of  2,000  acs.  granted  to 
Capt.  Fra.  Hooke,  26  Oct.  1637,  as- 
signed to  John  Clay  &  John  Frame,  & 
by  inheritance  descended  unto  William 


306 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Clay,  son  of  sd.  John,  &  by  William 
Bayly  purchased  of  sd.  William  Clay, 
the  younger. 

FRA.  RIPLY,  25  acs.  24  Mar.  1654, 
p.  334.  21  yr.  lease  from  the  Nativity 
of  our  Saviour.  Annual  rent:  1  bbl. 
Indian  Corn  &c. 

THOMAS  BRIDGE,  256  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  26  Mar.  1655,  p.  335.  Near 
a  branch  coming  out  of  the  head  of  the 
broad  Cr.  &c.  Granted  unto  John  Mar- 
shall, 4  May  1652,  &  assigned  unto 
George  Heigham,  who  assigned  unto  sd. 
Bridge  &  now  renewed  &c. 

JOHN  LYNGE,  300  acs.  James  City 
Co.,  on  N.  side  of  Chycohominy  Riv., 
1  Apr.  1655,  p.  335.  Beg.  at  the  head 
of  a  branch  of  Tyascond,  near  the  great 
Indian  feild  in  the  land  of  Margarett 
Barrett.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Ann  Jones, 
Tho.  Bromfeild,  Rich.  Scruggs,  Sisly 
Chaloys,  Gil.  Southerland,  James  Tyler. 

RICHARD  NEW,  750  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  on  N.  side  of  James  Riv.  & 
E.  side  of  Chycohominy  Riv.,  6  Apr. 
1655,  p.  335.  S.  E.  on  Margaretts  land, 
N.  E.  on  Thomas  Brookes  &  Sly.  on 
Mr.  Rolph's  land.  Trans,  of  15  pers.* 
15  Irishmen  included  in  a  certificate 
granted  unto  Capt.  Barrett,  March  last, 
&  assigned  unto  sd.  New. 

RICHARD  FOSTER,  200  acs.  on  the 
head  of  the  Southerd  Cr.  in  Severne,  in 
Mockjack  Bay,  1  Apr.  1655,  p.  336. 
Adj.  Col.  Ludlow.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
Ellen  Foster,  Mary  Foster,  Sarah  Davis, 
Robt.  Bynam;  Fra.  Bignall,  land  due  for. 

NICH.  BUSH,  317  acs.  James  City 
Co.,  on  N.  side  of  James  Riv.  &  E. 
side  of  Chycohominy  Riv.,  6  Apr.  1655, 
p.  336.  Beg.  at  a  marked  tree  on  the 
W.  side  of  Jones  his  Swamp  and  along 
the  head  of  the  swamp  until  it  meets 
with  Old  Knights  line  &c.  to  John 
Merryman  &c.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  James 
Hamilton,  Wm.  Poynter,  Ann  Stanning, 
Winfred  Mathews,  Jno.  Hews. 

JOHN  WYERE,  300  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  on  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  in  the 
freshes,  last  of  Mar.  1655,  p.  336.  Beg. 


on  N.  W.  side  of  Cliff ts  Cr.  &  adj. 
his  own  land.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Robt. 
Chambers,  twice,  Rich.  Williams,  Ann 
Collins,  Margt.  Stephens,  Mary  Stephens. 

JOHN  WOODWARD,  500  acs. 
Glouster  Co.,  17  May  1655,  p.  337. 
Bounded  on  N.  &  N.  E.  side  with 
Pyanketank  Riv.  &  S.  E.  upon  Abraham 
Moon.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Thomas 
Barrett,  Roser  Mallery,  John  Wale,  Ed- 
mund Kenny,  Teague  Ottamon,  Roger 
Donouge,  Tho.  O  Derrick,  William 
Dally,  Connor  O  Morpher,  Daniel 
Beane;  Relinquished  the  rights  to  make 
good  a  patent  for  Col.  Lee's  children, 
viz:  Wm.  and  Hancock  Lee.  Test: 
Tho.  Brereton,  Clk. 

COL.     RICHARD     LEE,     200     acs. 

Glouster  Co.,  17  May  1655,  p.  337. 
Bounded  on  N.  E.  side  with  land  of 
Henry  Corbell,  on  S.  E.  side  with  trees 
dividing  this  &  land  of  William  Haward, 
S.  &  S.  W.  upon  his  own  land,  W.  upon 
the  Dogwood  Springe  branch  &  N.  W. 
&  N.  upon  land  of  William  Thome. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  Cormack  O  Mally, 
Teague  Flanny,  Richard  O  Harratt, 
Giles   Peirce. 

CAPT.  ROBERT  ABRALL,  600  acs. 
Glouster  Co.,  upon  S.  E.  side  of  Meto- 
pony  Riv.,  20  Feb.  1654,  p.  337.  Upon 
a  branch  dividing  this  from  land  of 
Mr.  William  Wyatt.  Trans,  of  12  pers.* 
Joan  Welch.  (Granted  by  Richard  Ben- 
nett.) 

GEORGE  MOSELY,  100  acs.  Glous- 
ter Co.,  17  May  1655,  p.  338.  On  E. 
side  of  Severne  Riv.,  N.  against  land  of 
Lt.  Col.  Walker,  E.  upon  land  of  Mr. 
John  Robins,  S.  upon  Capt.  Thomas 
Breman,  &  W.  upon  Capt.  Warner. 
Trans,  of  2  pers:  Ann  Ryalls,  Sarah 
Ryalls. 

EDWARD  MOORE,  200  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  in  Occahanock  Cr.,  between 
lands  of  Jonas  Jackson  &  Phillip  Merri- 
day.  2  Apr.  1655,  p.  338.  Trans,  of 
4  pers:  John  Gourd,  James  Scott,  Mark 
Hamond,  Thomas  Wyatt. 

MR.  THOMAS  PECK,  1,000  acs. 
Glouster  Co.,  on  N.  E.  side  of  Metto- 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


307 


pony  Riv.,  behind  land  of  Major  Taylor 
&  Mr.  Edward  Diggs.  6  Apr.  1655,  p. 
338.  Trans,  of  20  pers:  John  Lewellin, 
Edward  Stone,  Tho.  Peckstone,  Ursula 
Jackson,  Mr.  Tho.  Peck,  Elizabeth  Peck, 
Walter  Stratton,  William  Carter,  Pe. 
Peterson,  Alice  Carpenter,  John  Wil- 
liams, 2  Negrowomen;  Robt.  Richard- 
son, Rich.  Lyddeatt,  David  Hamilton, 
Margt.  Cheines,  Mary  Farnell,  Susan 
Dayson,  Alice  &c. 

MATILDA      SCARBOURGH,      the 

daughter  of  Lt.  Col.  Edmund  Scar- 
bourgh,  500  acs.  Northampton  Co.,  at 
Pungotegue  Cr.,  31  Mar.  1655,  p.  339. 
Bounded  on  E.  by  land  of  Charles  Scar- 
bourgh,  on  W.  by  the  main  bay  &  run- 
ning Nly.  towards  Anancock.  Trans,  of 
10  pers:  David  Relue,  John  Soaper, 
Tho.  Reylue,  Dermot  Morane,  Rich. 
Stanton,  Teague  Trassy,  Robt.  Candeale, 
Cormack  Nelve,  Teague  Hart,  Patrick 
Jordan. 

EDMUND  SCARBOURGH,  Junr.,  & 
LITTLETON  SCARBOURGH,  sons  of 
Lt.  Col.  Edmund  Scarbourgh,  800  acs.  in 
Northampton  Co.,  at  Chyconnessecks 
Creek,  being  a  neck  of  land  on  the 
mouth  of  sd  Cr.  Trans,  of  16  pers: 
Donell  Grecheare,  Thomas  Maway, 
Phillip  Kahan,  John  Malladine,  Ven 
Cunagky,  John  Keynan,  Morkun 
Chunaghan,  Mor.  Kunnogh,  Moragha 
Donell,  Rich.  Kuoyard,  Coner  Gillealew, 
Teague  Neoly,  Donell  Lloyd,  Brin 
Grangrave,  William  Brovek,  Hugh 
Laffe.    31  Mar.  1655,  p.  339. 

PETER  FORD,  500  acs.  (viz)  Caca- 
mount  in  Glouster  Co.,  on  the  N.  E. 
side  of  Mettopony  Riv.,  beg.  at  lower 
tree  of  Capt.  Robert  Abrall,  behind  land 
of  Mr.  Barnhouse  &  Mr.  William  Wyatt 
&c.  25  Mar.  1655,  p.  340.  Trans,  of 
10  pers:  Patrack  Napier,  William  Bel- 
cher, Robert  Gibbs,  Mary  Roberts,  Wil- 
liam Francis,  John  Nicholls,  John  Ware, 
Anne  James,  Elizabeth  Walker,  Eliza- 
beth Mackrell.  Assigned  to  sd.  Ford  by 
Lt.  Col.  Abrall,  assignee  of  Capt.  Jno. 
Underwood. 

RALPH  GREEN,  500  acs.  New  Kent 
Co.,  13  May  1655,  p.  340.  Upon  S.  E. 
side  of  Mettopony  Riv.,  S.  W.  with  a 


branch  of  Arakico,  near  Leonard  Cham- 
berlaine  &  Ashwell  Batten  &  N.  E. 
against  a  former  tract  taken  up  by  Capt. 
Fra.  Morgan  &  Ralph  Green.  Trans,  of 
10  pers:  Joan  Bugg,  Mary  Hamond, 
Edward  Moss,  James  Monder,  Roger 
Birth,  John  Belson,  Adam  Chapman, 
Isaack  Rack,  James  Story,  Alex  Daniell. 

GEORGE  PARKER,  1300  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  at  Anancock  Cr.,  31  Mar. 
1655,  p.  340.  Beg.  at  land  of  Mr. 
William  Walters.  Trans,  of  26  pers: 
John  Parker,  John  Cole,  John  Mocellett, 
Joseph  Deryell,  Daniel  Till,  Farmer 
Jones,  Senr.,  Ann  Shaw,  Farmer  Jones, 
Junr.,  Sarah  Jones,  Farmr.  Jones,  Jane 
Nevera,  Robert  Hallow,  Florence  Cade, 
Marm.  (Marmaduke  ?)  Wilkenson, 
Carona  Cornelia,  Kath.  Mecane,  Ed- 
mund Bryant.  450  acs.  rights  being  due 
by  patent  of  sd.  Parker's,  5  June  1650 
&  adjudged  lost  in  Northampton  Court, 
only  the  rights  reserved  which  was  certi- 
fied by  that  court. 

JENKIN  PRICE,  800  acs.  Northamp- 
ton Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Anancock,  being 
two  necks  of  land,  Wly.  on  Batchelors 
branch,  parting  it  from  land  of  Robt. 
King  &  Walter  Taylor  &c.  E.  upon  the 
Spoone  branch,  etc.  26  Apr.  1655,  p. 
341.  Trans,  of  16  pers:  Henry  Darby 
William  Whitehead,  John  Smith,  Wil- 
liam Meadwell,  Mary  White,  William 
Harris,  One  Dutch  boy,  Peter  Clauce, 
Walter  Danks,  (or  Dauks),  Dorcas 
Hond,  Walter  Cooper,  1  Scotchman,  1 
man  servant  bought  out  of  a  Burmodean, 
Jenkin  Price,  John  Drummer. 

SAML.  SOLLACE  &  ROBERT  TRO- 
LIVER,  900  acs.  Glouster  Co.,  upon  S. 
E.  side  of  Poropotanck  Cr.,  200  acs. 
upon  N.  E.  side  of  a  branch  of  same 
called  Attapotomays  Cr.,  adj.  land  of 
Oliver  Green  &c,  700  acs.  upon  S.  W. 
side  of  a  branch  or  swamp,  along  the 
swamp  dividing  this  &  land  of  Isaac 
Richardson,  etc.  26  Mar.  1655,  p.  341. 
800  acs.  granted  them  12  Feb.  1651  & 
100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers:  John 
Mattro,  William  Lewis. 

SAMUEL  SOLLACE,  352  acs.  Glos- 
ter  Co.,  upon  S.  E.  side  of  Poropotank 
Cr.,  upon  N.  E.  side  of  a  swampe  divid- 


308 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


ing  this  &  land  of  Isaac  Richardson  & 
extending  along  a  branch  of  the  same 
dividing  this  &  land  of  John  Day  &c. 
26  Mar.  1655,  p.  341.  302  acs.  granted 
unto  William  Ginsey,  9  Sept.  1652  & 
assigned  to  sd.  Sollace;  &  50  acs.  for 
trans,  of  Mary  Land. 

JOHN  BROWN,  Gent.,  1262  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  13  June  1655,  p.  342. 
1000  acs.  Ely.  on  the  seaboard  side,  N. 
upon  the  Southermost  branch  of  Robin 
Creek,  Sly.  upon  Northermost  br.  of 
Phillips  Cr.  &c.  1,000  acs.  granted  sd. 
Browne  27  Nov.  1652,  &  262  acs.  for 
trans,  of  5  pers:  Willm.  Hogson,  Peter 
Kennett,  Oneath  Mackdoneal,  Jno.  Ore- 
dan,  Derman  O  Shalenan,  (or  O  Shale- 
van). 

ROBERT  PRIDDY,  400  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  on  S.  W.  side  of  York  Riv., 
28  June  1655,  p.  343.  Bounded  by  land 
of  John  Butler,  Mr.  Anthony  Langstone 
&  Mr.  Joseph  Crowshaw.  Trans,  of  8 
pers:  Elizabeth  Tawson,  John  Redman, 
William  Jones,  William  Davis,  Kath. 
Ellyotts,  Mary  Puckrell,  John  Frederick, 
Joane  Carlington. 

JER.  DODSON,  Gent.,  600  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  4  June  1655,  p.  343.  N.  E. 
upon  a  branch  of  Corocoman  Riv.,  upon 
land  of  one  Hawker,  &  S.  E.  upon  land 
of  William  Thatcher.  Trans,  of  12  pers: 
Cutbert  Benson,  Elizabeth  Popler,  Rob. 
Margeson,  Elizabeth  Feathy,  Thomas 
Robb,  David  Furbush,  James  Shaw, 
Nich.  Richardson,  James  Barter,  Thomas 
Bowles,  George  Lawson,  Patraack  Ste- 
ward. 

JOHN  BELL,  200  acs.  Lancaster  Co., 
on  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  14  June  1655, 
p.  343.  From  the  upper  side  of  land 
in  possession  of  Cyprian  Bishopp,  to 
land  of  Mr.  James  Bagnall.  Part  of  a 
patent  of  400  acs.  of  Henry  Deadman, 
18  Nov.  1653,  &  due  sd.  Bell  by  pur- 
chase. 

CYPRIAN  BISHOPP,  200  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
14  June  1655,  p.  344.  From  land  of 
Henry  Deadman  &c.  Part  of  a  devdt.  of 
400  acs.  of  sd.  Deadman,  and  due  as 
above. 


FRANCIS  CLAY,  Gent.,  400  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  on  S.  side  of 
Chicokone  Riv.,  E.  S.  E.  upon  land  of 
Col.  John  Mattrom,  etc.  S.  S.  W.  to- 
wards branches  of  great  Wicocomoco 
Riv.  4  June  1655,  p.  344.  Trans,  of 
8  pers:  Mary  Edwards,  Thomas  Clever, 
Edward  Simpson,  William  Jones,  Wil- 
liam Bethell,  Henry  Evans,  John  Cess, 
Elizabeth  Norman. 

HENRY  BARLOW,  300  acs.  in  the 
S.  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  down  Ceder 
Island  Cr.  to  mouth  of  broad  Cr.  18 
June  1655,  p.  345.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
Amy  Jones,  Tho.  Bromfill,  Rich.  Scruggs, 
Sisly  Chaloys,  Gilbert  Southerland, 
James  Tyler. 

THOMAS  ROOTS,  50  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  15  June  1655,  p.  345.  Ely.  upon 
Corocomon  Riv.,  Sly.  upon  Spring 
branch  &.  N.  N.  E.  upon  lands  of  Ed- 
ward Grimes,  dec'd.  Trans,  of  1  per: 
Thomas  Roots. 

WILLIAM  LITTLE,  100  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  on  S.  side  of  great 
Wicocomoco  Riv.,  4  June  1655,  p.  345. 
Adj.  land  of  Daniel  Crosby  &  towards 
land  of  William  Thomas.  Trans,  of  2 
pers:    Martin  Poole,  Jane  Poole. 

MAJOR  WILLIAM  LEWIS,  2,000 
acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  on  N.  E.  side  of 
Mettopony  Riv.,  28  June  1655,  p.  345. 
Bounded  with  Mama  Sheement  on  the 
N.  W.  &  near  the  head  of  sd.  river. 
Trans,  of  40  pers.* 

LT.  COL.  JOHN  WALKER,  1200 
acs.  on  the  Ewd.  side  of  a  runn  falling 
into  Ware  Riv.,  beg.  at  Mr.  Mordecay 
Cooks  land  &  by  marked  trees  of 
Zachery  Cripps.  14  July  1655,  p.  346. 
1,000  acs.  granted  him,  29  Jan.  1651, 
&  200  acs.  for  trans,  of  4  pers:  Ed- 
mund Orphew,  Walter  English,  Thomas 
O  Lyn,  Mahan  Carty. 

GERVACE  DODSON,  1,000  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  4  June  1655,  p. 
346.  On  N.  Side  of  great  Wicocomoco 
Riv.,  opposite  Capt.  Richard  Bud,  Ely. 
upon  George  Clerke  &  N.  by  E.  &  be- 
twixt lands  of  sd.  Clerke,  Mr.  John 
Burton  &  Mr.  Jeremy  Dodson.    Due  by 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


309 


virtue  of  the  rights  of  a  patent  to  Cor- 
bet Pedwell,  14  May  1653,  &  assigned 
to  sd.  Dodson. 

MR.  WILLIAM  NUTT,  683  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  on  N.  side  of 
great  Wicocomoco  Riv.,  4  June  1655,  p. 
347.  S.  S.  W.  upon  sd.  river  from 
Lambdens  Cr.  to  Hand  Cr.,  Wly.  upon 
same  &  land  of  William  Thomas,  E. 
N.  E.  upon  Thomas  Garrett,  the  land  of 
Henry  Smith,  orphant,  &  towards  land 
Richard  Span  bought  of  Edward  Cole. 
350  acs.  granted  to  Robert  Lambden  & 
William  Allen,  &  by  the  latter  assigned 
to  sd.  Lambden,  who  assigned  to  sd. 
Nutt;  &  333  for  trans,  of  7  pers:  Wm. 
Goward,  Jno.  Hollaway,  Geo.  Picker- 
inge,  Math.  Wilcocks,  Jno.  Smith,  Sarah 
Roberts,  Wm.  Nutt. 

GEORGE  COLTCLOUGH,  300  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  4  June  1655,  p. 
347.  Sly.  upon  Wicocomoco  Cr.  &  adj. 
his  own  land.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Robt. 
Morely,  Xpr.  Vaughan,  Tho.  Hinton, 
David  Pool,  his  wife  Mary,  Margt. 
Buttey. 

JOHN  HAMPTON,  150  acs.  between 
Garden  Cr.  &  the  Eastermost  Riv.  14 
July,  1655,  p.  347.  Trans,  of  3  pers: 
Edmund  Walch,  Abraham  Barreb, 
Teague  O  Moulins ;  assigned  by  Lt.  Col. 
Walker. 

SAML.  ELDRIDGE,  295  acs.  on  the 
main  branch  of  the  black  water,  bet.  Mr. 
Seawards  &  Humphry  Clerk's  land.  8 
June  1655,  p.  348.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
Job  Bearley,  3  times;  Richard  Henry, 
James  Mathewson,  Christian  Hygate. 

MR.    THOMAS    BROUGHTON,    of 

Yeocomoco,  100  acs.  Northumberland 
Co.,  4  June,  1655,  p.  348.  N.  W.  upon 
Yeocomoco  Riv.,  S.  E.  upon  Mettopony 
Riv.  &  S.  W.  upon  land  of  John  Meeks 
&  William  Newman.  Trans,  of  2  pers: 
Alexander  Cooper,  Walter  Clare. 

JOHN  MOTLEY,  of  Wicocomoco, 
Carpenter,  600  acs.  Northumberland  Co., 
4  June  1655,  p.  348.  Adj.  land  of  John 
Allen  &  Roger  Walters.  Trans,  of  12 
pers:  William  White,  Ann  Foster, 
Martha    Hunt,    Stephen    Johnson,    John 


Rowland,  James  Powell,  William  Dea- 
con, Mory  Deacon,  Henry  Wilcox, 
Triphany  Deacon,  Thomas  Courtman, 
George  Devell. 

JOHN  GREEN,  200  acs.  in  W. 
branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  adj.  his  own  land., 
1  June  1655,  p.  349.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
Richard  Green,  Kat.  Green,  Francis 
Teeling,  Abigail  Turner. 

LT.   COL.  ANTHONY  ELLYOTT, 

1,400  acs.  adj.  his  own  land  &  on  Aliens 
Cr.,  etc.  14  July  1655,  p.  349.  Trans, 
of  28  pers:  Margery  Clapham,  Neal 
Steward,  John  Mukee,  John  Ridue,  John 
Robins,  John  Downton,  Garratt  Lid- 
with,  Tho.  Rowland,  Susan  Craven,  Ann 
Kirby,  William  Knocks,  Ann  Toomes, 
Archibald  Gardner,  Thomas  Turner, 
William  Williams,  Henry  King,  Wil- 
liam Cook,  William  Brookwood,  Ann 
Steevens,  Mary  Stanton,  Joseph  Hooke, 
Sandie  Issabell,  John  O  Drenne,  Edward 
Kenny,  Rich.  O  Harrough,  Tho.  O 
Derruck,  Dan  O  Carby,  Owin  O  Lealy. 

MR.  THOMAS  BALLARD,  1,000 
acs.  Glouster  Co.,  now  called  New  Kent 
Co.,  on  S.  E.  side  of  Mettopony  Riv  & 
along  the  head  of  Mr.  William  Wyatt's 
land.  16  July  1655.  Trans,  of  20  pers: 
James  Cook,  Robert  Fisher,  Thomas 
Crump,  Wm.  Johnson,  Wm.  Cuning- 
ham,  Elizabeth  Masterson,  Grace  Farloe, 
Thomas  Pritchard,  Grace  Fisher,  Ann 
Simpson,  James  Glover,  Thomas  Pratt, 
Toby.  Forester,  Richard  Proby,  Cuthbert 
Jackson,  James  Cooper,  William  Smith, 
Fra.  Crosyer,  James  Smith,  Sarah  Tal- 
bott.    Page  350. 

JOHN  JOHNSON,  85  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  on  N.  side  of  great 
Wicocomoco  Riv.,  bet.  Mr.  James  Haw- 
ley  &  William  Betts  &  Sly.  upon  land 
called  Peter  Ashtons  Neck.  4  June 
1655,  p.  350.    Trans,  of  2  pers.* 

WILLIAM  RAWTON,  27  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  S.  E.  upon  the  mouth  of 
Corotoman  Riv.,  S.  W.  &  N.  W.  upon 
Hand  Neck  Cr.  &  N.  E.  upon  Edward 
Grymes.  15  June  1655,  p.  350.  Trans, 
of  1  pers.*  "One  man  dead  his  name 
unknown  assigned  him  by  Nich.  Mery- 
wether,  Assignee  of  John  Ling,  the  As- 


310 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


signe  of  Peter  Efford."    23  acs.  remain- 
ing due. 

WILLIAM  JOHNSON,  176  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  on  N.  side  of  Rappa. 
Riv.  &  N.  side  of  Puscation  Cr.,  14 
June  1655,  p.  351.  Beg.  on  the  N.  W. 
side  of  a  branch  dividing  this  &  land  of 
Mr.  John  Cox  &c,  to  the  side  of  a 
branch  dividing  this  &  land  whereon 
said  Johnson  now  lives.  Granted  to  him 
10  Mar.  1653  &  assigned  unto  Paul 
Brewer,  &  now  due  him  as  Admr.  of  sd. 
Brewer. 

JOHN  SHARP,  Junr.,  400  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  in  the  freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
about  14  mi.  above  Nanzemum  Towne. 
14  June  1655,  p.  351.  Beg.  at  a  creek 
dividing  this  &  land  of  Mr.  John  Batts 
&  John  Phillips.    Trans,  of  8  pers.* 

JOHN  PHILLIPS,  1300  acs.  upon  a 
creek  of  Occapason  Cr.,  beg.  upon  the 
Northermost  branch  of  same  called 
Wassanasson.  14  June  1655,  p.  351. 
Granted  to  Richard  Coleman,  11  Jan. 
1652,  relinquished,  &  now  due  sd. 
Phillips  for  trans,  of  26  pers.* 

FRAUNCIS  GOWER,  530  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
on  Ewd.  side  of  Hodskings  Cr.,  14  June 
1655,  p.  352.  280  acs.  granted  him,  15 
Nov.  1653;  &  250  acs.  granted  unto 
Mr.  Ja.  Williamson,  Nov.  15  1653,  & 
assigned  unto  sd.  Gower  for  the  use  of 
his  son  James  Gower,  which  parcels  are 
joined  together  at  the  request  of  sd. 
Fra.  Gower. 

EDWARD  LUCAS,  150  acs.  on  S. 
W.  side  of  Garden  Cr.  14  July  1655, 
p.  352.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  John  Mor- 
raine,  Kennet  Morraine,  John  Shalla- 
mine. 

JOHN  SMITHEY,  300  acs.  S.  side 
of  Garden  Cr.  14  July  1655,  p.  353. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Daniell  Beaw,  Morris 
White,  Cormack  Mallry,  Teague  Flanny, 
John  Mathew,  Jno.  O  Grangenes.  As- 
signed by  Lt.  Col.  Walker. 

THOMAS  READ,  300  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  on  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  next  to 
land  of  Capt.  Fleet  &  Wly.  upon  land 


of  John  Taylor.  6  June  1655,  p.  353. 
Granted  unto  Teague  Floyne,  1  Aug. 
1652,  assigned  &  renewed  unto  sd. 
Read. 

WILLIAM  BLACKEY,  Gent.,  1,300 
acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  9  June  1655,  p.  353. 
Including  the  land  he  is  now  seated  on, 
on  S.  side  the  Narrows  of  York  Riv., 
bounded  S.  E.  with  land  of  Mr.  Burnell, 
&  N.  W.  with  land  of  George  Lyddall. 
300  acs.  granted  him  29  July  1647;  & 
1,000  for  trans,  of  20  pers.* 

WILLIAM  WYATT,  300  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  on  N.  E.  side  of  Mettopony 
Riv.,  behind  his  own  land  &  adj.  land 
of  Mr.  Henry  Soanes.  6  June  1655,  p. 
354.    Trans,  of  6  pers.* 

PHILLIP  CHESLY  &  NICH.  MERY- 
WETHER,  1,000  acs.  on  N.  E.  side  of 
Skemeno  Swamp,  adj.  land  of  Robert 
Wild  &  sd.  Chesly,  to  Drinking  Swamp 
&c.  to  Ricohock  path.  7  June  1655,  p. 
354.    Trans,  of  20  pers.* 

JOHN  MARSHALL,  200  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  8  June  1655,  p.  354.  120 
acs.  part  of  a  devdt.  purchased  of  John 
Valentine  &  assigned  to  sd.  Marshall; 
80  acs.  adj.  his  own,  land  of  George 
Midland  &  Richard  Penny,  &  due  for 
trans,  of  2  pers:  Edw.  Wms.  (Wil- 
liams), Jno.  Wormington. 

MARTIN  HAMOND,  300  acs.  on  S. 
side  of  James  Riv.,  at  the  head  of  land 
of  John  Senior,  &  running  along  land 
of  Henry  Meddows.  (Date  blank). 
Page  355.  Granted  to  Richard  Rickless, 
1  July  1652,  by  him  deserted  &  granted 
by  order  of  court  unto  Nich.  Mery- 
wether,  who  assigned  unto  sd.  Hamond, 
&  due  for  trans,  of  6  pers:  Elizabeth 
Johnson,  Robert  Mason,  Elizabeth  Bent- 
ley,  Kath.  Mutton,  Mary  Langingham, 
John  Glover.  Note:  This  patent  is 
come  into  the  hands  of  Nich.  Mery- 
wether  and  the  rights  due  to  him.  Test: 
Tho.  Brereton,  Clk. 

JOHN  HODSON  &  JOHN  GAR- 
RATT,  300  acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  6  June 
1655,  p.  355.  On  N.  E.  side  of  Metto- 
pony Riv.,  bounded  on  Southermost 
corner  of  Thomas  Saunders,  unto 
Arakeyaco  Sw.  &c.    Trans,  of  6  pers.* 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


311 


MAJOR  WILLIAM  LEWIS,  400  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  8  June  1655,  p.  355. 
On  N.  E.  side  of  Mettopony  Riv.,  adj. 
his  own  land,  N.  E.  with  main  swamp 
of  Arsantans  Cr.  ah.  Tarsantyan,  &  be- 
hind land  of  Capt.  Robt.  Abrall.  Trans, 
of  8  pers:  William  Davis,  John  Mon- 
tra,  Henry  Lee,  Wm.  Dowglas,  Ellin 
Taylor,  Tho.  Randoll,  John  Poole, 
Josuah  Bigg;  by  assignment  from  Mr. 
James  Herd. 

JOHN  WATSON,  300  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  12  June  1655,  p.  356.  Upon  Occa- 
pason  Cr.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Ralph 
Boerer,  Rich.  Toosly,  Rich.  Keniston, 
Gesper  Vigeo,  James  Clerke,  Wm.  Lake. 

WILLIAM  THATCHER,  200  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  upon  a  branch  of  Coroto- 
man  Riv.,  opposite  land  of  one  Hawker, 
&  S.  E.  upon  land  of  John  Munger,  sold 
to  John  Davis,  &  now  in  possession  of 
Henry  Davis.  4  June  1655,  p.  356. 
Trans,  of  4  pers.* 

GEORGE  WALL,  1200  acs.  West- 
moreland Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Petomeck 
Riv.,  18  May  1655,  p.  356.  Beg.  at  a 
pochichery  dividing  this  &  land  of  John 
Miles,  opposite  tract  surveyed  for  Tho. 
Broughton  &c.  Due  by  virtue  of  the 
rights  of  a  patent  of  500  acs.  surren- 
dered, &  2  certificates  for  trans,  of  14 
pers:  John  Day,  Margery  his  wife, 
Derman  Absolon,  Bess  a  Negro,  Thomas 
Baxter,  Alex.  Delumaine,  Ann  Price, 
Sibill  Coleman,  4  Irishmen,  Thomas 
Wilkenson,  George  Wall.  Assigned 
him  by  sd.  Day. 

WILLIAM  GOOCH,  Esq.,  one  of  the 
Councell  of  State,  &  ROBT.  VAULX, 
Merchant,  6,000  acs.  Westmoreland  Co., 
9  June  1655,  p.  357.  On  S.  side  of 
Petomeck  Riv,  behind  the  cliffts  of 
Corowoman,  beg.  at  Wwd.  side  of  a 
great  deep  run,  being  the  head  of  great 
Rappa.  Cr.  &  opposite  lower  end  of 
1200  acs.  surveyed  for  Thomas  Brough- 
ton &c.    Trans,  of  120  pers.* 

CAPT.  HENRY  FLEET,  347  acs. 
upon  S.  side  of  Pepetick  Cr.,  3  July 
1655,  p.  357.  Adj.  land  of  John  Payne 
&  divided  by  a  creek  from  land  of  Tho- 
mas Hawkins.    Trans,  of  7  pers:    John 


Smith,  Isaac  Holding,  Henry  Lisbourne, 
John  Polwort,  Teague  O  Fallo,  David 
Wright,  Hugh  Budder. 

MAJOR    WILLIAM    HOCCADAY, 

3,550  acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  1  Aug.  1655, 
p.  358.  On  S.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.,  adj. 
land  he  is  now  seated.  Renewal  of  2 
former  patents  for  1346  acs.,  10  Dec. 
1648,  &  1000  acs.,  14  Apr.  1653,  & 
1200  acs.  &  for  trans,  of  25  pers.* 

JOHN  BIGGS,  260  acs.  Low.  Norf. 
Co.,  on  Ewd.  side  &  near  the  head  of 
the  S.  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  20  Aug. 
1655,  p.  358.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Wil- 
liam    Stillard,     William    Rends,    

Piggott,  Rich.  Day,  Thomas  Brittaine, 
Tho.  Buckmaster.  40  acs.  of  the  last 
right  due  to  Mr.  Emperor,  who  assigned 
these  rights  to  him. 

MATHEW  HUBERD,  Gent.,  590  acs. 
York  Co.,  on  S.  W.  side  of  Yorke  Riv., 
18  Aug.  1655,  p.  358.  Beg.  in  Thomas 
Smiths  line  running  Ewd.  etc.  to  bounds 
of  William  Gantlett,  to  Spring  run  on 
the  main  swamp  of  Skemenoe,  &  Wly. 
to  Phillip  Chesly  &  Daniel  Wylds  line 
&c.  Trans,  of  12  pers:  Wm.  Parke, 
Senr.,  Wm.  Parke,  Junr.  et  uxor.,  Sarah 
Park,  Wm.  Swinburne,  Edward  Harris, 
Wm.  Beamont,  Rice  a  Welchman,  Fra. 
Taylor,  Ann  Flower. 

MAJOR    WILLIAM    HOCCADAY, 

640  acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  on  S.  side  of 
Yorke  Riv.,  1  Aug.  1655,  p.  359.  On 
S.  E.  side  Warreny  main  branch,  in- 
cluding the  Indian  Feilds  on  the  S.  E. 
side  of  the  head  of  Warreny,  commonly 
called  sd.  Hoccadies.  Trans,  of  13 
pers:  Fra.  Ashton,  Rich.  Major,  Tho- 
mas Delf,  Judith  Stanly,  Mary  Worth, 
James  Blake,  Phillip  Waldon,  Ann 
Colby. 

WILLIAM  MORGAN,  1.166  acs.  on 
E.  side  of  Chicohomminy  Riv.  1  June 
1655,  p.  359.  816  acs.  upon  the  head 
of  Morgans  Cr.,  in  James  City  Co.,  up- 
on land  of  Mr.  Filmore,  Mr.  William 
Edwards  &  his  own  land;  350  acs. 
bounded  from  his  old  devdt.,  along  land 
of  Mr.  George  Lobb,  to  land  of  Joseph 
Knight  &c.  816  acs.  granted  him  22 
Oct.  1643,  &  350  acs.  granted  8  June 
1652. 


312 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


MR.       ANTHONY       LANGSTON, 

1,000  acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  on  S.  side  of 
the  freshes  of  York  Riv.,  behind  land 
of  Col.  Man.  Hamond  &c,  including 
land  now  seated  by  William  Stone.  26 
Apr.  1655,  p.  360.  Trans,  of  20  pers: 
Daniel  Reverton,  Hum.  Chiverfall,  Eli- 
zabeth Andrews,  Ann  Stanford,  Ed. 
Simons,  Roger  Creeton,  Mary  Smith, 
Eliz.  Kent,  William  Feild,  Mary  Puck- 
erell,  William  Davis,  Richard  Clerke, 
Richard  Crouch,  Eliz.  Thompson,  Hoell 
Thomas,  Richard  Johnson,  Mary  Clerke, 
Runberen  Davis,  Roger  Jones,  Robert 
Bridley. 

JOHN  CATLETT  &  RALPH  ROU- 
ZEE,  1542  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  1  July 
1655,  p.  360.  400  acs.  beg.  at  a  branch 
dividing  same  &  land  of  George  Eaton, 
now  purchased  by  sd.  John  &  Ralph; 
304  acs.  parted  from  the  aforesd.  tract 
by  a  branch;  and  the  residue  adj.  both 
of  sd.  tracts,  upon  Occapason  Cr.,  by 
land  of  Richard  Lawson,  Thomas  Lucas, 
(purchased  by  Thomas  Hawkins)  &c. 
400  acs.  granted  23  May  1650;  304  acs. 
granted  unto  George  Eaton  18  June 
1651  &  purchased  by  them  &  336  acs. 
granted  unto  Thomas  Lucas  &  sd.  Cat- 
lett  20  July  1652  &  purchased  by  them. 
502  acs.  for  trans,  of  10  pers.  * 

EDWARD  PETTAWAY,  500  acs. 
Surry  Co.,  on  S.  side  of  James  Riv.,  on 
the  head  of  Lower  Chipoaks  Cr.,  last  of 
Aug.  1655,  p.  361.  Being  part  of  1,000 
acs.  of  William  Carter's,  Deed.,  beg. 
at  the  main  branch  of  the  reedy  swamp, 
to  Mr.  Pettaways  Springe,  along  Wil- 
liam Carter's  line  &c.  Trans,  of  10 
pers:  John  Farly,  Joyce  Farly,  Fra. 
Farly,  Joseph  Farly,  William  Workman, 
Samll.  Hardy,  James  Mill,  John  Chal- 
lace,  Mary  Morian,  Tho.  Lewis;  assigned 
him  by  Peter  Green. 

HENRY  HUBERD,  (Hubert),  350 
acs.  Glouster  Co.,  at  the  head  of  Poro- 
potank  Cr.,  25  Aug.  1655,  p.  362.  Adj. 
Mr.  Blunt.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  Robert 
Long,  Jammay  Long,  Emma  Brett,  Tho- 
mas Nash,  George  Mutford,  John  Harri- 
son, Nich.  Bridges. 

JOHN  SHARPE,  500  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  on  N.  E.  side  of  a  S.  E.  branch  of 


Moraticond  Cr.,  &  N.  W.  upon  land  of 
Abraham  Moone.  4  Sept.  1655,  p.  362. 
Trans,     of     10     pers:    Ralph     Rowzey, 

Joseph  Catt,  Valentine  ,   Nicholas 

&c. ,  Peter  Neale,  John  Eaton,  Geo. 

Eaton,  Jno.  Ridlys,  Robt.  Burwell,  John 
Hookes. 

CAPT.  NICH.  MARTEAW,  2,000 
acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  upon  S.  side  of 
Potomack  Riv.,  4  Sept.  1655,  p.  363. 
Bounded  E.  upon  sd.  River,  S.  upon 
land  of  Richard  Hawkins  &  N.  upon 
land  of  Richard  Codsford.  Due  by  vir- 
tue of  the  rights  of  a  patent  for  the 
same  quantity  granted  him  25  Oct.  last, 
which  is  relinquished,  etc.  Note:  This 
never  past,  the  former  pattent  to  be  of 
force.    Test:    Nich.  Merewether,  CI. 

RICHARD  PRICE,  son  of  Arthur 
Price,  deed.,  600  acs.  on  S.  W.  side  of 
York  Riv.,  New  Kent  Co.,  28  Aug.  1655, 
p.  363.  Adj.  his  own  land,  Hugh  Dowdy 
&c.  Trans,  of  12  pers:  Amy  Lymon, 
Grace  Hatfeild,  Dorothy  Richardson, 
Joan  Wilson,  John  Miller,  Jane  Parker, 
Joan  Bradwell,  Marg.  Biggs,  Dennis 
Teague,  John  Moy. 

THOMAS  WILSFORD,  Gent.,  50 
acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  on  N.  W.  side 
of  Hallows  Cr.,  adj.  his  own  &  land  of 
Andrew  Munroe.  4  Sept.  1655,  p.  363. 
Trans,  of  Sarah  Southerne. 

JOHN  WITHERS,  150  acs.  West- 
moreland Co.,  upon  a  branch  of  Peto- 
meck  Cr.,  &  E.  upon  Capt.  Brent's  land. 
4  Sept.  1655,  p.  364.  Trans,  of  3  pers: 
James  Lewis,  John  Jones,  William 
Clerk. 

RICHARD  CODSFORD,  400  acs. 
Westmoreland  Co.,  20  Aug.  1655,  p. 
364.  On  S.  E.  side  of  land  of  Edward 
Parker  &  N.  E.  upon  a  creek  dividing 
same  from  land  of  Mr.  Valentine  Patten. 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  Richard  Bew,  John 
Willett,  Robert  Lawrence,  William 
Tharpp,  Tames  Margaret,  David  Doug- 
hert,  William  Thomas,  Richard  Feild. 
Note:  Renewed  by  order  of  Ct.  in  name 
of  Isaac  Watson  &  Saml.  Mothershed. 

PATRICK  MILLER,  350  acs.  on  S. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  Lancaster  Co.,   20 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


313 


Aug.  1655,  p.  364.  Adj.  land  of  Capt. 
Brocas,  deed.  &  George  Wadeing. 
Trans,  of  7  pers:  James  Nutt,  Thomas 
Bryan,  William  James,  Ralph  Cookely, 
Susanna  Hillary,  James  Hart,  William 
Jenkins. 

MRS.  MARGARET  BRENT,  1,000 
acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  upon  S.  side  of 
Rappa.  Riv.,  4  Sept.  1655,  p.  365. 
About  a  quarter  of  a  mile  above  the 
falls  of  the  sd.  River.  Trans,  of  20 
pers:  Richard  Cherry,  James  Hamilton, 
John  Martin,  William  Cooper,  one 
Negro  woman,  Mr.  John  Underhill, 
Henry  Jones,  Giles  Wright,  John  Ran- 
dall, John  Hutchenson,  Henry  Newly, 
Thomas  Allen,  James  Miller,  Sar. 
Leman,  Richard  Good,  Walter  Oliver, 
Francis  Grensly,  Mary  Wagstaff,  John 
Mayne,  Edward  Cooke. 

THOMAS  WILLESS,  450  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  20  Aug.  1655,  p.  365.  Adj. 
land  of  Lady  Chichly,  Bertam  Obert  & 
Arthur  Dunne,  assignee  of  Abraham 
Moone.  300  acs.  granted  to  Richard 
Lewis  &  assigned  unto  sd.  Willis  & 
Richard  Watkins  &  150  acs.  for  trans. 
of  3  pers:  John  Bell,  John  Nurden, 
John  Johnson. 

WALTER  DICKENSON,  500  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  upon  W.  side  of  Coroto- 
man  Riv.,  20  Aug.  1655,  p.  365.  Adj. 
land  of  Thomas  Hobkins,  assignee  of 
Thomas  Burrows,  assignee  of  David 
Fox,  &  a  tract  of  William  White.  300 
acs.  granted  unto  Henry  Hacker,  as- 
signed unto  Thomas  Borrows,  who  as- 
signed same  to  sd.  Dickenson;  &  200 
acs.  for  trans,  of  4  pers:  Jenkin  Morris, 
John  Naylor,  Richard  Harper,  James 
Clerke. 

THOMAS  JONES,  400  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  6  Aug.  1655,  p.  366.  On  N. 
side  of  James  Riv.,  bounded  from  Mr. 
Howes  corner  to  the  longe  Thickett  &c. 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  Ann  Green,  Richard 
Cole,  Jane  Stoute,  Elizabeth  Drooyt, 
Maudlin  Jones. 

GEORGE  KIBLE,  350  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  on  N.  side  of  Pyanketank  Riv.,  1 
Apr.  1655,  p  366.  Trans,  of  7  pers: 
Charles  Hill,  Andrew  Perren,  Jame  (or 


Jane)  Draper,  Ann  Jeffryes,  Ann  Beach, 
Xpher.  Kelle,  Thomas  Williams. 

EDWARD  GRIMES,  390  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  on  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
15  June,  1655,  p.  367.  150  acs.  called 
Quiacomack,  lying  S.  E.  upon  the  mouth 
of  Corotoman  Riv.,  running  from  the 
Spring  branch  to  a  br.  of  the  Island 
Neck  Cr.  240  acs.  adj.  land  of  David 
Fox  &  a  creek  dividing  same  from  land 
of  Thomas  Harwood.  Granted  unto  Ed- 
ward Grimes  in  2  patents,  i.  e.  23  Mar. 
1650,  &  21  May  1651. 

THOMAS  HUNT,  1  acr.  James  City, 
bounded  Sly.  upon  James  Riv.,  Wly. 
upon  land  of  Mr.  Chiles,  now  in  the 
occupation  of  Samll.  Hart  &  Thomas 
Woodhouse,  &  Nly.  upon  the  Path  lead- 
ing from  Capt.  Websters  to  sd.  Mr. 
Chiles.  1  Aug.  1655,  p.  367.  Half  an 
acre  of  sd.  land  formerly  granted  unto 
Mrs.  Elizabeth  Fleet,  which  by  her  death 
accrued  to  her  children,  &  now  by  Tho- 
mas Lyne,  guardian,  assigned  unto  Tho- 
mas Wilkenson,  to  whom  sd.  Hunt  is 
successor,  &  the  other  half  acre  granted 
by  order  of  the  Quarter  Ct.  &c. 

COL.     FRANCIS    MORRISON,     24 

acs.  commonly  known  by  the  name  of 
the  Glass  House,  James  City  Co.,  6 
Sept.  1655,  p.  367.  Formerly  by  Sir 
John  Harvey  by  bill  of  sale  made  over 
unto  Anthony  Coleman,  &  by  Edwd. 
Knight  his  heir  &  Joseph  Knight,  Atty. 
of  Wm.  Coleman,  joynt  heir  to  sd.  An- 
thony Coleman,  assigned  to  John  Senior, 
who  assigned  to  John  Fitchett,  who  as- 
signed same  to  John  Phipps  &  Wm. 
Harris,  which  sd.  Phipps  assigned  his 
part  unto  sd.  Harris,  who  assigned  the 
whole  to  sd.  Morrison. 

Patterns  granted  in  Governor  Bennett's 
time  formerly   Omitted  to   be  recorded. 

THOMAS  PENCHERMAN,  80  acs. 
York  Co.,  24  July  1654,  p.  368. 
Bounded  on  W.  with  a  swamp  dividing 
this  &  land  of  William  Graves,  N.  by 
W.  to  Skemeno,  upon  land  of  William 
Gantlett  &  upon  land  of  Phillip  Taylor, 
deed.,  now  in  possession  of  William 
Heward  &  sd.  Pencherman.  Trans,  of 
2  pers:  Johanna  Stella,  Richard  Bul- 
lock. 


314 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


RICHARD  JAMES,  40  acs.  James 
City,  6  June  1654,  p.  368.  On  S.  side 
of  the  back  creek,  beg.  at  Pyping  point 
&c.    Trans,  of  Richard  James. 

NICHOLAS  MORRIS,  512  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  1  June  1654,  p. 
368.  Upon  great  Wicocomoco  Riv.,  in- 
clud.  a  peninsula  called  the  Hand. 
Trans,  of  11  pers:  Ann  Evans,  James 
Veach,  Geo.  Wakefeild,  Rich.  Bates, 
John  Demaley,  John  Warner,  John 
Bridge,  Stephen  Taylor,  Dorothy  Griffen, 
John  Galler,  Kath.  Madix,  Wm. 
Nicholls;  Wm.  Nicholls  due. 

FIRDINANDO  AUSTIN,  1200  acs. 
Chas.  City  Co.,  25  Feb.  1653,  p.  369- 
On  N.  side  of  James  Riv.  &  E.  side  of 
Queens  Cr.,  Ely.  on  Moses  run,  S.  on 
Mr.  Horsmandine  &  Mr.  Hamblin. 
Trans,  of  24  pers:  John  Smith,  James 
Cockrum,  Dan.  Valker,  Edward  Smith, 
Wm.  Rogers,  Thomas  Wilkes,  William 
Brown,  Ferd.  Austin,  Jos.  Alcock,  Fra. 

Allen,   Jone  ,  Allester  ,  Tho. 

Gregory,    Ja.    Gregory,    Tho.    Kelway, 
Margt.    Legg,    Peter    Gerrard,    Thomas 

,  John  Griffen,  Jone  Irish,  Teague 

Allen,  Jone  Bristoll,  Thomas  Green,  Jo. 
Mitchell. 

THOMAS  HANCKS,  100  acs.  Glous- 
ter  Co.,  16  Feb.  1653,  p.  369.  N.  E. 
side  of  the  head  of  Arakiaco  Swamp, 
upon  S.  E.  side  of  Mettopony  Riv.,  & 
S.  W.  upon  Hanckes  br.  of  said  Swamp. 
Trans,  of  2  pers:  Joane  Litefoot,  John 
Range. 

RALPH  GREEN,  400  acs.  Glouster 
Co.,  16  Feb.  1653,  p.  369.  Upon  N. 
side  of  York  Riv.,  beg.  at  the  mouth  of 
Jones  Cr.,  E.  upon  a  Cr.  dividing  this 
&  land  of  Col.  Richard  Lee  &  N.  W. 
upon  land  of  William  Thorpe,  &  which 
was  assigned  to  him  by  said  Col.  Lee. 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  William  Coldham, 
John  Cranford,  John  Roberts,  Rich. 
Rethstroote,  John  Glass,  Henry  Elcher, 
John  Griffen,  Richard  Johnson. 

JAMES  TURNER,  800  acs.  on  S. 
side  of  York  Riv.,  in  the  Narrows,  adj. 
lands  of  Mr.  Joseph  Croshaw,  John  But- 
ler &  Mackadequin  Cr.  17  July  1653, 
p.  370.    Trans,  of  16  pers:    Nath.  Hale, 


Thomas  Hickman,  Hump.  Street,  Xan. 
(Christian)  Johnson,  Thomas  Baker, 
Eliz.  Sadler,  Antho.  Jackson,  Margt. 
Wilcox,  Frederick  Morris,  William 
Stephen,  Robert  Kaas,  Mary  Turner, 
John  Woodwar,  Robert  Winchell, 
Abraham  Rich,  William  Peters. 

OBED.  WILLIAMS,  440  acs.  York 
Co.,  between  land  of  Henry  Ashwell  & 
Richard  Parthmore.  6  May  1654,  p. 
370.  Trans,  of  9  pers:  Obed.  Williams, 
Thorn.  Williams,  Robert  Lilly,  Benjamin 
Johnson,  Nehemiah  Cattan,  Thomas 
Tuggell,  John  Pye,  Elizabeth  Davsell, 
William  Waterhouse. 

MR.  RICHARD  PARKER,  400  acs. 
in  the  S.  branch  of  Nanzemond  Riv., 
adj.  his  own  &  land  of  Mr.  William 
Wright.  5  Oct.  1654,  p.  371.  Trans, 
of  8  pers.* 

MR.  EDMUND  BOWMAN,  200 
acs.  at  the  head  of  Julions  Creek,  a 
branch  of  the  S.  branch  of  Elizabeth 
River.  9  Mar.  1653,  p.  371.  Trans,  of 
4  pers:  Sarah  Smith,  Robert  Peacock, 
Dan.  Dowglass,  Dan.  Mackland. 

MR.  EDMUND  BOWMAN  and 
RICHARD  STARNELL,  1200  acs.  in 
Deep  Creek,  a  branch  of  the  S.  branch 
of  Eliz.  River  Same  date  &  page. 
Trans,  of  24  pers:  Richard  Goldston, 
John  Aylett,  Richard  Gardner,  Margt. 
Bowman,  Sarah  Bowman,  Garthred 
Bowman,  Fra.  Cutter,  Elizabeth  Dur- 
ham, John  Agagin,  Dary  Line,  Jane 
Miller,  Mary  Price. 

MR.  RUSSELL,  150  acs.,  adj.  Mossey 
Poynt,  &  near  land  of  John  Gookin. 
27  Aug.  1653,  p.  372.  Trans,  of  3 
pers.*    Note:    "Formerly  recorded.'' 

THOMAS  COLE,  300  acs.  Chas.  City 
Co.,  18  Apr.  1653,  p.  372.  On  N.  side 
of  Wards  Cr.  near  the  mill,  &  on  Cross 
Cr.,  which  divides  same  from  land  of 
John  Francis,  opposite  against  John 
Redishes  land  &  S.  S.  W.  on  Capt. 
Bond's  land.  Trans,  of  6  pers:*  150 
acs.  granted  unto  John  Rasbury,  29  Oct. 
1642,  &  assigned  to  sd.  Cole;  &  100 
acs.   assigned  to  him  by  Edward  Cole. 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


315 


WILLIAM  MELLS,  400  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co.,  6  Sept.  1654,  p.  372.  On  N. 
side  &  in  the  freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
bounded  on  N.  W.  with  land  surveyed 
for  Mr.  Toby  Smith  &  S.  E.  upon  land 
of  Mr.  Thomas  Hobkins.  Trans,  of  8 
pers:  James  Bourne,  William  Poweil, 
David  Hart,  William  Davis,  Richard 
Williams,  David  Blagg,  Richard  Jones, 
Roger  Wardy. 

JOHN  WITHERS  &  STEPHEN 
GAREY,  1,000  acs.  Westmoreland  Co., 
6  Oct.  1654,  p.  373.  Bounded  on  N.  E. 
with  land  of  Capt.  Brent  &  S.  W.  with 
a  branch  of  Petomeck  Cr.  Trans,  of  20 
pers:  Cleare  Browne,  Lawrence  Organ, 
Joane  Macker,  Thomas  Simpson,  Mary 
Batchelor,  Hanna  Fowler,  Edmond 
Peters,  John  Stubberts,  John  Hamond, 
Thomas  Burbadge,  Thomas  Blucknett, 
Perty  Hamond,  Emedlen  Burford,  Wil- 
liam Wood,  William  Finch,  Susan  Col- 
lins, Phillip  Ellyott,  Ann  Ellyott,  Ed- 
ward Ellyott. 

MR.  GILES  BRENT,  son  of  Capt. 
Giles  Brent,  1,000  acs.  Westmoreland 
Co.,  6  Sept.  1654,  p.  373.  On  S.  side 
of  Petomeck  Riv.,  in  the  freshes,  beg.  at 
the  Ricohockian  Stand  &  N.  E.  near  the 
mouth  of  Hunting  Creek.  Trans,  of  20 
pers:  Capt.  Robert  Felgate,  his  son 
Erasmus  twice,  his  wife  Sibilla,  3 
Negroes:  Tony,  Bass  &  Maria;  Thomas 
Hall,  Willm.  Burford,  Richard  Wells, 
Henry  Morgan,  Fra.  Sharpe,  Grace 
Head,  Mary  Hayes,  Wm.  Hillard,  Tho- 
mas Bassett,  Robert  Tyler,  Edward 
Fenner,  Mary  Peay,  Fra.  Hans  worth. 

RICHARD  COLEMAN,  600  acs.  up- 
on the  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  adj.  land 
of  Silvester  Thatcher  &  Thomas  Whit- 
lock  &  beg.  upon  the  head  of  a  branch 
of  Mr.  Smarts  Creek.  9  June  1654,  p. 
373.    Trans,  of  12  pers.* 

THOMAS  HOBKINS,  1400  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  on  N.  side  of  Rappa. 
Riv.,  6  Sept.  1654,  p.  374.  Bounded  on 
S.  E.  with  Pepetick  Cr.,  adj.  land  of 
William  Mells  &  opposite  land  of  Mr. 
John  Catlett.  Trans,  of  28  pers:  Wil- 
liam Wheeler,  John  Hallows,  John 
Tue,  William  Freeke,  Robert  Street, 
Restitute    Hollis,    Sr.,    Restitute    Hollis, 


Junr.,  John  Knott,  Edward  Fryar,  Tho- 
mas Youle,  Ann  Yowell,  Senr.,  Ann 
Yowell,  Junr.,  And.  Munroe,  Thomas 
Yowell,  William  Yowell,  Tho.  Brough- 
ton,  Ann  Williams,  Edward  Dawson, 
John  Garner,  John  Eaton,  Geo.  Eaton, 
John  Ridly,  Rob.  Burwell,  John  Hooks, 
Peter  Ward,  Con.  Gamberson,  Nath. 
Winly,  Harry  Renn;  Assignee  of  A. 
Moon,  assignee  of  Mr.  Hollis  &  John 
Eaton. 

FRANCIS  SMITH,  Ingeenr.  (Engi- 
neer) &  MR.  JOHN  SMITH,  of  Stanly 
hundred,  3,000  acs.  Westmoreland  Co., 
10  Sept.  1654,  p.  374.  N.  E.  upon  Up- 
per Machotix  Riv.,  betwixt  lands  of 
Nich.  Lambsen  &  Capt.  Thomas  Davis 
and  John  Williams  &  Stephen  Norman, 
Nly.  upon  land  of  John  Walton,  Ely. 
upon  land  of  Gervace  Dodson  &  Nath. 
Jones.  Trans,  of  60  pers:  William 
Cadagon,  William  Alliston,  (or  Alfis- 
ton),  Henry  Gwany,  Richard  Willard, 
Thomas  Panckhest,  Henry  Nurton,  Wm. 
Fothergale,  John  Peck,  Peter  Hogard, 
Thomas  White,  John  Taylor,  Richard 
Taylor,  John  Wimpey,  Jobe  Wardell, 
John  Smith,  David  Hues,  Bryan  Canida, 
Richard  Tinason,  Elmor  Lockington, 
John  Giles,  Charles  Scott,  James  Mor- 
rice,  Mrs.  Kath.  Whitby,  Thomas  Whit- 
by, Edward  Gibbs,  Phillip  Farrant, 
Martha  Sadler,  Alice  Standly,  Thomas 
Edmonds,  Ralph  Weeks,  John  Arch, 
Margarett  Nash,  Margarett  Jones,  Wil- 
liam Hilton,  William  Bregat,  Sarah 
Hutchins,  James  Husly,  Andrew  Browne, 
John  Selly,  Alex,  a  Scott,  Saul  a  Scott, 
Daniel  Smith,  Rowland  Beawmon,  Eli- 
zabeth a  maid  servt.,  Mary  a  maid  servt., 
Thomas  Tervant,  Francis  Smith,  Robt. 
Newman,  3  Negroes:  Mathias,  John  & 
Susan.  150  acs.  by  assignment  of  a 
patent  from  Robert  Newman  to  Mr. 
Whitby  &  by  the  said  Whitby  delivered 
up  in  the  office  for  the  above  said 
Smith's  use. 

ROBERT  HUBERD,  300  acs.  Glous- 
ter  Co.,  upon  N.  side  of  York  Riv.,  6 
June  1654,  p.  375.  Beg.  on  Wwd.  side 
of  Bennetts  Cr.  dividing  this  &  land  of 
John  Bennett  &  Thomas  Leechman  &c, 
to  a  white  oak  dividing  this  &  land  of 
Thomas  Bell,  &  S.  S.  E.  upon  land  of 
John  King.    Granted  unto  Joseph  Haies, 


316 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


3  Apr.   1651,  by  him  deserted  &  now 
granted  by  order  of  court  &c. 

MR.  MORDECOY  COOKE,  300  acs., 
upon  the  N.  side  of  a  swamp  falling 
into  Ware  Riv.,  &  opposite  land  of  John 
Walker.,  7  Sept.  1654,  p.  375.  Trans, 
of  6  pers:  Thomas  Seag  (or  Seay), 
Henry  Norman,  Mathew  Borrowes,  John 
Gassent,  Thomas  Cater,  Richard  Pevvis. 

JAMES  YATES,  1,000  acs.,  on  S. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  &  Wwd.  side  of 
land  of  John  Gillett;  beg.  on  Wwd. 
side  of  a  creek  dividing  this  &  land  of 
sd.  Gillett.  7  Sept.  1654,  p.  375. 
Trans,  of  20  pers:  James  Yates,  Eliza- 
beth Jones,  William  Keneis,  Ralph 
Prichett,  Margt.  Lewellen,  James  Pren- 
ton,  William  Lewis,  William  Manahan, 
Andrew  Elkeson,  Mar.  Wilson,  Neal 
Hannah,  Robert  Akleson,  John  Green, 
Roger  Harreson,  Sarah  Kegs,  Dan. 
Simpson,  William  Dunston,  Henry 
Sharpe,  Francis  Blany,  Dan.  Higgins. 

THOMAS  MEADS  &  JOHN  PHIL- 
LIPS, 1,000  acs.,  on  S.  side  of  the 
freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  about  16  mi. 
above  Nanzemum  Towne,  opposite  land 
of  Richard  Coleman.  7  Sept.  1654,  p. 
376.    Trans,  of  20  pers.* 

NICHOLAS  MERYWETHER,  3,000 
acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  1  June  1654,  p. 
376.  Upon  W.  branch  of  Petomeck 
Riv.,  N.  Wly.  upon  the  hills  by  the 
falls  &  S.  E.  upon  land  of  Col.  Bur- 
bage.  Trans,  of  60  pers:  Elizabeth 
Hart,  James  Hare,  Thomas  Green, 
Robert  Stone,  Alexander  Hind,  Thomas 
Webb,  Richard  Wells,  David  Jones, 
James  Johnson,  Grace  Thomas,  Henry 
Cocket,  William  Rose,  Thomas  Hart, 
Joane  Wright,  Peter  White,  Edward 
Whiting,  John  How,  Edmond  Williams, 
William  Clerke,  Jeffry  Moore,  Charles 
Heiward,  Richard  Perren,  James  Bowles, 
Henry  Walker,  James  Cocket,  Arthur 
Cocket,  Grace  Noble,  Ellynor  Mathews, 
Thomas  Hyupp,  Agnis  Melvice,  Edward 
Saunderson,  gent.,  Mountecue  his 
brother. 

SAME.  1350  acs.,  same  Co.,  date  & 
page.  Nly.  upon  Petomeck  Riv.  &  Ely. 
upon  land  of  John  Walton.    Trans,  of 


27  pers:  Henry  Kelly,  Nich.  Eusam, 
Fra.  Durwell,  Tho.  Hamond,  John 
Crostick,  Charles  Howell,  Simon  &c, 
George  Abothon,  James  Forrest,  And. 
Muber,  Rich.  Cowhead,  Eliz.  Willes, 
Eliz.  Jackson,  Eliz.  Lucham,  Thomas 
Duell,  Tho.  Crowder,  Wm.  Hutchinson. 

RICHARD     JONES,     CI.     (Clerk), 

1500  acs.  Chas.  City  Co.,  12  Mar.  1655, 
p.  377.  950  acs.  being  about  2  mi. 
from  the  River,  at  the  back  of  Mer- 
chants Hope,  W.  upon  land  of  Richard 
Craven,  S.  upon  the  Old  Towne  being 
the  land  of  Mr.  Richard  Tye,  &  E.  on 
land  of  Thomas  Wheeler;  &  550  acs. 
adj.  this  tract.  950  acs.  by  patent  dated 
30  Aug.  1650  &  550  by  patent  dated  1 
Mar.  1651. 

By  Edward  Diggs,  Esqr. 

JOHN  BATES,  50  acs.,  15  Sept. 
1655,  p.  377.  Lying  at  the  Middle 
plantation,  butting  Ely.  upon  the  Old 
paile,  Nly.  upon  Mr.  Tyler  &  Sly.  upon 
Fra.  Peale.  Due  by  purchase  from 
George  Lake. 

SYMONS  SYMONS,  320  acs.  Chas. 
City  Co.,  on  S.  side  of  James  Riv.  &  E. 
side  of  Powells  Cr.,  about  a  mile  from 
the  creek,  15  Sept.  1655,  p.  377. 
Bounded  S.  from  the  reedy  swamp,  up 
by  James  Ward,  downe  by  Mr.  Frame 
&c.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  Bashaw,  Negro; 
Joyce  Downes,  John  Marks,  Eliz.  Noles, 
John  Hull,  Richard  Arum. 

JOHN  JOHNSON,  227  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  Sly.  upon  great  Wicoco- 
moco  Riv.  24  Oct.  1655,  p.  377. 
Granted  to  Thomas  Kedby,  &  sd.  John- 
son, 24  July  1650,  &  assigned  unto  sd. 
Johnson. 

CAPT.  HENRY  FLEET,  1,000  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  1  June  1655,  p.  378.  In 
Fleets  Bay,  S.  upon  a  creek  near  land 
of  Toby  Horton,  E.  upon  the  Bay,  & 
N.  upon  Hadawaies  Cr.  Trans,  of  20 
pers.* 

WILLIAM  WALKER,  839  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  24  Oct.  1655,  p. 
378.  639  acs.,  S.  E.  upon  Yeocomoco 
Riv.,    S.    W.    upon    land    of    Richard 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


317 


Holder;  200  acs.  commonly  called 
Bloyce,  his  land,  S.  E.  upon  sd.  Riv.  & 
N.  E.  upon  a  creek  towards  John  Earles 
plantation.  339  acs.  granted  sd.  Wal- 
ker, 19  Oct.  1653,  &  300  acs.  part  of 
600  acs.  patent  to  Richard  Holder,  13 
Oct.  1653  &  assigned  by  him  to  sd. 
Walker  in  leiu  of  300  acs.  remaining 
in  Walkers  patent  &c;  &  200  acs.  due 
for  trans,  of  4  pers.* 

RICHARD  HOLDER,  600  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  24  Oct.  1655,  p. 
379.  S.  E.  upon  Yeocomoco  Riv.,  S.  W. 
upon  land  of  Robert  Smith  &  N.  E. 
upon  William  Walker.  Due  as  noted 
in  Walker  patent  above. 

CAPT.  DANIEL  LUELLIN,  636 
acs.  Chas.  City  Co.,  10  Mar.  1655,  p. 
379.  270  acs.  on  the  head  of  Sherly 
hundred,  commonly  known  by  the  name 
of  rich  Levell,  E.  upon  land  of  Mr. 
Walter  Aston,  &  N.  upon  his  own  land ; 
&  200  acs.  in  or  near  Shirly  hundred, 
which  was  in  possession  of  Edward 
Gardner,  deed.,  N.  upon  40  acs.  of  land 
purchased  of  Edward  Madison,  &  S. 
upon  land  lately  belonging  to  Serjant 
John  Harris;  63  acs.  in  Sherly  hundred, 
beg.  at  land  of  sd.  Luellins,  lately  pur- 
chased of  Robt.  Partin,  Senr.  &  Robt. 
Partin,  Junr.,  &  sold  to  Mr.  John 
Meares;  63  acs.  another  part  being  in 
Sherly  hundred  or  Bermuda  hundred, 
lately  belonging  to  Michael  Turpin;  43 
acs.  next  to  land  lately  belonging  unto 
Joseph  Royall,  deed.,  next  towards 
Sherly  hundred  maine.  270  acs.  by 
patent  dated  26  Oct.  1650;  200  acs.  by 
patent,  11  July  1653;  63  acs.  purchased 
of  Dorothy  Baker,  the  relict  of  John 
Baker;  63  acs.  purchased  of  Michael 
Turpin;  40  acs.  purchased  of  Edward 
Maddin.  All  of  which  several  parcels 
were  ordered  to  be  included  in  one 
patent. 

THOMAS  WOODHOUSE,  1  acre, 
James  City  Co.,  17  Oct.  1655,  p.  380. 
Beg.  at  the  Mulberry  Tree  &c.  towards 
Mr.  Chiles  his  Orchard  &c.  Due  by 
order  of  Court,  etc. 

LAZARUS  THOMAS,  250  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  12  Oct.  1655,  p.  380.  On 
N.  E.  side  of  Richohock  Path,  from  a 


marked  tree  of  Mathew  Williamson  to 
Charles  Edmonds  &c.  Trans,  of  5  pers.* 
Note:  Assigned  unto  Step.  Pettus  & 
renewed  in  his  name,  10  Mar.  1662. 

ALEXANDER  PORTEU  (POUR- 
TEU),  600  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  6  Oct. 
1656,  p.  380.  On  S.  side  of  Morratticon 
Cr.,  W.  S.  W.  upon  land  of  Lambert 
Lambertson  &  Rich.  Hatton.  Granted 
to  David  Fox,  25  Nov.  1652,  assigned 
to  sd.  Porteu  &  renewed  by  order  of 
the  Govr.  &c. 

CAPT.      WILLIAM      WHITACRE, 

(Whittacre),  90  acs.  James  City  Co., 
on  N.  E.  side  of  James  Riv.,  5  June 
1656,  p.  381.  Beg.  in  Mr.  Lovings  line 
behind  Richard  Lennarts  house,  running 
W.  by  N.  etc.  to  York  Path,  etc.  Trans, 
of  2  pers.* 

WILLIAM  DORMER,  1100  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  on  N.  side  of  James 
Riv.  &  Ely.  side  of  Chicohomminy  Riv., 
6  June  1656,  p.  381.  Beg.  on  Richard 
News  land  N.  N.  E.  to  Tyascum,  to- 
wards Mr.  Rolfes  Indian  feild,  over  two 
branches  of  Rabenetts  run,  to  Squire 
Diggs'  corner  &c.    Trans,  of  20  pers.* 

SAME.  200  acs.  Same  county,  date 
&  page.  In  Harrop  Parish,  W.  N.  W. 
by  land  of  Edward  Besse  to  Ware  Cr., 
S.  by  E.  by  land  of  William  Davis,  E. 
by  N.  by  Tutties  Neck  Swamp  &  by 
land  of  Humphry  Higgenson.  Due  by 
purchase  from  William  Davis. 

SYMON  SYMONS,  300  acs.  in  N. 
W.  branch  of  Nanzemond  Riv.,  3  June 
1656,  p.  382.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Wil- 
liam Everat,  Ann  his  wife,  Richard 
Staples,  Tho.  Sterling,  Alexander  Linsey, 
Garrard  Harrard. 

SAME.  100  acs.  beg.  by  the  Mill 
dam,  S.  E.  butting  on  land  of  Peter 
Mallerus,  etc.  Same  date  &  page. 
Trans,  of  2  pers:    Daniell  Johnson. 

RICHARD  MAJOR,  1,350  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  last  of  June  1656,  p.  382. 
400  acs.  upon  N.  side  of  Chas.  Riv., 
abutting  N.  W.  upon  Perrins  Cr.,  which 
divides  this  &  land  of  Ashwell  Batten, 
&  N   .E.   upon   land   of  Thomas   Bell; 


318 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


600  acs.  adj.  his  own  land,  near  a 
branch  of  Porotank  Cr.,  S.  W.  upon 
land  of  John  Major,  and  upon  head  of 
Perrens  Cr.,  dividing  this  &  land  of 
James  Holding;  350  acs.  on  E.  side  of 
Simpsons  Swamp,  etc.  1,000  acs.  by 
patent,  20  Mar.  1653,  &  350  acs.  for 
trans,  of  7  pers.* 

RICHARD  LAWSON,  1400  acs.  beg. 
at  marked  trees  which  run  W.  S.  W. 
cross  the  upper  of  the  great  Island  in 
Rapp.  Riv.  &  the  lower  part  of  the  neck 
of  land  upon  which  he  lives,  parallel  to 
land  of  George  Eaton  &c.  6  Oct.  1656, 
p.  383.  1,000  acs.  granted  to  Epaphra- 
ditus  Lawson  &  assigned  unto  sd.  Rich- 
ard, &  400  acs.  assigned  unto  him  by 
Rowland  Lawson,  to  whom  it  was 
granted  6  Oct.  1654. 

GEORGE  KIBBLE,  740  acs.  on  S. 
side  of  Peanketanke,  beg.  a  mile  or 
more  from  the  river,  &c,  to  an  oak  near 
Rappa.  Path.  4  June  1656,  p.  384.  350 
acs.  by  patent  dated  1  Apr.  1655;  & 
390  acs.  for  trans,  of  8  pers:  Charles 
Leach,  Robert  Filkin,  Peter  Leach,  Peter 
Garland,  Robert  Tompson,  Robert 
Smith,  Thomas  Hansen,  John  South. 

MR.  PETER  RIGBY  &  GEORGE 
KIBBLE,  600  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  8  Oct. 
1656,  p.  384.  Upon  N.  side  of  Pyanke- 
tank  River,  opposite  to  land  formerly 
Major  William  Hoccaday's.  Trans,  of 
12  pers:  Richard  Chantry,  William 
Leach,  John  Binion,  Mary  Stanton,  Ed- 
ward Steevens,  John  Riggons,  David 
Vause,  John  Wells,  Barbary  Shekells, 
Ann  Tompson,  Thomas  Bond,  Robert 
Thompson. 

JOB  BEARLY,  Gent.,  600  acs.  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  6  June  1656,  p.  385. 
Beg.  near  Capt.  Wombnell's  land  &  on 
the  second  swamp  of  the  black  water. 
Trans,  of  12  pers.* 

GEORGE  ABBOTT,  600  acs.  in  the 
Upper  Parish  of  Nancemond,  adj.  land 
of  Mr.  Thomas  Francis,  3  June  1656, 
p.  385.  Trans,  of  12  pers:  George 
Abbott,  Tho.  Hanson,  Wm.  Harrison, 
John  Quick,  Ellice  Denman,  Mary 
Fisher,  Eliz.  Dixon,  Luke  Dixon,  Robt. 
Whiteworth,  Alice  Maddox. 


RICHARD  SLAUGHTER,  650  acs. 
Nancemond  Co.,  3  June  1656,  p.  386. 
Running  to  the  Horse  bridge.  250  acs. 
by  purchase  from  Epaphraditus  Lawson; 
200  acs.  by  former  patent,  dated  30  May 
1653,  &  200  acs.  for  trans,  of  4  pers.* 

DAVID  FOX,  Gent.,  800  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  7  July  1656,  p.  386.  Upon 
S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  about  44  miles 
up  the  same,  adj.  Mr.  Soanes  land  & 
Puscaticon  Creek.  Renewal  of  patent 
dated  29  Nov.  1652,  by  order  of  Ct.  &c. 

MR.  THOMAS  PURIFOY,  2,000  acs. 
on  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  in  the  freshes, 
about  4  mi.  above  Nanzemum  Towne., 
13  Mar.  1655,  p.  386.  Trans,  of  40 
pers:  William  Elliott,  George  Pennell, 
Ann  Freeman,  Ann  Tawney,  John 
Byrom,  Joseph  Lansey,  3  times,  Ann 
Bowles,  Senr.,  Ann  Bowles,  Junr., 
Charles  Aston,  Issabell  his  wife,  John 
his  son,  Elinor  Steward,  4  Negroes; 
Wm.  Underfeild,  Mary  Slaughter,  Ed- 
mond  Sweny,  Senr.,  Eliz.  his  wife,  Ed- 
mond  Sweny,  Junr.,  Elizabeth  Sweney, 
Mary  Sweney,  Jane  Richards,  Augustine 
Johannes  Van  de  Powke.  (The  lack  of 
punctuation  makes  it  difficult  to  deter- 
mine whether  or  not  the  last  name  re- 
fers to  one  or  more  persons.) 

LT.  COL.  WILLIAM  BARBER,  538 
acs.  in  Yorke  Co.,  on  S.  W.  side  of 
Yorke  Riv.,  13  Sept.  1656,  p.  387. 
Adj.  land  of  Mr.  Richard  Jones,  Mr. 
Thomas  Whitehead,  Mr.  William  Cain- 
hoe  &  Capt.  Robt.  Felgate.  125  acs.  & 
50  acs.,  part  hereof,  by  two  patents 
dated  10  Aug.  1642  &  6  May  1651, 
respectively,  and  363  acs.  for  trans,  of 
8  pers.* 

FRANCIS  BURNELL,  Gent.,  300  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  on  S.  W.  side  of  York 
Riv.,  10  Oct.  1655,  p.  387.  Adj.  his 
own  land  at  Warreny.  Trans,  of  6 
pers.* 

SAME.  1,000  acs.  Same  county.  15 
Dec.  1655,  p.  388.  Including  new 
Warreny  feilds  beg.  at  Northermost 
corner  marked  trees  by  Warreny  Path, 
running  S.  E.  etc.  670  acs.  granted  to 
George  Chapman  &  assigned  unto  sd. 
Burnell;  &  300  acs.  granted  sd.  Burnell, 
as  above.    31  acs.  for  trans,  of  1  pers.* 


Patent  Book  No.  3 


319 


SILVESTER  THATCHER,  1,000  acs., 
on  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  at  a 
creek  dividing  his  own  &  land  of  Wil- 
liam Yarrett,  parallel  to  land  of  Thomas 
Whitelock  &c.  6  Oct.  1656,  p.  388. 
500  acs.  being  the  moiety  of  a  patent 
granted  unto  him  &  Thomas  Whitelock, 
&  500  acs.  for  trans,  of  10  pers:  Wil- 
liam Bullock,  Elizabeth  Clerck,  And. 
Mills,  Roger  Thomas. 

JOHN  BROMFEILD,  650  acs.  on  S. 
W.  side  of  Chycohomminy  Riv.,  James 
City  Co.,  last  of  Mar.  1656,  p.  389. 
Behind  land  "sometimes"  of  Toby  Smith 
&  part  of  Mr.  Haines,  beg.  at  the  head 
of  Wickwaas  &c.  to  Nicadawances  path, 
etc.    Trans,  of  13  pers.* 

WILLIAM  TIGNER,  750  acs.,  on  S. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  upon  the  E. 
side  Troublesome  point  Creek  &  adj. 
his  own  land  on  Tigners  Cr.  4  Nov. 
1656,  p.  389.  550  acs.  purchased  of 
Richard  Axome  &  Thomas  Godwin,  to 
whom  it  was  granted  22  May  1650;  & 
200  acs.  assigned  unto  him  by  James 
Bonnor,  (Bonner),  to  whom  it  was 
granted  15   Sept.  1651. 

HUGH  LEE,  388  acs.  Northumber- 
land Co.,  4  June  1656,  p.  390.  100  acs. 
adj.  N.  upon  his  own,  W.  upon  land  of 
James  Cloughton  &  S.  upon  an  Old 
Indian  Feild;  288  acs.  S.  E.  upon  a 
swamp  of  Kings  Cr.  &  N.  E.  towards 
land  of  Col.  John  Mattrom.  Renewal 
of  two  former  patents,   dated   21   Dec. 

1650,  and  22  Apr.  1654. 

ROBERT  HORSLY,  300  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  6  Oct.  1655,  p.  390. 
On  S.  side  of  Petomeck  Riv.,  Wly.  upon 
Nomeny  bay  &  Nly.  upon  a  creek  divid- 
ing this  from  land  of  John  Armsby. 
Granted  unto  Thomas  Yowell,  16  Sept. 

1651,  &  by  sd.  Youle  &  Ann,  his  wife, 
assigned  unto  Rice  Maddocks,  by  whom 
it  was  assigned  unto  sd.  Horsly. 

SARAH  PHILLIPPS  &  LT.  COL. 
MOORE  FANTLEROY,  250  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  6  June  1656,  p.  390.  On  N. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  at  Johns  Cr. 
running  N.  N.  E.  etc.  Due  by  virtue 
of  the  administration  granted  them  on 
the  estate  of  John  Phillipps,  who 
patented  same,   13  July  1653. 


DAVID  PHILLIPPS,  400  acs.  West- 
moreland Co.,  10  Sept.  1656,  p.  391. 
N.  W.  upon  Chotank  Cr.  &  N.  E.  upon 
land  surveyed  for  Oliver  Baulf.  Trans, 
of  8  pers.* 

WILLIAM  SARSON,  107  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  on  N.  side  of  James  Riv  &  S. 
side  of  Parthmores  Cr.,  2  Oct.  1656,  p. 
391.  Nly.  on  Goose  Hill  howse,  &  Ely., 
Sly.  &  Wly.  on  the  main  river.  7  acs. 
by  purchase  from  Capt.  Dowglass,  Atty. 
of  Lady  Elizabeth  Dale;  &  100  acs.  for 
trans,  of  2  pers.* 

JOHN  HARRISON,  1,000  acs.  West- 
moreland Co.,  4  Sept.  1655,  p.  391. 
Upon  the  head  of  Oqui  Riv.,  lyeing 
W.  N.  W.  upon  Mr.  Payton's  land  & 
E.  N.  E.  upon  Chapawansick.  "To  have 
and  to  hold  the  said  land  to  him  the 
said  John  Harrison  his  Heyrs.  for  ever 
&  for  want  of  Heires  to  his  Sister  Mrs. 
Francis  Harrison  and  the  Heires  of  her 
body  and  for  want  of  her  Heires  to  Mr. 
Giles  Brent  of  Peace  in  the  County  of 
Westmoreland  his  Heyrs.  and  Assignes 
for  ever." 

THOMAS  HARRIS,  650  acs.  on  the 
N.  side  of  the  head  of  Puscaticon  Cr., 
Lancaster  Co.,  23  Aug.  1656,  p.  392. 
Adj.  land  of  Oliver  Seger,  &  opposite 
an  Indian  feild.  Trans,  of  13  pers: 
Richard  Dorman,  Alexandr.  Lawrence, 
Peter  Tibball,  Henry  Jones,  John  Yate, 
Elenor  Ogestor,  Elinr.  Harris,  Law. 
Davis,  Patrick  Wishart,  Peter  Croleham, 
Dan.  Coningham,  Giles  Dryver. 

WILLIAM  WALKER,  839  acs.,  24 
Oct.  1655,  p.  392.  630  acs.  in  North- 
umberland Co.,  S.  E.  upon  Yeocomoco 
Riv.  &  S.  W.  upon  land  of  Richard 
Holdin.  200  acs.  S.  E.  upon  sd.  River 
&  N.  E.  towards  John  Earles  Plantation, 
which  tract  is  comonly  called  Bloyses 
land.  600  granted  him  10  Oct.  1653, 
&  200  acs.  for  trans,  of  4  pers:  Wil- 
liam Tagle,  Thomas  Price,  Elizabeth 
Sullivant,  John  . 

RICHARD  HULL,  400  acs.  on  Swd. 
side  of  Home  Harbour  Cr.,  9  Oct.  1655, 
p.  393.    Granted  unto  Winnifred  Mor- 


320 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


rison,  26  June  1651,  assigned  unto  sd. 
Hull  &  now  renewed,  by  order  &c. 

SAME.  116  acs.  Eliz.  City  Co.,  15 
Oct.  1655,  p.  393.  Bounded  on  W. 
with  Hampton  Riv.,  on  S.  by  the  Gleab 
land  &  N.  by  land  of  Henry  Coleman. 
Granted  unto  Henry  Poole,  17  Oct. 
1642  &  assigned  unto  sd.  Hull. 

GEORGE  TAYLOR,  530  acs.  on  N. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  in  Corotoman  Riv., 
&  running  along  land  of  Henry  Lee.  6 
Oct.  1656,  p.  393.  Renewal  of  patent 
dated  5  Sept.  1650. 


P.  394.  MEMORAND:  "The  former 
part  of  this  Book  being  transcribed  out 
of  loose  Leaves,  which  were  by  me 
hung  upon  a  string  and  alphabeted, 
when  I  was  Deputy  in  this  Office;  By 
the  said  Alphabet  I  find  there  are  three 
Leaves  since  that  time  on  which  by  the 
Alphabet  are  enter'd  the  following 
patents."  Vizt:  Bebey,  John  .  .  700 
acs;  Barnhouse,  Richard  .  .  450  acs; 
Billips,  George  .  .  100  acs;  Blunt,  Gil- 
bert .  .  320  acs;  Higgins,  Charles  .  . 
100   acs;    Holt,   Robert    .    .    1550   acs; 

Shaw  of  Northumb'land   .   .   345 

acs.    (Signed)    R.  Beverly. 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


By  Edward  Diggs,  Esqr.,  Governor  &  Captain  General  of  Virginia. 

To  all  to  whome  these  presents  shall  come  I  Edmond  Diggs  esqr.,  Govr.  & 
Capt.  Generell  of  Virginia  send  greetinge  in  Our  Lord  God  everlastinge. 

Whereas  by  the  articles  dated  at  James  Citty  the  12th  of  March  1651  con- 
cluded &  signed  by  the  Comrs.  appointed  by  Authority  of  Parliament  for  the 
reducinge,  settlinge  &  goveringe  of  Virga.  It  was  provided  that  the  priviledge  of 
fifty  acres  of  Land  for  every  person  transported  into  this  Colony  should  bee 
Continued  as  formerly  granted  And  Whereas  by  act  of  a  grand  Assembly  made 
the  26th  of  Aprill  1652  It  was  provided  that  all  pattents  should  hereafter  bee 
signed  under  the  Governors  hand  with  the  Secretaries  and  shall  bee  accounted 
Authentique  &  vallid  in  Law  untill  a  Collony  seale  shall  bee  provided  and  apointed 
Now  know  yee  that  I  the  said  Edward  Diggs  esqr.  doe  with  the  Consent  of  the 

Councell  of  State  accordingly  give  &  grant  unto  (Here  follows  name  of 

patentee  and  description  of  land.)  To  have  &  To  hold  the  said  Land  with  his 
due  share  of  all  mines  &  minneralls  therein  Conteyned  with  all  rights  &  priviledges 
of  huntinge  hawkinge  fishinge  &  fowleinge  with  all  woods  waters  &  rivers  with 
all  proffitts  commodoties  &  hereditaments  whatsoever  in  anie  wise  belonginge  to 

the  said  Land  to  him  the  said his  heyres  or  Assignes  For  Ever  In  as  large  & 

Ample  Manner  to  all  Intents  and  purposes  as  is  exprest  in  a  Charter  of  Orders 
from  the  late  Treasurer  &  Company  dated  the  18th  of  November  16 18  or  by 
Consequence  may  bee  Justly  Collected  out  of  the  same  or  out  of  the  letters 
pattents  whereon  they  are  grounded.  Yeildinge  &  payeinge  unto  the  rent  gatherers 
thereunto  apointed  for  every  Fifty  acres  of  Land  herein  by  these  presents  given  & 
granted  Yearely  at  the  feast  of  Saint  Michael  the  Arch  Arigel  the  fee  rent  of  one 
shillinge  which  payment  is   to   bee  made   Seaven  yeares   after   the  first  grant   or 

seating   thereof    &   not    before.    Provided    that    if    the    said    his    heyres    or 

Assignes  doe  not  plant  or  seate  or  Cause  to  bee  planted  or  seated  upon  the  said 
Land  within  three  yeares  next  ensueinge  that  then  it  may  &  shall  bee  Lawfull 
for  any  Adventurer  or  planter  to  make  Choice  &  seate  thereon.  Given  under  our 
hands  at  James  Citty  the  day  of  (Old  V,  page  1.) 

NOTE:  The  following  Abstracts  of  Patent  Books  Nos.  4  and  5  were  made  from  "Old 
Volume  5",  which  has  been  transcribed  into  two  volumes,  and  the  old  book  withdrawn  from 
general  usage.  "Old  Volume  5"  is  unindexed  and  the  pages  do  not  correspond  with  the 
general  index  to  patents  or  with  the  transcripts  in  Book  4  and  5,  therefore,  attention  is  called 
to  the  duplicate  pagination..  The  first  page  number  refers  to  the  old  volume,  while  the  numerals 
in  brackets  indicate  pages  in  the  transcripts.  It  is  evident  Old  Volume  5  is  an  ancient  copy 
and  is  used  in  this  work  because  it  gives  the  names  of  "headrights",  with  few  exceptions, 
which   are  not  carried  in  the  copied  books. 

JOHN  NICHOLLS,  400  acs.  North-  MR.    HUGH    YEO,    Merchant,    644 

ampton   Co.,    2   Oct.    1655,   p.    1,    (1).  acs.  Northampton  Co.,  2  Oct.  1655,  p. 

On  the  N.  side  of  the  maine  S.  branch  2,  (2).    On  S.  side  of  Pungoteage  Riv., 

of  Anancocke,   Sly.   on  a  small   branch  Nly.  on  land  of  Charles  Scarbrough,  be- 

called  Ekeks    (?)    parting  it  from  land  ing  400  acs.  purchased  by  sd.  Yeo,  Ely. 

of  William  Mellinge.    Trans,  of  8  pers:  on  land  of  Mr.  Anthony  Hoskins,  Wly. 

Wm.    Kendall,    Mary    Crumwell,    John  on   land   of  John  Robinson   &  part  on 

Haner     (or    Haver),    Richd.    Johnson,  land  of  Nicholas  Waddilow.    Trans,  of 

Tho.  Sledwell,  James  Lyna,  Wm.  Stan-  13    pers:    Mary    Risden,    Jane    Risden, 

ton,  Rob.  (?)  Stanton.  Blandma    Risden,    Henry    Hunt,    Wm. 


322 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Blades,  Tho.  Cope,  Wm.  O  Naught, 
Kath.  Helter,  Richard  Armstronge, 
Daniell  Curtis,  Anne  Spilman,  Tego 
OFahee,  Donell  O  Graham  (or 
Craham). 

JOHN  HINMAN,  800  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  3  Oct.  1655,  p.  2,  (2). 
At  Anancock  Cr.,  bounded  on  the 
Southern  parts  by  the  head  branch  of 
sd.  Cr.  &  on  W.  by  line  extending  to- 
wards Chiccanssecks  Cr.  Trans,  of  16 
pers:  John  Knight,  Eliz.  Johnson,  Ro. 
Wright,  Miles  Gray,  Jane  Williams, 
Rich.  Gardner,  John  Dye,  Richd.  Gay- 
ney,  Tho.  Thorowgood,  Alex.  Bromley, 
John  Farmer,  Tho.  Collier,  Rob.  Rose, 
Mary  Poole,  Joane  Willms.  (Williams), 
Joane  Hodges. 

DANIEL  BOUCHER,  200  acs.  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  25  Jan.  1655,  p.  2,  (3). 
On  a  branch  of  Pagan  Cr.  against  a  neck 
of  land  called  Shorne  brooke  hill  &  run- 
ning nigh  Cedar  Island.  Trans,  of  4 
pers:  Richard  David,  Mathew  Harby, 
Veceto  (or  Vereto)  Hugon,  John  Mack- 


JOHN  HULET  (Hulett),  300  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  24  Oct.  1655,  p. 
3,  (3).  Sly.  upon  Wicocomoco  Cr.  & 
Ely.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Geo.  Coltclough. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  John  Hill,  Tho. 
Holden,  Wm.  Pryce,  John  Evans,  Nath. 
Jones,  George  Clearke. 

JOHN  PALMER,  300  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  24  Oct.  1655,  p.  3,  (3). 
Sly.  upon  Wicocomoco  Cr.  &  Ely.  upon 
land  of  John  Hulet.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
Peter  Allott,  Mary  Greene,  Anne 
Greene,  Susan  Starr,  Rob.  Ellyott, 
Moyses  Thorpe. 

JOHN  AYRES,  250  acs.  on  N.  side 
of  Rappa.  Riv.  above  the  plantation  of 
Mr.  Wm.  Smart.  24  Oct.  1655,  p.  3, 
(4).  Trans,  of  5  pers:  Barnaby  John- 
son, James  Pearson,  Thomas  Hart,  Elnor 
Hart. 

DR.  GILES  MODE,  1000  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  15  Dec.  1655,  p.  3,  (4). 
On  N.  E.  side  of  Mettopony  Riv.,  adj. 
land  of  Mr.  Tho.  Dale  on  the  one  side; 
unto  land  of  Major  Wm.  Lewis  on  the 


other  side.  Trans,  of  20  pers:  Dr. 
Giles  Mode  twice,  Mr.  Tho.  Bowler 
foure  times,  Jane  Salmon,  Jno.  Walker, 
Edward  Phillips,  Edwd.  Waight,  Wm. 
Griffin,  Tho.  Midleton,  Wm.  Augood 
(or  Angood),  Henry  Wilcox,  Wm. 
Morton,  Joseph  Tompson,  1  Negro, 
Amy  Edwards,  Grace  Davis.  These  7 
land  due  for:  Ellin  Hamon,  Jeremy 
Rawlins,  Wm.  Bradly  (?),  Kath.  Burris, 
Rob.  Smith,  Richd.  Leatcher  (or 
Leather),  John  Glan,  Roger  Pidlers. 

THEOPHILUS  HOANE,  Gent.,  720 
acs.  on  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  on 
Ewd.  side  of  a  swamp  or  branch  running 
out  of  the  head  of  Coratowamon  Riv. 
5  Oct.  1655,  p.  4,  (5).  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  22  Feb.  1652. 

JOHN  AYRES,  200  acs.  upon  S.  side 
of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  upon  a  branch  near 
adj.  land  of  William  Clapham.  24  Oct. 
1655,  p.  4,  (5).  Trans,  of  4  pers:  John 
Taylor,  John  Ayres,  Elinor  Gill,  Hen. 
Peeters. 

ROBERT  JONES,  Gent.,  450  acs., 
Gloster  Co.,  24  Nov.  1655,  p.  4,  (6). 
On  E.  side  of  Propotanke  Swamp,  beg. 
by  the  beech  spring  &  running  E.  S.  E. 
&c.    Trans,  of  9  pers.* 

CHRISTOPHER  CALVERT,  800  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  2  Oct.  1655,  p.  5, 
(6).  On  S.  side  of  the  maine  S.  branch 
of  Anancock,  bounded  on  the  W.  by  a 
branch  parting  it  from  land  of  John 
Jenkins  &  on  the  E.  part  by  another 
branch  parting  it  from  land  of  William 
Mellinge.  Trans,  of  16  pers:  Denies 
Coxa  (?),  Rob.  Harper,  Jno.  Owens, 
Mary  Owens,  Teage  Shone,  Mary  Shone, 
John  Doza,  Mary  Mackero,  John 
Mackert,  Wm.  Mackery,  Tho.  Jonas, 
Wm.  Coarde,  Tho.  Owens,  Richd. 
Dyers,  John  Dyers,  Mary  Dyers. 

DAVID  PHILLIPS,  600  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  24  Jan.  1655,  p.  5,  (7).  On 
N.  side  of  James  Riv.,  Wly.  side  of 
Chicohominy  Riv.  &  N.  E.  side  of 
Moses  his  Cr.,  bounded  N.  W.  on  John 
Williams,  &  S.  E.  on  Willm.  Fry.  Due 
by  purchase  from  Willm.  Stronge. 

ROBERT  VAULX,  Merchant,  6000 
acs.   Westmoreland   Co.,    1    Mar.    1655, 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


323 


p.  5,  (7).  On  S.  side  of  Petomecke 
Riv.  behind  the  cliffs  of  Corowoman, 
beg.  on  W.  side  of  a  great  deep  run 
being  the  head  of  great  Rapahack.  Cr. 
&  opposite  lower  end  of  1200  acs.  of 
Tho.  Broughton.  Sd.  land  granted  joint- 
ly with  Major  Gooch  9  June  1655, 
which  sd.  Gooch  being  since  deceased 
the  land  according  to  the  law  of  Eng- 
land is  due  sd.  Vaulx.  Renewed  28 
Mar.  1662. 

WILLIAM  FRY,  252  acs.  James  City 
Co.,  6  Feb.  1655,  p.  6,  (8).  On  N. 
side  of  James  Riv.,  S.  E.  on  Capt.  Ed- 
loe's  land  and  neare  Wm.  Havats  land. 
Part  of  patent  granted  unto  Richd.  Hoe 
18  Oct.  1643  &  by  bill  of  sale  made 
over  to  sd.  Fry  who  purchased  sd.  land 
of  Willm.  Cradock  &  Tho.  Drinker,  as- 
signe  of  sd.  Hoe. 

JOHN  WILLIAMS,  600  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  24  Jan.  1655,  p.  6,  (8).  On 
N.  side  of  James  Riv.,  Wly.  side  of 
Chickohominy  Riv.,  N.  E.  side  of  Moses 
his  Cr.,  N.  W.  on  Richd.  Williams  & 
S.  E.  on  David  Phillips.  By  purchase 
from  William  Stronge. 

JOHN  LEWIS,  Junr.,  250  acs.  Glos- 
ter  Co,  29  Dec.  1655,  p.  6,  (9).  Beg. 
at  the  main  swamp  of  Poropotank,  run- 
ning down  same  from  land  of  Col. 
Richard  Lee  to  Beech  Springe  &c. 

GILBERT  DEACON,  324  acs.  Henri- 
coe  Co,  7  Oct.  1655,  p.  6,  (9).  S.  W. 
along  land  of  Tho.  Shepey  &c.  to  Elams 
land.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  Gilbert  Deacon, 
Joseph  Bourne,  (or  Bournie),  Geo. 
Burcher,  Richd.  Delabere,  Dan.  Ruse, 
John  Bagby,  Eliz.  Davis,  Tho.  Webs 
(?),  Nich.  Lacoom  (?),  Alex.  Somers. 
In  all  500  acs.  176  acs.  remaining  due. 
Renewed  18  Mar.  1662. 

RICHARD  HAMLETT,  497  acs. 
James  City  Co,  9  Mar.  1655,  p.  7,  (9). 
On  N.  E.  side  of  Chichahominy  Riv, 
E.  side  of  Warreny  Cr.  alias  Tyascun, 
Sly.  on  the  longe  necke  run  &  opposite 
to  Rob.  Sorrells  land,  Wly.  &  Nly.  on 
land  of  Mr.  Hampton.  Trans,  of  10 
pers:  Phill.  Prendergrast,  Rob.  Andrew, 
Tho.  Hawstone,  Eliz.  Sidney,  Symon 
Hazleton,  Wm.  Andrew,  Jone  Downes, 


John  Gryme,  John  Browne,  Xph.  Bones 
(or  Bowers). 

RICHARD  WILLIAMS,  1550  acs. 
James  City  Co,  24  Jan.  1655,  p.  7, 
(10).  800  acs.  on  N.  E.  side  of  Chicho- 
hominy  Riv,  S.  E.  on  land  of  Capt. 
Barkly  &  N.  W.  upon  the  Indian  Sw. 
750  acs.  on  S.  W.  side  of  the  head  of 
sd.  river,  opposite  the  aforesd.  tract,  beg. 
at  a  little  creek  the  uppermost  bounds 
of  William  Fryes  land,  running  to 
Namans  feild  &c.  800  acs.  by  patent, 
last  of  Nov.  1653  &  750  acs.  for  trans. 
of  15  pers.* 

SAMUEL  SMITH,  100  acs.  James 
City  Co,  2  Dec.  1655,  p.  7,  (11).  On 
N.  side  of  James  Riv,  N.  W.  side  of 
Chichohominy  Riv,  Nly.  side  of  Moses 
run,  along  marked  trees  formerly  be- 
longing to  Phillip  Charles  now  is  pos- 
session of  Tho.  House,  &  along  the 
sandy  ridge  to  Tho.  Tinslies  line  &c. 
Trans,  of  2  pers:  John  Walker,  Henry 
Soare. 

ROBERT  NICHOLSON,  500  acs. 
Charles  City  Co,  3  Jan.  1655,  p.  8, 
(11).  On  N.  side  of  James  Riv,  op- 
posite to  Tapahanna  marsh,  bounding 
S.  &  E.  on  Col.  Melsworths  land,  N. 
on  Moises  run,  W.  N.  W.  on  Warham 
Horsmondens  (Horsmandin's)  land  &c. 
300  acs.  granted  unto  David  Jones  & 
purchased  by  sd.  Nicholson  of  Roger 
Lucas,  assignee,  &  200  acs.  for  trans,  of 
4  pers:  Henry  Seares,  James  Hukes, 
John  Webber,  Peeter  Jackson,  NOTE: 
"wrong  entered  &  instead  thereof  are": 
Arthur  Slater,  Henry  Warner,  (or 
Harmer),  Geo.  Noble,  Abm.  Turner 
(?).    Renewed  18  Mar.  1662. 

JOHN  COALE,  750  acs.  James  City 
Co,  3  Jan.  1655,  p.  8,  (12).  On  N. 
side  of  James  Riv.  &  S.  of  Moses  run, 
beg.  at  Mr.  Knipes  corner  by  the  run 
side  &c.  to  John  Clacies  (?)  line,  along 
his  lyne  to  the  Bishops  lower  cor.  tree, 
S.  by  E.  &c.  to  head  of  Jones  his  run, 
thence  to  Col.  Molsworth  cor.  on  Moses 
his  run  to  beg.  Trans,  of  15  pers:  Fra. 
Salter,  Tho.  Edes,  Ger.  Byham,  Jere. 
Thorne,  Jno.  Fowler,  Tho.  Fay,  James 
Frier,   Rob.   Fostly,   Jeffery  Speed,   Bar. 


324 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Stilt,   Hugh  Jeffers.    Renewed   18  Mar. 
1662. 

JOHN  ADISTON,  300  acs.  towards 
the  head  of  Parrotts  Cr.  upon  Rappa. 
Riv.,  22  Nov.  1655,  p.  8,  (12).  Trans, 
of  6  pers:  Jno.  Bincks,  Jno.  Anderson, 
Tho.  Peele,  Izable  Huberd,  Fra.  Spencer, 
Wm.  Reeves. 

THOMAS  LETHERBERRY  (Leather- 
berry)  600  acs.  Northampton  Co.,  2 
Oct.  1655,  p.  9,  (13).  On  S.  side  of 
the  S.  branch  of  Anancock  &  bounding 
Wly.  on  land  of  John  Dorman.  Trans. 
of  12  pers:  Ellynor  Leatherberry, 
Howell  Gladeine,  (or  Gladenie),  Owen 
Maturt,  Dennis  Solivart,  Syfra  Aubuff 
(?),  Mary  Gladen,  Wm.  Mitchell,  Mary 
Batchellor,  Teague  Roane,  Rob.  Bright, 
Mary  Fookes,  Cha.  Coonies  (or  Coomes). 

WILLIAM  STEEVENS,  700  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  2  Oct.  1655,  p.  9, 
(13).  On  S.  side  of  Matchotanke  Cr. 
alias  little  Anancocke,  Sly.  towards 
Pungoteague.  Trans,  of  14  pers:  Rob. 
Knowles,  Jno.  Hill,  Rob.  Elles,  Jno. 
(Harris),  Teague  Owen,  Wm.  South, 
John  Gillet,  Jno.  Wilkes,  Wm. 
Stephens,  Anne  his  wife,  Tho.  Nockey, 
Jno.  Robotton,  Roger  Roades,  Tho. 
Howlet. 

WILLIAM  WRIGHT,  Gent.,  2250 
acs.  Nancemond  Co.,  15  Feb.  1655,  p. 
9,  (13).  Crossing  a  great  white  marsh 
into  the  maine  Poquoson,  etc.,  crossing 
Marracoones  (?),  Creek,  etc.  Trans,  of 
45  pers:  Dan:  Gimblet,  Nehemiah 
Lynch,  Tho.  Poole,  Tho.  Pinkard,  Nich. 
Chapman,  Jno.  Walker,  Jno.  Norris, 
Arth.  Holden,  Enoch  Hutchinson,  Doro- 
thy Westhrop,  Xph.  Cobin,  Wm. 
Audrick,  John  Pryce,  Edwd.  Ruffe, 
Martha  Phillips,  Jno.  Wenet,  Tho. 
Moore,  Jno.  Edes,  Rob.  Jnoson  (John- 
son), Hen.  Roberts,  Fra.  Davis,  Jno. 
Smith,  Ralph  Bastill,  (or  Bassill),  Eliz. 
Hartly,  Richd.  Harman,  Mich.  Lynge, 
Mary  Carter,  Rob.  Sapsoate,  Henry 
Prescoate,  Roger  Steward,  Richd.  Safrell, 
Marth.  Boswell,  Hester  Barker,  Marg: 
Roberts,  Eliz.  Hartly,  Mary  Spencer, 
Anne  Parker,  Nich.  Stallinge  &  his 
wife,  Anth.  Warren,  Jno.  Warren,  Rob. 
Even,  Leonard  Stronge,  Jno.  Brown, 
Kath.   Hector. 


MR.  ROB.  BOURNE  &  MR. 
DANIELL  PARKE,  580  acs.  Yorke  Co., 

8  Oct.  1655,  p.  10,  (14).  Beg.  on  S. 
W.  side  of  a  branch  of  the  old  Mill 
Swamp  in  the  line  of  Thomas  Smith, 
running  to  Richd.  Foards  lyne  &c.  by 
Warreny  path  &  hot  water  path,  along 
Richohock  path  &c.  to  tree  in  Thomas 
Smiths  lyne  &c.  Trans,  of  12  pers: 
Daniell  Parke,  his  wife,  Peeter  French, 
his  wife,  Tho.  Bayly,  Emanuell  a  Negro, 
Thomas  Hayward,  Richard  Palmer,  Jno. 
Newnham,  Isabel!  Fletcher,  Eliz.  Cona- 
way,  Mary  a  Negro. 

GEORGE  FRIZELL  &  THOMAS 
MOORE,  650  acs.  Northampton  Co.,  2 
Oct.  1655,  p.  10,  (15).  On  S.  side  of 
Pungotegue  Riv.,  bounding  Ely.  to 
Randall  Renells  (or  Revells)  cor.  tree 
by  the  bridge  &c.  Trans,  of  13  pers: 
Tho.  Boswell,  Owen  Read,  Jno.  Collins, 
Teague  Row,  Richd.  Scot,  Wm.  Dennis, 
Richd.  Drone,  Rob.  Downer,  Fra. 
Downer,  Jane  Downer,  Jno.  Francis, 
Wm.    Thompson,    Charles    Brissit    (?). 

COL.  EDWARD  HILL,   one  of  the 

Councell  of  State,  4000  acs.  on  the  N. 
side  &  within  the  freshes  of  Rappa. 
Riv.,  opposite  to  Portobaccoe,  bounded 
on  S.  by  W.  side  with  sd.  Riv.,  on  W. 
by  N.  with  a  creek  upon  the  Ewd.  side 
of  Asasaticon  (?)  towne  &  on  Wwd.  of 
Warisqucock  (?)  Indian  towne,  S.  & 
E.  S.  E.  with  Fallinge  Cr.  Trans,  of 
80  pers.  Irish,  assigned  by  Capt.  Barret. 

9  Oct.  1655,  p.  10,  (15). 

JOHN  WESTLOCKE,  300  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  2  Oct.  1655,  p.  11, 
(16).  On  S.  side  of  Anancocke,  being 
a  neck  of  land,  Nly.  against  the  mouth 
of  Dymond  branch,  Wly.  upon  a  small 
branch  dividing  it  from  land  of  Thomas 
Letherburry.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Rose 
Lyna,  Jno.  Holmes,  Mary  Lina,  Arthur 
Lyna,  William  Mees,  Jane  Doe. 

JOHN  BEBEY,  300  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  4  Oct.  1655,  p.  11,  (16).  On  S. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.    Trans,  of  6  pefs.* 

THOMAS  GERRARD,  300  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  24  Oct.  1655,  p. 
11,  (17).  200  acs.  abutting  Sly.  upon 
land  of  Tho.  Kedby,  Wly.  upon  a  creek 
issuing  out  of  great  Wicocomocoe  Riv. 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


325 


&c.  100  acs.  Sly.  upon  land  sd.  Kedby 
sold  to  John  Johnson,  Wly.  upon  land 
sd.  Gar  rat  bought  of  Thomas  Watts, 
Ely.  upon  land  of  Mr.  James  Hawly. 
200  acs.  granted  unto  Thomas  Watts, 
Junr.,  1  Apr.  1650  &  assigned  to  sd. 
Gerrard  &  100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2 
pers:    Mary  Wesson,  Xpr.  Peirce. 

THOMAS  HALE,  of  Mettopony, 
Planter,  79  acs.  Northumberland  Co., 
24  Oct.  1655,  p.  12,  (17).  Beg.  by  a 
branch  of  the  great  swamp  which  runs 
into  Broad  Cr.,  S.  W.  by  Lawrence 
Damerons  &c.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  James 
Clere,  Tho.  Willis. 

WILLIAM  BOTHAM,  500  acs. 
Westmoreland    Co.,    24    Oct.    1655,    p. 

12,  (18).  N.  Ely.  upon  Petomecke  Riv., 
S.  Ely.  upon  land  of  Jno.  Lancht  (?), 
Wly.  upon  land  of  Sam.  Bonam.  Trans. 
of  10  pers:  Peirce  Morrice,  Abagaill 
How,  Mary  Tanner,  Jno.  Ball,  Wm. 
Hurpe,  Geo.  Dally,  Nich.  (or  Nath.) 
Jones,  Wm.  Thrush,  Anne  Boswell,  Jone 
Hartwell. 

WILLIAM  HALL,  Surveyor,  350  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  6  Oct.  1655,  p.  12, 
(18).  On  N.  side  of  James  Riv.  &  E. 
side  of  Richohock  path,  bounded  from 
Wareny  path  to  sd.  path  &c.  to  Wester- 
most  branch  of  Ware  Riv.  &c.  Trans. 
of  7  pers:  Mary  Ellice,  And.  Burchell, 
James  Staples,  Martha  Wright,  Fra. 
Reinolls,  Jno.  Feild,  Ro.  Garland. 

WILLIAM  GRAVES,  80  acs.  Yorke 
Co.,  3  Oct.  1655,  p.  12,  (19).  Bounded 
on  W.  side  with  a  swamp  dividing  this 
&  land  of  Tho.  Pencherman,  N.  upon 
land  of  Wm.  Gantlet,  E.  upon  Skime- 
noe  &  S.  upon  his  own  land.  Trans,  of 
2    pers:    Bryan   Coxon,    Ellis   Wheatly. 

CAPT.  GEORGE  FLOID  (Floyd), 
432  acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  6  Feb.  1655,  p. 

13,  (19).  On  E.  side  of  Richohock 
path,  S.  E.  on  Mr.  Overmans  land,  and 
N.  W.  on  S.  W.  branch  of  Ware  neck. 
Trans,  of  9  pers:  Mary  Joyner,  Richd. 
Harper,  Henry  Hoffeild,  Richd.  Han- 
cock, Arthur  Canneck,  Anne  Renolls, 
James  Plunket,  Jno.  King,  Dennock 
(or  Dermock)    Bearne. 


ELIZABETH  GIBBS,  the  daughter  of 
Jno.  Gibbs,  150  acs.  New  Kent  Co., 
20  Nov.  1655,  p.  13,  (19).  Upon  S.  E. 
of  Mettopony  Riv.,  N.  &  N.  E.  with  a 
branch  of  Arakiaco  Sw.  Trans,  of  3 
pers.* 

MR.  CUTHBERT  POTTER,  1200 
acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  14  Dec.  1655,  p.  13, 
(20).  On  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  upon 
branches  of  Burnhams  Cr.  Trans,  of  24 
pers.* 

WILLIAM  THOMAS,  of  Yeocomoco, 
200  acs.  Northumberland  Co.,  24  Oct. 
1655,  p.  13,  (20).  N.  Ely.  toward  land 
of  John  Earle  &  John  Waram.  Trans, 
of  4  pers:  John  Gibbins,  Eliz.  Glissen, 
Joane   an   Irish   woman,    Jane   Brocket. 

JOHN  EARLE,  100  acs.  Northumber- 
land Co.,  24  Oct.  1655,  p.  14,  (20). 
N.  Ely.  upon  a  creek  issuing  out  of 
Yeocomoco  Riv.  &  S.  Ely.  upon  his  own 
land.    Trans,  of  2  pers:    Wm.  Thomas.* 

JOHN  LAWSON,  the  son  of  Row- 
land Lawson,  500  acs.  Lancaster  Co., 
22  Nov.  1655,  p.  14,  (21).  On  the 
N.  side  &  in  the  freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv. 
about  12  mi.  from  the  falls.  Trans,  of 
10  pers:  Henry  Berry,  Pa:  Cleash, 
Sarah  Turner,  Eliz.  Sethell,  N:  Mother- 
inge,  Wm.  Nicholson,  Geo.  Goodale, 
Jno.  Mascale,  Dan.  Cooper,  Kath.  Eng- 
lish.   Renewed  8  Jan.  1663. 

WILLIAM  JOHNSON  &  STEPHEN 
HORSEY,  500  acs.  Northampton  Co., 
28  May  1655,  p.  14,  (21).  Being  a 
neck  of  land,  at  Anancock,  bounded  on 
W.  by  a  branch  separating  this  from 
land  of  David  Cuffin.  Trans,  of  10  pers: 
Tho.  Denellin,  Mary  Denellin,  Geo. 
Harrison,  Ben.  Sumer,  Jno.  Treddar, 
Wm.  Jnson  (Johnson),  Symon  Bronely, 
Tho.  Wilson,  Richd.  Warren,  Ellynor 
Walter. 

MR.  HUGH  KINSEY,  100  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  8  Oct.  1655,  p.  14,  (22). 
On  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  &  N.  E.  side 
of  Corotoman  Riv.,  on  Wwd.  side  of  a 
devdt.  of  400  acrs.  whereon  sd.  Kinsey 
now  liveth,  being  half  of  a  patent  of 
800  acs.  granted  to  Jno.  Mungor.  Trans, 
of  2  pers:    Paule  Kinsey,  Hugh  Kinsey. 


326 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


SAMUEL  HUBY  &  JOHN  CARTER, 
500  acs.  Surry  Co.,  25  Jan.  1655,  p.  15, 
(22).  On  S.  side  of  James  Riv.,  on  the 
Ely.  &  Wly.  sides  of  the  black  water 
main  branch  towards  Capt.  Sheapards 
devdt.,  beg.  below  sd.  Sheapards  plan- 
tation, running  to  the  cart  path,  over 
the  bridge  &c.  over  the  Indian  path  &c. 
Trans,  of  10  pers:  Eliz.  Duber,  Jno. 
Henry,  Fra.  Hossier  (?),  Mary  Holland, 
Dorothy  Kew. 

RICHARD  COALE  &  DAVID  AN- 
DERSON, 150  acs.  Westmoreland  Co., 
24  Oct.  1655,  p.  15,  (23).  100  acs. 
Wly.  upon  a  creek  dividing  this  from 
land  of  Hercules  Bridges;  50  acs.  Nly. 
upon  sd.  land  &  land  of  Henry  Brookes. 
Trans,  of  3  pers:  Fra.  Thomas,  Jno. 
Frizzer,  Anne  Perry. 

JOHN  LINGE,  (Lynge)  350  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  18  Nov.  1655,  p.  15, 
(23).  On  S.  W.  side  of  Chichohominy 
Riv.  behind  land  of  Mr.  Bromfeild, 
bounded  on  N.  W.  with  Wickwaws 
run,  by  land  surveyed  for  Mr.  Jno. 
Bromfeild  &c.    Trans,  of  7  pers.* 

CAPT.  THOMAS  DAVIS  of  Walters 
Creeke,  300  acs.  Warwicke  Co.,  20  Jan. 
1655,  p.  16,  (24).  In  the  reedy  Swamp 
at  the  upper  end  next  the  head  of  sd. 
Cr.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Thomas  Morgan, 
Mary  Goodman,  Jno.  Gullam,  Phillip 
Baker,  Phillip  Parker,  Robt.  Reaves. 

MAIOR  (Major)  MILES  CAREY,  94 
acs.  Warwick  Co.,  20  Sept.  1655,  p.  16, 
(24).  38  acs.  upon  head  of  pott  ash 
Cr.  &  56  acs.  being  the  outmost  bounds 
of  Mr.  Thomas  Taylor  &  adj.  Sam. 
Mathews  land.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Tho. 
Wilkinson,  John  Thomas,  Margaret 
May,  John  Tistall.    Land  due  for  2  last. 

LT.  COL.  THOMAS  SWAN,  900 
acs.  Surry  Co,  7  Feb.  1655,  p.  17,  (25). 
On  S.  side  of  James  Riv.  &  upon  E. 
side  of  the  black  water  about  3  mi. 
Wly.  from  John  Bradies,  bounding  N. 
W.  upon  land  of  Capt.  Jordan.  Trans, 
of  18  pers:  Margarett  Delton  (or  Deb- 
ton),  Sarah  Coe,  Susanna  Coe,  Tho. 
Smith,  Rich.  Jacksall,  Jno.  Sinckler, 
Jno.  Douglas,  Mary  Hawkins,  Tegh  & 
(an)  Irish  boy,  James  Seward,  Michaell 


White,  Jno.  Long,  Jno.  Lewis,  Jno. 
Pelloone,  James  Pelloone,  Wm.  Sanford, 
an  Irish  woman,  Jane  Sinckler. 

JOHN  DORMAN,  850  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  2  Oct.  1655,  p.  17,  (26). 
On  S.  side  of  the  S.  branch  of  Anan- 
cock,  Wly.  on  spoone  branch  parting  it 
from  land  of  Jenkin  Pryce;  trans,  of  17 
pers:  Sarah  Dorman,  Wm.  Hickman, 
Mary  Owenton  (or  Overton),  Ellenor 
Higgenson,  James  Murhead,  Wm.  Jones 
(or  Jenks),  Giles  Pickfrizell,  Job  Ed- 
munds, Eliz.  Holliday,  Anne  Haies,  Rog. 
Amolachan  (?),  Elizabeth  Haies,  Tho. 
Younge,  Marg.  Cornelnia  (?),  John 
Toole,  James  Adwick,  Grace  Adwicke. 
"In  all  17  psons." 

EDWARD  COALE,  900  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  16  Nov.  1655,  p.  17,  (26). 
On  N.  side  of  James  Riv.,  N.  W.  side 
of  Chickohominy  River,  N.  upon  Moses 
Cr.,  &  bounded  Nly.  upon  Pease  hill 
run,  Ely.  on  line  formerly  Phillip 
Charles  now  purchased  &  in  possession 
of  Thomas  House,  &  on  marked  trees  on 
both  sides  of  Oaken  Swampe  now  in 
possession  of  Edward  Gravin.  Trans, 
of   18  pers.*   relation  being  had  to  an 

order  of  court  dated 1655  granted 

unto  Nich.  Merywether  &  assigned  unto 
sd.  Coale. 

WILLIAM  JENINGES,  251  acs. 
Surry  Co,  1  Feb.  1655,  p.  18,  (27). 
S.  side  of  James  Riv.  near  Col.  Floods, 
bounded  N.  on  the  main  river,  E.  on 
Capt.  Sidway  (or  Tidway)  copied  in 
new  Bk.  4,  p.  27  as  Sidney)  father  in 
law  to  Peter  Harrison  son  of  Benjamin 
Harrison  dec'd.  &  heir  of  the  aforesd. 
land,  E.  &  W.  on  Mr.  Foards  land,  Ely. 
on  Col.  Floods  land  &  S.  on  John 
Floods  land.  151  acs.  granted  unto 
John  Blackborne  11  Mar.  1652  &  as- 
signed unto  sd.  Jenings;  &  100  acs. 
granted  unto  Francis  Jorden,  same  date, 
&  assigned  unto  sd.  Jenings.  Marginal 
note:  Renewed  in  name  of  Robt.  Lane, 
being  assigned  to  him  by  Thomas  Cul- 
mer,  who  had  order  for  same  from 
Surry  Court  &  granted  to  Lane  18  Mar. 
1662.    Fra.  Kirkman,  Clk. 

WM.  WRIGHT,  200  acs.  at  the  head 
of   Parkers   Cr.    15    Feb.    1655,    p.    18, 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


327 


(27).  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Wm.  Wright, 
Dorothy  Hall,  Alexander  Flaminge, 
Marie  Owen.  Renewed  in  his  name  18 
Mar.   1662. 

ROBERT  CASTLE,  an  island  of 
marsh,  300  acs.  James  City  Co.,  11  Mar. 
1655,  p.  18,  (28).  On  N.  side  of 
James  River  in  the  middle  of  Chicho- 
hominy  Riv.  commonly  called  the  Lower 
Gulfe  Marsh,  butting  on  Nimoles 
(Nuncles  ?)  Neck  &  on  Gregory  Wells 
plantation.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  John 
Nayler,  Wm.  Franklin,  Kath.  Brown- 
inge,  Mary  Cobb,  Robt.  Whitefare,  John 
Hayall. 

PHILLIP  CHARLES,  140  acs.  upon 
the  Southermost  branch  of  Warreny  Cr., 
on  the  E.  side  of  Chichohominy  Riv., 
bounded  from  corner  tree  of  Mr.  Wm. 
Strong,  to  marked  trees  of  Mr.  Soanes. 
8  Apr.  1656,  p.  18,  (28).  Trans,  of  3 
pers:  Tho.  Beggon,  Eliz.  Marin,  (or 
Mavin),  Hugh  Hemecegga  (?). 

SOUTHEY  LITTLETON,  2,340  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  atNondris  (Nondui) 
Cr.,  25  Mar.  1656,  p.  19,  (29). 
Bounded  by  the  main  Bay  of  Chese- 
peack  &  Arracock  Cr.  &  land  of  John 
Wise.  Trans,  of  47  pers:  Richd.  Smith, 
Geo.  Daw,  Sam.  Lucas,  Tho.  Busfeild 
(Buffeild),  Rob.  Max,  "Dicke  of  the 
Frigot",  Eliner  Glover,  Dorothy  Slaugh- 
ter, Fra.  Rowles,  Geo.  Butcher,  Phillip 
Gardner,  Jno.  Jackson,  Richd.  Johns, 
Margaret  Alen,  Eliz  .Bond,  Tho.  New- 
ton, Geo.  Freshwater,  Tho.  Blacklock, 
&  his  wife  &  child,  Gabriell  Powell, 
Mathew  Pypinge,  Step.  Cowon  (?), 
Richd.  Pickeringe,  Sanders  Wilson,  Tho- 
mas Hogg,  Mathew  Wardell,  Xpher. 
Donoh,  Richd.,  Conner  &  Daniel,  Irish- 
men, John  Pryer,  Dan.  Baker,  Will 
Fisher,  John  Wyse,  Mary  Fleetwood, 
Wm.  Smith,  Geo.  Smith,  Mathy 
(Mathew  ?)  Bennet,  Wm.  Clerke, 
Richd.  Smith,  Jno.  Symons,  Jno.  Mun- 
day,  Tho.  Fowler,  Richd.  Skinner,  John 
Johnson.    Renewed  26  Nov.   1661. 

JOHN  SYMONS,  200  acs.  in  the 
Western  branch  of  Nanzemond  Riv.,  26 
Mar.  1656,  p.  19,  (30).  Beg.  at  miles 
end  of  Mr.  Geo.  Ludlowes  land  &  butt- 
ing   on    land    of    Jonathan    Robinson. 


Trans,  of  4  pers:  John  Aggor,  John 
Morehead,  Elizabeth  Hatly,  Mary  Finch. 
Renewed  30  Oct.  1662. 

SYMON  PEETERS  (Peters),  500  acs. 
lyeing  in  Daniell  Tanners  Cr.,  being  a 
branch  of  Elizabeth  Riv.,  beg.  at  a 
pointe  called  the  Indian  Towne  pointe. 
26  Mar.  1656,  p.  19,  (30).  Trans,  of 
10  pers.* 

JASPER  HODGKINSON,  200  cs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  at  the  head  of  the  E. 
branch  of  Daniell  Tanners  Cr.,  26  Mar. 
1656,  p.  20,  (30).  Adj.  his  own  land. 
Granted  unto  Robert  Woody  16  Apr. 
1653  &  by  him  assigned  unto  sd.  Hodg- 
kinson.    Renewed  18  Mar.  1662. 

FRANCIS  HUTCHINS,  200  acs. 
Nancemond  Co.,  26  Mar.  1656,  p.  20, 
(31).  At  the  head  of  beaver  dam  Cr., 
being  a  branch  of  the  W.  branch  of 
Nansemond  Riv.,  beg.  at  miles  end  of 
Wm.  Stories  land  &  adj.  land  of  Mr. 
John  Garrett  &  Tho.  Powell.  Trans,  of 
4  pers:  Elizabeth  Pye,  Daniell  Murrey, 
Mary  Miffomer,   Armagall  Greenwood. 

CAPT.  THOMAS  GODWIN,  200 
acs.  Nansemond  Co.,  11  Mar.  1655,  p. 

20,  (31).  Near  the  head  of  the  N.  W. 
branch  of  sd.  river,  beg.  at  miles  end 
of  Symon  Symons  land.  Trans,  of  4 
pers:  Dorothy  Loyd  *  Assigned  to 
William  Pope  &  renewed  in  his  name 
30  Oct.  1662. 

JOHN  WYSE,  200  acs.  Northampton 
Co.  at  Nondui  Cr.,   24  Mar.   1655,  p. 

21,  (32).  Adj.  lands  of  Mr.  Edwd. 
Littleton  &  George  Truett.  Trans,  of 
4  pers:  Nohah  Hibs,  Lawrence  Hillyer, 
Hannah  Wise,  Wently  Macklayne  (or 
Mackdayne). 

GEORGE  TRUETT,  300  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.  at  Nondui  Cr.,  24  Mar. 
1655,  p.  21,  (32).  Adj.  lands  of  John 
Wyse  &  John  Rogers  (or  Roisers). 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Alice  Watson,  John 
Omarweare,  Mack  (or  Mark)  Wm. 
Owen,  John  Huntley,  James  Oger,  Tho- 
mas Jones. 

DAVID  WILLIAMS,  100  acs.,  lying 
on    the    S.    W.    side    of    James    River, 


328 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


bounded  on  the  W.  &  N.  W.  side  from 
a  marked  oake  on  Chipoakes  Cr.  & 
running  to  Nicholas  Spencers  cleare 
field.  25  Mar.  1656,  p.  21,  (33). 
Trans,  of  2  pers.*  Renewed  28  Jan. 
1662. 

WILLIAM  GOWERS,  300  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  27  Mar.  1656,  p.  21, 
(33).  Ely.  upon  deepe  Cr.  &  Sly.  to- 
wards Chissenessecks.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
Occome,  Tonye,  Duke,  Robin,  Tom, 
Brunke,  Negroes,  assigned  by  Col. 
Scar  burgh. 

MR.  RICHARD  BARNHOUSE, 
Junr.,  200  acs.  Gloster  Co.,  17  Mar. 
1655,  p.  22,  (33).  Upon  S.  E.  side  of 
Metopony  Riv.,  2  mi.  above  Indian 
Ferry,  bounded  W.  N.  W.  upon  land  of 
Lt.  Col.  Abrall,  N.  E.  along  Apostiquo 
Cr.  &  S.  E.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Wm. 
Wyatt.  Granted  sd.  Barnhouse  27  Apr. 
1653  &  renewed  by  order  of  court. 

MARY  LEWIS,  400  acs.  Northamp- 
ton Co.,  27  Mar.  1656,  p.  22,  (34). 
At  Chichonessecks  Cr.  &  Sly.  towards 
Anancock  Cr.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Henery, 
Negro,  Kath.  Merifell,  Anne  Jones, 
Mary  Allvit,  Jno.  Mackwilliam,  Angora, 
Ape,  Ottoms,  Negroes,  assigned  by  Col. 
Scarburgh. 

JOHN  DYER,  109  acs.  Low.  Norf. 
Co.,  in  Lynhaven  Parish,  14  Mar.  1655, 
p.  22,  (34).  Bounded  on  the  South 
with  land  of  Thomas  Allen,  on  N.  with 
land  of  John  Stratton  &  on  W.  by  his 
own.  Granted  unto  sd.  Dyer  29  Apr. 
1652  &  renewed  by  order  of  court.  The 
following  names  appear:  James  Cole, 
Wm.  Jackson. 

ABRAHAM  IVESON,  Junr.,  100  acs. 
On  N.  W.  side  of  the  North  Riv.  of 
Mockjack  Bay,  26  Mar.  1656,  p.  22, 
(34).  Granted  unto  Lt.  Col.  Anth. 
Ellyot  21  Mar.  1650,  assigned  unto  sd. 
Iveson  &  now  renewed  by  order  of 
court.    Renewed  18  Mar.  1662. 


TABITHA  &  MATILDA  SCAR- 
BURGH, 3,500  acs.  Northampton  Co., 
27  Mar.  1656,  p.  23,  (35).  Lying  on 
the  N.  &  S.  sides  of  Deepe  Cr.  Trans, 
of  70  pers:  41  Negroes;  (whose  first 
names  are  given),  &  Mack  William, 
Arinde  Thomas,  Jane  o  Tire,  Turrell 
(?)  Ogley,  Murell  Jones,  Horly  Kanny, 
Orsell  Derry,  Nella  O  Lanny,  Morris 
Kiffe,  Jno.  Ockmond,  Wm.  Mory,  Wm. 
Gowry  ( ? ) ,  Jonny  Wallon,  Donio  John, 
Fra.  Smalewell,  Calleat  Moore,  Morley 
Morry,  Hareo.  Kennell,  Mutton  Wrist, 
Jno.  O  William,  Morcop  Waffeild, 
Henry  Carey,  Tirish  Mogon,  Undell 
Illey,  Glannell  Jerrey,  (or  Terry), 
Cillina  Clinn,  Dollo  O  Melle,  Gwallo 
O  Loffe,  Remor  Wicke. 

EDWD.  ROBINSON,  &  THOMAS 
HALL,  200  acs.  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  in 
Lyn  haven  Parish,  standing  by  a  branch 
of  Mr.  Woodhouses  damms,  etc.  8  Apr. 
1656,  p.  23,  (36).  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
Thomas  Browne  &  Ann  his  wife,  David 
Tompson,  George  Such. 

THOMAS  ROLFE,  Gent.,  300  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  25  Apr.  1656,  p.  23, 
(36).  On  N.  E.  side  of  Wallingford 
Riv.  alias  Chichohominy.  Adj.  his  own, 
land  of  Mr.  Edward  Digges  &  Richard 
New  and  on  a  branch  of  Ravenets  Run. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Richd.  Gummy,  John 
Huson,  Wm.  Hollyman,  Kath.  Hock- 
well,  Wm.  Morley,  Geo.  Marler. 

ROGER  WOLMSLY  &  RICHD. 
INGRAM,  200  acs.  James  City  Co.,  25 
Apr.  1656,  p.  24,  (37).  On  N.  side  of 
James  Riv.,  beg.  at  Bartholomew  Knipes, 
running  to  Col.  Swans  line  &  along 
John  Coale.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Herbert 
Margerom,  John  Eells,  Rob.  Bryer, 
David  Roberts. 

GEORGE  KEMPE,  400  acs.  in  Lyn 
haven  Parish,  26  Mar.  1656,  p.  24, 
(37).  Beg.  at  Col.  Sidneys,  now  in 
possession  of  John  Porter,  Senr.,  &c. 
Due  by  virtue  of  the  rights  of  a  patent 
granted  him  28  Apr.  1652. 


THOMAS  DODFORD,  100  acs.  in 
the  E.  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.  on  the  N. 
side  thereof.  26  Mar.  1656,  p.  22,  (35). 
Renewal  of  patent  dated  11  Mar.  1652. 


WILLIAM  BIRD,  300  acs.  upon  the 
S.  side  of  Wards  Cr.  above  land  of 
John  Wall.  7  June  1656,  p.  24,  (37). 
Due  by  purchase  from  Wm.  Havet,  to 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


329 


whom  it  was  granted  7  Apr.  1653,  & 
for  trans,  of  6  pers:  Anne  Turk,  Edwd. 
Clanterne,  Jno.  Kite,  Jno.  Chapman, 
Wm.  Munteth,  Margaret  Sweetman. 

HENRY  HUBERD,  (Hubert)  250  acs. 
Gloster  Co.,  17  Mar.  1655,  p.  24,  (38). 
In  the  forke  of  Poropotanke  Cr.,  adj. 
his  own  &  Mr.  Knights  land.  Being 
part  of  a  patent  granted  unto  Gilbert 
Blunt  but  deserted  &  granted  sd.  Huberd 
by  order  of  court  &  for  trans,  of  5  pers.* 

LEWIS  PERRY,  200  acs.  on  Indian 
Cr.,  being  a  branch  of  the  W.  branch 
of  Nansemond  Riv.  &  adj.  land  of  Hum- 
phry Edey.  26  Mar.  1656,  p.  25,  (38). 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  John  Marshall,  James 
Yeoman,  Eliz.  Stiles,  Mary  Nicholls. 

NICHOLAS  SMITH,  Gent.,  200  acs. 
Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  13  Mar.  1655,  p.  25, 
(39).  Beg.  at  the  Indian  Springe  on 
James  Riv.  side,  through  a  marsh  & 
into  a  branch  of  Pagan  Cr.  100  acs. 
granted  unto  Anthony  Jones,  26  Nov. 
1636  &  assigned  unto  sd.  Smith;  100 
acres  the  residue  for  trans,  of  2  pers: 
Nicholas  Smith,  &  his  wife  Sarah. 

MAJOR  THOMAS  JOHNSON,  200 

acs.  Northampton  Co.,  14  Mar.  1655,  p. 
25,  (39).  At  Occahannock  Cr.  at  the 
head  of  Matachepeneck,  bounded  on  W. 
by  Cedar  Branch  separating  this  from 
land  of  Henry  Edwds.  &  George  Truett, 
N.  by  his  own  land  &  E.  by  pine  bridge 
branch.    Trans,  of  4  pers.* 

JOHN  RUTHERFORD  &  MYCUM 
CURRY,  500  acs.  Chas.  City  Co.,  17 
Mar.  1655,  p.  26,  (40).  On  S.  side  of 
James  Riv.  &  W.  side  of  an  Indian 
Swamp  called  by  the  name  of  Ohoreek 
Swamp,  opposite  Tho.  Weltons  planta- 
tion. Granted  unto  William  Lea  6  Feb. 
1654  &  assigned  unto  the  above  named 
patentees. 

BENJAMIN  BRASSEURE,  300  acs. 
at  the  head  of  Indian  Cr.,  a  branch  of 
the  W.  branch  of  Nancemond  Riv.,  adj. 
land  of  Mr.  John  Garrat.  26  Mar. 
1656,  p.  26,  (40).  Renewal  of  patent 
to  him  dated  12  Apr.  1653. 

WILLIAM  JUSTICE,  1,198  acs. 
Chas.  City  Co.,   neare  Flower  de  hun- 


dred Cr.,  26  Apr.  1656,  p.  26,  (41). 
Adj.  land  of  Cheney  Boice.  Granted 
Capt.  John  Frame,  1  Sept.  1643,  &  due 
sd.  Justice  as  marrieinge  the  daughter 
&  heyr.  of  sd.  Frame,  as  also  for  trans, 
of  24  pers:  Mary  Sherwood,  Rich.  Lee, 
Jno.  Barber,  Edmond  Joyner,  Mathew 
Baile,  Wm.  Coleman,  Wm.  Phillips, 
Joseph  Errence,  Tho.  Haistwood,  Alice 
Michell,  Rebecca  Frame,  Fra.  Nelson, 
Wm.  Price,  Wm.  Lawrence,  Mary  Law- 
rence twice,  Anne  Lawrence,  Arthur 
Lawrence,  Sarah  Lawrence,  Wm.  Bal- 
lance,  John  Hatly,  Eliz.  Heath,  Peeter 
Plumer,  Tho.  Whitter. 

WILLIAM  MELLINGE,  600  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  17  Mar.  1655,  p.  26, 
(41).  On  S.  branch  of  Anancock,  W. 
on  Ekeks  branch.  Trans,  of  12  pers: 
Fra.  Cutt,  Roger  Barr,  Wm.  Sterlinge, 
Timothy  Trallop,  Phillip  Watkins,  Alex. 
Wignall,  Tho.  Wignall,  Wm.  Smarth, 
Henry  Mitchell,  Grace  Lewis. 

THOMAS  WHITE,  300  acs.  in 
Julians  Cr.,  a  branch  of  the  S.  branch 
of  Eliz.  Riv.  15  Mar.  1655,  p.  27,  (41). 
Trans,  of  6  pers.*  Renewed  29  Jan. 
1663. 

JOHN  WILLIAMS,  200  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  16  Mar.  1655,  p.  27,  (42). 
Being  a  necke  called  Pochichery  Necke; 
beg.  neare  Daniell  Tanners  Cr.  running 
S.  W.  to  Julians  Swampe,  etc.  Trans. 
of  4  pers:    Jno.  Grey,  Sarah  Miller. 

BERTRAM  OBART,  773  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  26  Mar.  1656,  p.  27,  (42). 
On  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  550  acres 
beg.  at  a  Cr.  next  above  Niemcock  Cr., 
&  adj.  land  of  Jno.  Pedros,  etc;  and 
223  acs.  adj.  land  of  Richd.  Lewis.  & 
land  formerly  granted  unto  Edwd.  Bos- 
well.  550  acs.  granted  sd.  Obart  16 
Nov.  1650  &  223  acs.  unto  Dennis 
Coniers  30  Mar.  1653  &  by  him  assigned 
unto  John  Pedro,  who  assigned  unto  sd. 
Obart. 

THOMAS  BEST  &  CHRISTOPHER 
ASHLY,  300  acs.  Nancemond  Co.,  26 
Mar.  1656,  p.  28,  (43).  Beg.  at  miles 
end  of  Thomas  Jordans  land,  adj.  Giles 
Webb,  their  own  &  land  of  Mr.  Peeter 
Mountegue.    200  acs.  by  patent  to  them 


330 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


dated  14  Sept.  1653  &  100  acs.  for 
trans,  of  2  pers:  Jane  Gittins,  Wra. 
Grant. 

WILLIAM  FRY,  750  acs.  James  City 
Co.,  29  Apr.  1656,  p.  28,  (44).  On 
W.  side  of  Chichohominy  Riv.,  500  acs. 
part  upon  land  of  Humphry  England  & 
Thomas  Warden.  The  residue  along 
Mr.  Fries  line,  thence  to  Richard  Wil- 
liams, John  Williams  &  David  Phillips. 
500  acs.  by  patent  dated  29  Aug.  1643 
&  250  acs.  for  trans,  of  5  pers.* 

RICHARD  DENNIS,  400  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  26  Apr.  1656,  p.  28, 
(44).  350  acs.  N.  upon  a  branch  of 
great  Wicocomoco  Riv.  called  Dennis' 
Cr.,  S.  E.  upon  a  branch  dividing  same 
from  land  of  Tho.  Gascoine  &  N.  W. 
upon  land  of  Wm.  Spicer  &  50  acs.  adj. 
same.  350  acs.  granted  unto  his  father 
Jno.  Dennis  15  Sept.  164 —  &  due  him 
as  son  &  heir;  &  50  acs.  for  trans,  of  1 
pers.* 

WILLIAM  CAPPS,  250  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  last  of  Mar.  1656,  p.  29, 
(45).  150  acs.  on  Ewd.  side  of  the  S. 
bay  or  head  of  Strattons  Cr.  issueing 
into  Lyn  haven  Riv.,  &  100  acs.  beg. 
on  the  second  bay  in  sd.  river  &  adj. 
Hugh  Woods.  Formerly  granted  sd. 
Capps  by  2  patents  dated  10  Apr.  1649 
&  11  May  1652. 

THOMAS  BROMFEILD,  315  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,  1  May  1656,  p.  29,  (45). 
Upon  head  of  Queens  Cr.,  bounded  on 
N.  N.  E.  with  the  milne  Swampe,  & 
adj.  land  of  Capt.  David  Mansell.  Said 
land  formerly  made  over  by  sd.  Mansell 
unto  Thomas  Pryce  &  by  him  bequeathed 
unto  Hannah  Price  &  due  sd.  Brom- 
feild  by  intermarrieinge  with  sd.  Han- 
nah. 

DENNIS  CONIERS,  1178  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  4  Apr.  1656,  p.  29,  (46). 
878  acs.  on  N.  side  of  Pyanketanke 
Riv.  running  to  land  of  Mrs.  Elnor  Bro- 
cas.  300  acs.  upon  N.  side  of  sd.  Riv., 
adj.  sd.  Brocas'  &  land  of  Abraham 
Moone  &  extending  upon  the  great 
swamp.  1,000  acs.  by  patent  dated  26 
Feb.  1653  &  178  acs.  for  trans,  of  4 
pers.* 


JOHN  EVANS,  400  acs.  Northamp- 
ton Co,  11  Mar.  1655,  p.  30,  (46). 
Near  Matchepungoe  &  adj.  land  of  Capt. 
Fra.  Pott.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Kath. 
Gardner,  Eliz.  Johnson,  John  Knight, 
Rob.  Wright,  Miles  Grey,  Jane.  Wms. 
(Williams),  Lydia  Easterfeild,  Eliz. 
Vincent. 

COL.  RICHARD  LEE,  5  acs.  Gloster 
Co.,  4  June  1656,  p.  30,  (47).  Towards 
head  of  Poropotanke  Cr.  whereon  the 
store  of  sd.  Col.  Lee  stands,  &  is  part 
of  a  devdt.  granted  Peter  Knight,  mer- 
chant, 25  Aug.  1652  which  is  deserted. 
Trans,  of  1  servant:    Morris  Plummor. 

WILLIAM  &  HANCOCK  LEE,  sonns 
of  Col.  Richd.  Lee,  850  acs.  Gloster  Co., 
2  June  1656,  p.  30,  (47).  Upon  a 
branch  of  Peanketanke  Sw.  500  acs.  due 
by  rights  of  a  patent  to  John  Wood- 
ward, Atty.  of  Col.  Lee,  17  May  1655, 
&  relinquished  by  sd.  Lee  to  make  this 
good  &  350  acs.  for  trans,  of  7  pers: 
Roger  Sheely,  Jno.  O  Leally,  Patrik  O 
Crahan,  John  Mathew,  David  Mahoone, 
Douny  (or  Denny)  Carby,  Richd.  Joy, 
Dermot  O  Fame,  land  due  for.  Note: 
Deserted  by  said  Wm.  &  Hancock  Lee 
&  regranted  to  Thomas  Brereton,  28 
Mar.  1662. 

ROBERT  BAYLY,  200  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  17  Mar.  1655,  p.  30,  (48). 
At  the  head  of  the  S.  branch  of  Anan- 
cock,  Wly.  upon  a  branch  parting  it 
from  land  of  Christopher  Calvert  &  Nly. 
on  land  of  Mr.  Wm.  Mellinge.  Trans, 
of  4  pers:  Richard  Perry,  Jacobin 
Trevis,   Wm.  Trevis,   Lydia  Easterfield. 

ARTHUR  UPSHOTT,  300  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  11  Mar.  1655,  p.  31, 
(48).  Near  the  head  of  Occahannock 
Cr.,  near  land  of  Wm.  Taylor  &  adj. 
his  own  land.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Mary 
Risden,  James  Risden,  Landma  Risden, 
Arth.  Carpenter,  Phillip  Soccohack,  John 
Alber   (or  Albee). 

SAMPSON  ROBINS,  350  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  24  Mar.  1655,  p.  31, 
(49).  Beg.  at  the  head  branch  of  Hun- 
gars  Cr.,  Sly.  to  William  Jones'  Cr.  & 
Nly.  towards  land  of  Richard  Jacobs. 
Trans,    of    7    pers:    John    Hill,    Danll. 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


331 


Denwood,  Brian  Teagle,  Dun.  (?) 
Ogre,  Cur  (?)  Hoe,  Annis  Clerke, 
Joane  Hewis. 

JOHN  JENKINS,  400  acs.  called  Egg 
Necke,  Northampton  Co.,  17  Mar.  1655, 
p.  31,  (49).  S.  side  main  branch  of 
Anancocke,  bounded  on  W.  by  a  branch 
parting  same  from  land  of  Richard 
Wans  worth.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Richd. 
Browne,  Jno.  Harrold,  Wm.  Farr,  (or 
Harr),  Jeffery  Hughes,  Toby  Calgey, 
Ann  Jordan,  Marg.  Willmude,  Wm. 
Lemon. 

MR.  JOHN  MOTTROM  (Mot- 
terom-Motron),  300  acs.  Northumber- 
land Co.,  4  Jan.  1655,  p.  31,  (49). 
Upon  N.  side  of  Wicocomoco  Cr.,  Sly. 
upon  same  from  land  of  Mr.  Colt- 
cloughes,  surveyed  by  Wm.  Cocke,  to 
the  Bridge  Cr.  dividing  this  from  land 
of  Mr.  George  Coltclough  and  Nly.  up- 
on a  tract  called  Hulls  Thickett.  Trans, 
of  6  pers:  Lidia  Sawyer,  Edwd.  Gower, 
Tho.  Glover,  Lyonell  Britten,  Tho. 
Jones,   John  Motteron. 

EDWARD  LITTLETON,  1200  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  25  Mar.  1656,  p. 
32,  (50).  Bounded  on  S.  by  Magetty 
bay  pond,  W.  by  main  bay,  N.  by  old 
plantation  Cr.,  &  adj.  land  granted 
Nathaniell  Littleton,  Esqr.  1050  acs. 
granted  unto  Mr.  Charles  Harmar  4 
Jan.  1635  &  150  acs.  granted  unto  Eli- 
zabeth Harmar  17  Sept.  1644,  to  which 
was  added  said  1050  acs.,  she  being  the 
daughter  &  heir  of  sd.  Charles  Harmar, 
&  by  deed  dated  1  May  1654  &  signed 
by  Tho.  Harmar,  sonne  of  Dr.  John 
Harmar,  heir  to  the  sd.  Charles  Harmar 
&  Elizabeth  his  daughter,  made  over  to 
Nathaniell  Littleton  &  due  sd.  Edwd. 
as  his  sonne  &  heir. 

WILLIAM  MOORE,  200  acs.  lyeing 
at  the  old  Poquoson  Riv.,  25  Mar.  1656, 
p.  32,  (50).  Beg.  at  Burrowes'  necke. 
Said  land  formerly  assigned  unto  Joseph 
Moore  by  Lucy  Purifoy,  relict  of  Capt. 
Purifoy  &  allowed  of  by  Tho.  Purifoy, 
sonne  &  heir  of  sd.  Capt.  Purifoy,  & 
now  due  sd.  Wm.  as  sonne  &  heir  of 
sd.  Joseph.    Renewed  29  Oct.  1662. 

NATHANIELL  POPE,  Gent.,  1550 
acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  24  Apr.   1656, 


p.  32,  (51).  On  S.  side  of  Petomeck 
Riv.  1050  acs.  on  the  N.  W.  of  a 
swampe  dividing  this  &  land  of  John 
Walton,  Cooper,  &  adj.  his  own  land; 
500  acs.  Wly.  upon  sd.  Riv.  &  land  of 
Mr.  Tirrall,  N.  Wly.  upon  land  of  John 
Vaughan  &  S.  Ely.  upon  Richd.  Walker. 
1050  acs.  by  patent,  19  May  1651  &  500 
acs.  for  trans,  of  10  pers:  Jacob  Cur- 
teanceaw,  Anne  his  wife,  John,  Jacob  & 
Willm.,  his  sons,  Rob.  Davis,  (or 
Dawes),  Edmond  Singlar,  Rob.  Sitch, 
Maudlin  Hoskins,  Susan  Hart,  assigned 
by  Jacob  Curteanceaw  (?).  Renewed 
13  Jan.  1661. 

WILLIAM  TAYLOR,  300  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  11  Mar.  1655,  p.  33,  (52). 
Near  the  head  of  Occahannock  Cr. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Barth.  Meares,  Oneale 
Bulker.* 

PEETER  STARCHEY,  100  acs.  in 
the  new  Poquoson,  comonly  called  Ox- 
ford, bounding  Wly.  upon  land  of 
Dictoris  Christmas.  20  Mar.  1655,  p. 
33,  (52).  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Tho. 
Sutton,  Nich.  Press. 

WILLIAM  PERRY,  (Parry),  100 
acs.,  Eliz.  City  Co.,  6  May  1656,  p. 
33,  (52).  Lately  belonging  to  Wm. 
Cocke,  dec'd.  Abutting  Wly.  upon  land 
of  Henry  Withers  &  Ely.  on  land  of 
Thomas  Sherley,  lately  Daniell  Tanners, 
&  Sly.  on  or  near  mouth  of  Tuckers 
Creek.  Trans,  of  2  pers.*  Renewed  13 
Jan.  1661. 

ZACHARY  CRIPPS,  300  acs.  at  the 
head  of  a  branch  falling  into  Ware  Riv. 
in  Mockjack  bay,  beg.  at  Capt.  Breemans 
land  &  N.  W.  to  land  of  Mr.  Mordecoy 
Cooke.  Trans,  of  6  pers.*  24  Mar. 
1655,  p.  33,  (53). 

MOSES  LYNTON  (Linton),  200 
acs.  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  p.  34,  (53).  (No 
date)  At  head  of  the  S.  E.  branch  of 
Daniell  Tanners  Cr.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
John  Townshend,  Charles  Blanchernell, 
John  Scoe,  (or  Scot),  Eliz.  Church. 

MR.  ROGER  FOUNTEINE,  600  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  p.  34,  (53).  No  date. 
In  Lin  haven  parish  on  the  Western 
shoare,  bounded  on  S.  W.  by  Mr.  Rich 
ard    Smithes   Cr.   &   adj.    upon   Francis 


332 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Lands  devdt.  Trans,  of  12  pers:  James 
Flaharty,  Garret  Burry,  Sarah  Tompson, 
John  Kirke,  Job  Chandler,  Alex  Simp- 
cock,  Dan.  Gerdan,  Rose  Springe,  Gab. 
Johnson,  Archiball  Wahoope,  Hum. 
Twillye,  Archiball  Hunter.  Renewed 
18  Mar.  1662. 

HENRY  WESGATE,  250  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  p.  34,  (54).  No  date.  In 
lyn  haven  parish  at  the  little  creeke, 
bounded  with  the  head  of  Henry  Snailes 
land  &  Bart.  Hoskins.  Trans,  of  5 
pers:  John  Browne,  Morgan  Jones, 
Mathew  Henderson,  Ellen  Wesgate, 
Tho.  Woolmer. 

JOHN  MARSHALL,  100  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  p.  34,  (54).  No  date.  In 
the  E.  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  bounded  on 
E.  with  Wm.  Nicholls  &  on  W.  with 
Mr.  Tho.  Sawyers  marked  trees.  Trans, 
of  2  pers:  Timothy  Ives  &  Margarett 
his  wife. 

SAMUELL  RUTLAND,  200  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  p.  35,  (55).  No  date. 
Up  the  Indian  Cr.,  &  alongst  Richard 
Whitehursts  line.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
Penelope  Gilbert,  John  Bradshew,  Doro- 
thy Bright,   Aug.    (or  Ang.)    Addison. 

PEETER  SEXTON,  700  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  20  Mar.  1655/6,  p.  35,  (55). 
Near  the  head  of  the  S.  branch  of  Eliz. 
Riv.  &  adj.  Richd.  Joanes.  Due  by  vir- 
tue of  the  rights  of  a  patent  for  the 
same  quantity  granted  to  Tho.  Gutte- 
ridge,  gent.,  assigned  unto  sd.  Sexton  & 
relinquished.  Assigned  by  Ann  the  re- 
lict &  Admx.  of  sd.  Sexton  &  renewed 
in  name  of  Rich.  Jones,  11  Apr.  1663. 

MR.  ISAACK  FOXCRAFT,  March. 
(Merchant),  2,000  acs.  Northumberland 
Co.,  24  Apr.  1656,  p.  35,  (56).  On  S. 
side  of  great  Wicocomoco  Riv.,  upon 
Fishing  Cr.  dividing  this  from  land  of 
Mr.  Wm.  Thomas,  S.  Ely.  upon  land  of 
Martin  Coale  &  a  cr.  dividing  this  from 
land  of  Tho.  Salsbury  &  Wly.  upon 
land  of  John  Fawcet.  1100  acs.  part 
granted  unto  Tho.  Salsbury,  13  Sept. 
1654,  by  whom  it  was  assigned  unto 
Gervase  Dodson,  who  assigned  to  sd. 
Foxcraft;  900  acs.  for  trans,  of  18  pers.* 
Assigned  unto  Tho.  Prettyman  &  re- 
newed 18  Mar.  1662. 


DAME  ELIZABETH  LUNSFORD, 
500  acs.  3  June  1656,  p.  36,  (56).  On 
S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  adj.  land  of  John 
Benton,  on  Wwd.  side  of  Matchepungoe 
Cr.,  &  near  Col.  Lees  plantation.  The 
sd.  land  by  Lady  Lunsford  called 
Brandon.  Granted  unto  her  by  patent 
dated  6  June  1654  &  due  by  assignment 
from  Samuell  Abbot,  who  patented  same 
22  Dec.   1642. 

RICHARD  JOANES,  350  acs.  in  the 
W.  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  beg.  at  Ailing- 
tons  Cr.,  &  adj.  Capt.  Wm.  Tuckers 
land.  8  Oct.  1655,  p.  36,  (57).  200 
acs.  part  granted  unto  Capt.  Wm. 
Tucker  14  July  1635  &  by  Lt  Col. 
Cornelius  Loyd,  agent  for  sd.  Tucker, 
assigned  unto  sd.  Joanes  &  150  acs.  for 
trans,  of  3  pers:  Charles  Hodges,  Geo. 
Wahab,  Jno.  Makefashion. 

LAWRENCE  DAMORON,  342  acs. 
Northumberland   Co.,    8   Oct.    1655,   p. 

36,  (57).  N.  E.  upon  the  head  of  tanx 
Yeocomoco  Riv.  Renewal  of  patent  to 
him  dated  12  May  1652.  Renewed  18 
Mar.  1662. 

CAPT.  GEORGE  MASON,  900  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  26  Mar.  1656,  p. 

37,  (58).  N.  E.  upon  Quiough  Riv.  & 
S.  E.  upon  land  of  Richard  Codsford. 
Trans,  of  18  pers.* 

HENRY  SMITH,  Junr.,  200  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  9  Dec.  1656,  p. 
37,  (58).  Nly.  upon  land  of  Thomas 
Dorrow  &  S.  E.  upon  Edward  Coles  (or 
Toles.)  Renewal  of  patent  granted  5 
May  1652. 

CAPT.  HENRY  FLEETE,  550  acs. 
11  Sept.  1656,  p.  38,  (58).  Beg.  at 
the  miles  end  of  land  of  Mr.  WmSons. 
(Williamsons),  now  called  Mr.  Hobkins 
land  &  adj.  his  own  land.  Trans,  of 
11  pers:  Darby  Howranley,  Katherine 
Cullin,  Wm.  Tall,  Daniell  Morrell,  Jno. 
Bryant,  Tho.  Hinde,  James  Ludwell, 
Tho.  Harris,  Joane  Wood,  Tho.  Boane 
(or  Boare),  Bridges  Lee. 

JOHN  LEAR,  100  acs.  Westmoreland 
Co.,  4  Dec.  1656,  p.  38,  (59).  In 
Oquiah  Riv.  on  S.  side  of  Capt.  Giles 
(Brent) ;  beg.  at  lowermost  part  of  land 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


333 


sd.  Lear  bought  of  Capt.  George  Mason. 
Sd.  land  being  deserted  by  the  sd.  Brent 
&  due  sd.  Lear  for  trans,  of  2  pers: 
himself  &  a  servant,   Xphian.  Winkle. 

HUMPHREY  TABB  (Tab),  gent., 
900  acs.  Eliz.  City  Co.,  20  Sept.  1656, 
p.  38,  (59).  Bet.  Harrises  Cr.  &  Point 
Comfort  Cr.,  beg.  on  a  branch  comonly 
called  old  wills  canow,  running  by  gut- 
ter swampe  unto  the  place  of  the  indian 
stone,  to  land  of  John  Ducket.  100  acs. 
by  patent  dated  6  May  1638;  150  acs. 
by  patent  of  Jno.  Ingrames,  dec'd,  24 
Sept.  1645  &  purchased  by  sd.  Tab;  300 
acs.  by  another  patent  of  sd.  Ingrams 
dated  23  Nov.  1647  and  by  him  pur- 
chased; 100  acs.  by  patent,  19  June 
1642;  50  acs.  by  patent  dated  25  Nov. 
1637;  200  acs.  for  trans,  of  4  pers: 
Rich.  Lowe,  Wm.  Allen,  Thomas  Tomp- 
son,  Andrew  Blarke. 

JOHN  KENT,  666  acs.  Northumber- 
land Co.,  30  Nov.  1656,  p.  39,  (60). 
Ely.  towards  the  Gleabe  land  &  Nly. 
upon  the  head  of  Matapony  Riv.  550 
acs.  by  patent  granted  to  Mr.  Rob.  New- 
man, 25  Mar.  1651  &  by  John  Hayne, 
assignee  of  sd.  Newman,  assigned  unto 
sd.  Kent;  116  acs.  for  trans,  of  3  pers.* 
Renewed  31  Dec.   1662. 

CAPT.  JNO.  ROGERS,  300  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  on  Cloughtons 
Cr.,  30  Nov.  1656,  p.  39,  (61).  250 
acs.  beg.  at  the  head  of  a  branch  com- 
ing out  of  Monocke  branch  &  along 
land  of  Mr.  George  Higgings;  50  acs. 
E.  upon  sd.  land,  Why.  upon  the  Gleab 
&  Sly.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Hugh  Lee. 
250  acs.  by  patent  to  John  Cloughton, 
20  Dec.  1650  &  assigned  unto  sd. 
Rogers;  and  50  acs.  his  own  patent 
dated  15  Sept.  1654.  Renewed  29  Nov. 
1662. 

THOMAS  READE,  1,000  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Wiccoco- 
moco  Riv.,  30  Nov.  1656,  p.  40,  (61). 
Bounding  N.  N.  E.  upon  lands  of  Mr. 
Isaacke  Foxecroft  &  David  Kyffin  &  W. 
N.  W.  upon  land  of  Jarvice  Dodson 
which  was  surveyed  for  Jno.  Palmer. 
Trans,  of  20  pers.*  This  land  deserted 
&  granted  unto  James  Austin,  3  Dec. 
1659.    Test:    Tho.  Brereton,  Clk. 


RICHARD  HOLDEN,  100  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  30  Nov.  1656,  p. 
40,  (62).  Ely.  upon  Potomack  Riv., 
Sly.  upon  Yoacomacoe  Riv.,  Wly.  upon 
a  creek  dividing  this  from  land  of  Tho- 
mas Hailes  sold  to  Robt.  Lord  &  Nly. 
upon  his  own  land.  Due  by  patent  to 
William  Bedlam,  29  Nov.  1652  &  as- 
signed to  sd.  Holden. 

MR.  CHARLES  ASHTON  &  THO- 
MAS ADAMS,  300  acs.  Northumber- 
land Co.,  in  Cherry  point  Nicke,  30 
Nov.  1656,  p.  40,  (62).  Wly.  on 
Matapony  Riv.,  Sly.  upon  land  of  Ed- 
ward Henley  &  Nly.  upon  land  of 
Willm.  Warde.    Trans,  of  6  pers.* 

WILLIAM  THATCHER,  400  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  30  Nov.  1656,  p.  41, 
(63).  Upon  N.  W.  side  of  Corotomen 
Riv.,  opposite  land  of  Henry  Davis,  N. 
Ely.  upon  land  surveyed  for  Jno. 
Nicholls,  the  forrest  dividing  this  from 
land  one  Hale  bought  of  one  Hawker. 
300  acs.  by  patent  dated  17  May  1655 
&  100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers.* 

LT.  COL.  NATHANIELL  POPE, 
1,050  acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  30  Nov. 
1656,  p.  41,  (63).  50  acs.  Nly.  upon  a 
branch  of  the  head  of  Hollis'  Cr.  at 
Apamatockes,  Ely.  upon  land  of  Major 
John  Hollis;  &  1000  acs.  adj.  sd.  50 
acs.  Trans,  of  21  pers.*  This  land  was 
given  by  will  of  sd.  Pope  to  his  son 
Nathaniell  &  renewed  in  his  name  13 
Jan.  1661. 

ENOCKE  HAWKER  &  ANTHONY 
DONEY,  1,000  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  6 
Oct.  1656,  p.  42,  (64).  Upon  the  N. 
W.  branch  of  Corotomen  Riv.  &  adj. 
land  of  John  Nicholls.  Granted  to  them 
by  patent  dated  29  July  1652. 

MR.  JOHN  PAINE,  610  acs.  on  the 
head  of  the  Eastern  Br.  of  Pepoticke  Cr. 
on  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  6  Oct.  1656, 
p.  42,  (64).  Trans,  of  13  pers:  Marga. 
Paine,  Jno.  Paine,  Junr.,  Wm.  Emaston, 
Morris  Williams,  Elizabeth  Pusie,  Jno. 
Capell,  Raughley  Travers,  Rich.  Pea- 
cocke,  Mary  Smith,  Law.  Thompson, 
Wm.  Walker,  Tho.  Jelly. 

ISACKE  HUTCHINGS,  378  acs. 
Henrico    Co.,    known   by    the   name    of 


334 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Worricke,  14  Dec.  1656,  p.  42,  (65). 
Lyeing  next  to  land  of  Peeter  Lee,  S.  E. 
on  the  main  river  &  N.  E.  to  a  place 
called  Porringers  Spring.  Trans,  of  8 
pers.* 

HENRY  CHICHLEY,  Km.,  2200 
acs.  on  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  opposite 
to  Port  Tobacco,  bounded  on  E.  with 
Poytresses  Cr.  &  land  of  Vincent  Stan- 
ford, etc.  8  Dec.  1656,  p.  43,  (66). 
Trans,  of  44  pers:  Rich.  Scarbrow, 
Tho.  ap  Thomas,  James  Howard,  Antho. 
Caudell,  Tho.  Beardwell,  Rob.  Hane 
(or  Hand),  Jno.  White,  Jno.  Ray, 
Henry  Rice,  Arthur  Chandler,  Wm.  By- 
ler,  Wm.  Chelmedge,  Rich.  Arrundell, 
Tho.  Mason,  Georg  Haynes,  Sam.  Parry, 
Tho.  Pones,  Peter  Mason,  Wm.  Hurt, 
Tho.  Howell,  Samll.  Goodwin,  Tho. 
Harris,  Rob.  Taylor,  Tho.  ap  Richd., 
Jones  Alpott,  Jno.  Woodson,  Edwd. 
Buckingham,  Edward  Freeman,  Henry 
Lambert,  Jost  Wms.  (Williams),  Tho. 
Warrington. 

MYLES  DIXON,  1000  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  8  Dec.  1656,  p.  43,  (66).  On  S. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  on  N.  side  of  the 
great  swamp  lyeing  Wly.  from  land  of 
Jno.  Haywood.  Trans,  of  20  pers.* 
This  land  is  granted  to  Jno.  Apleton, 
gent.,  15  May  1661.  Teste:  Tho. 
Brereton,  Clk. 

PEETER  LEE,  126  acs.  Henrico  Co., 
known  by  the  name  of  Worricke,  14 
Dec.  1656,  p.  44,  (67).  Beg.  at  a  small 
run  &  a  place  called  London  Bridge 
which  divides  it  from  land  belonging  to 
the  orphans  of  William  Cox,  S.  E.  on 
the  main  river  &  N.  E.  on  Isack  Hutch- 
ings.    Trans,  of  3  pers.* 

DANIEL  JAMES  &  JOHN  JEN- 
INGS,  400  acs.  on  S.  side  of  Rappa. 
Riv.,  adj.  land  of  Thomas  Wilkinson. 
6  Oct.  1656,  p.  44,  (61).  Trans,  of  8 
pers:  Charles  Leech,  Robert  Fillkin, 
Peeter  Leech,  Peter  Garland,  Robert 
Tompson,  Robert  Smith,  Tho.  Henson, 
John  South. 

VINCENT  STANFORD,  300  acs.  on 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  adj.  land  of 
Jno.  Robinson,  parallel  to  lands  of  Mr. 
Fox  &  Fairewethers  Neck.  6  Oct.  1656, 
p.  44,    (68).    Trans,  of  6  pers:    Rich. 


Colt  twice,  Thomas  Flood,  George 
Stanley,  Grace  Davis,  Robert  Newby, 
twice. 

WILLIAM  JOHNSON,  550  acs.  on 
N.  W.  side  of  Pasckataynon  (Pashata- 
quon)  alias  Coxes  Cr.,  parallel  to  land 
of  Robert  Yongue,  &  S.  W.  with  land 
of  Randall  Chamlett,  &  another  part  of 
Paskato  Creek.  6  Oct.  1656,  p.  45, 
(68).  350  acs.  by  former  patent  & 
residue  for  trans,  of  4  pers:  Mr.  Tho- 
mas Prettyman,  Richard  Redding,  Fran- 
cis Coulston,  Elizabeth  Howman.  Re- 
newed in  his  name  28  July,  1662;  & 
in  name  of  Wm.  Johnson,  his  son,  25 
Sept.    1671. 

HENRY  CHICHLEY,  Km.,  800  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  7  Oct.  1656,  p.  45,  (69). 
At  the  head  of  Peankatanke  Riv.,  and 
below  the  Horse  path,  etc.  Trans,  of 
16  pers.* 

MR.  CUTBERT  POTTER,  1200  acs. 
on  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  behind  land 
of  Mr.  Rowland  Burnham.  No  date;  p. 
46,   (69).    Formerly  granted  by  patent. 

MINRED  MINSON  &  ROBERT 
KEMPE,  200  acs.  in  Rappa.  Riv.,  upon 
the  head  of  Parratts  Cr.  where  the  Cr. 
divides  itself  into  branches.  10  Dec. 
1656,  p.  46,  (70).  Trans,  of  4  pers.* 
Assigned  by  them  to  Roger  Harris,  who 
assigned  same  to  Tho.  Warrick,  in 
whose  name  it  was  renewed  19  Apr. 
1664.    Test:    Fra.  Kirkman,  CI. 

JOHN  CURTIS,  500  acs.  on  S.  side 
Potomake  Cr.,  opposite  tract  of  land  of 
Wm.  Beeches.  10  Dec.  1656,  p.  46, 
(70).    Trans,  of  10  pers.* 

MINRED  MINSON  &  ROBERT 
KEMPE,  600  acs.  in  Rappa.  Riv.  upon 
Mr.  Burnham's  Cr.  &  N.  N.  E.  along 
Copeland's  land.  12  Dec.  1656,  p.  47, 
(71).  Trans.  12  pers.*  Renewed  in 
name  of  Robt.  Kemp,  10  Dec.  1663,  sd. 
Minson  having  relinquished  his  title. 

MARY  STEPHENS,  Widdow,  150 
acs.  Surrey  Co.,  17  Dec.  1656,  p.  47, 
(71).  On  the  E.  side  of  a  branch  of 
Black  Water,  beg.  on  Capt.  Jordans 
lyne,    halfe    a    myle    above    the   Indian 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


335 


path,   etc.,   and  butting  on  Benj.  Dolls 
300  acs.    Trans,  of  3  pers.* 

BENJAMIN  DOLL,  Negro,  300  acs. 
Surrey  Co.,  17  Dec.  1656,  p.  47,  (71). 
Beg.  on  the  Sly.  side  of  the  Reeded 
Marsh  on  Capt.  Jotdans  lyne.  Trans, 
of  6  pers.* 

JOHN  COSBY,  760  acs.  New  Kent 
Co.,  5  Jan.  1656,  p.  48,  (72).  On  the 
N.  E.  side  of  Mattepony  Riv.,  beg.  on 
the  S.  E.  side  of  a  branch  of  Aquin- 
tanocco  Sw.,  N.  E.  to  lines  of  Lt.  Col. 
Robert  Abraell's  land.  Trans,  of  16 
pers.*  "Noe  Rights  never  entered  for 
this  patent." 

SAME.  1000  acs.  in  same  county, 
page  and  date.  On  S.  side  of  York 
Riv.,  adj.  land  of  Mr.  Anthony  Lang- 
stone.  Trans,  of  20  pers.*  Noe  rights, 
etc. 

SAME.  800  acs.  in  same  county,  and 
date,  p.  48,  (73).  On  S.  side  of  Matta- 
pony  Riv.,  on  N.  E.  side  of  Arsantan 
maine  swamp,  beg.  at  Thomas  Hancks 
&  N.  E.  by  land  of  Major  Lewis.  100 
acs.  by  purchase  from  Tho.  Hanckes  & 
600  acs.  by  purchase  from  Major  Lewis. 
Residue  for  trans,  of  12  pers.*  Noe 
rights,  etc. 

GRIFFITH  DICKINSON,  300  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  5  Jan.  1656,  p.  49, 
(73).  On  S.  W.  side  of  Moyses  Cr., 
on  the  Nly.  branch  of  Tomahack  (or 
Tomahun)  Cr.  above  Nickatounces  (?) 
quarter,  bounded  Sly.  on  Capt.  Bennett 
Freeman  &  Will.  Wolfes,  Wly.  on  Wm. 
Hitchman,  Nly.  on  Wm.  Phillips  &  Ely. 
towards  his  own  land.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
Himselfe  twice,  Eliz.  Dickenson,  Wm. 
Jones,  Susan  Crotch   (or  Croch). 

THOMAS  BUSBIE  (Busby),  400  acs. 
Surrey  Co.,  14  Jan.  1656,  p.  49,  (73). 
On  S.  side  of  the  Western  (branch)  of 
the  head  of  upper  Chippoakes  Cr.,  beg. 
on  Mr.  Moseleys  line  near  the  path  that 
goes  to  Mr.  Barkers  &c.  to  John  Bar- 
rowes  line.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Peeter 
Spicer,  Eliza.  Paine,  Wm.  Gray,  Jane 
Barker,  Anth.  Hulbunt,  Tho.  Busby, 
Rich.  Ballard,  Cicely  More. 


WM.  PULLAM,  334  acs.  New  Kent 
Co.,  1  Jan.  1656,  p.  49,  (74).  Beg.  in 
Mr.  Martin  Baker's  line,  Sly.  upon  a 
branch  of  Skennow  (Skeninow)  Run  & 
Wly.  to  Thomas  Collins,  etc.  Trans,  of 
7  pers:  Jno.  Jennings,  Wm.  Walker, 
Wm.  Richards,  Tho.  Tuffes,  Anne 
Parker,  Robert  Morris,  William  Jackson. 

JOHN  WOOD,  1,000  acs.  on  S.  side 
of  Potewmacke  Riv.,  behind  land  of  Mr. 
Roger  Isham.  14  Jan.  1656,  p.  50, 
(74).  S.  W.  Va  mi.  beneath  the  dwell- 
ing house  of  sd.  Isham.  Trans,  of  20 
pers:  Phillip  Chester,  Peter  Browne, 
Robert  Walker,  Alexander  Farrell, 
James  Wms.  (Williams),  Andrew 
Berry,  Jane  Griffith,  Tho.  Senior,  Tho. 
Pond,  Jone  Abbott,  James  Joyner,  Fran. 
Gregory,  James  Kirke,  Michaell  Long, 
James  Mackiney,  Edward  Allen,  Ellis 
Bensom  (Benison),  Wm.  Seale,  Joseph 
Kent,  John  Moyses. 

JOHN  ROSIER,  Clerke,  1,050  acs. 
Westmoreland  Co.,  14  Jan.  1656,  p.  50, 
(75).  On  N.  W.  side  of  Nominy  Riv., 
neare  a  branch  dividing  this  from  land 
surveyed  for  Lewis  Burrill,  deed.,  now 
in  possession  of  Capt.  Robert  Henfield. 
500  acs.  by  patent  to  Major  Lewis  Bur- 
rell  17  Nov.  1650,  assigned  to  Thomas 
Yeowell,  who  assigned  to  sd.  Rosier; 
300  acs.  granted  to  sd.  Yeowell  &  as- 
signed unto  Rosier  &  250  acs.  for  trans, 
of  5  pers:  Tho.  Ardington,  Georg 
Spell,  Wm.  Cowdery,  John  Lawrence, 
Andrew  Rayne. 

THOMAS  STEPHENS,  100  acs. 
Surrey  Co.,  14  Jan.  1656,  p.  51,  (76). 
On  S.  side  of  the  W.  branch  of  the  head 
of  upper  Chippoakes  Cr.,  beg.  on  Mr. 
Moseleyes  line,  being  the  uppermost 
bounds  of  Thomas  Busbyes  land,  run- 
ning to  Jno.  Barrowes  corner  &c.  Trans, 
of   2   pers.* 

MAJOR  WILLM.  LEWIS,  1200  acs. 
Glocester  Co.,  14  Jan.  1656,  p.  51, 
(76).  On  N.  E.  side  of  Mattapony 
Riv.,  beg.  at  upper  Westermost  tree  of 
Mr.  Hollands  devdt.  &  along  the  back 
of  Mr.  Hansfords  devdt.  Granted  by 
patent  dated  25  May  1654. 

VINCENT  STANFORD,  700  acs.  at 
the  head  of  Poytresses  Cr.  on  N.  side 


336 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


of  Rappa.  Riv.  neare  Nansatiquon.  6 
Oct.  1656,  p.  51,  (76).  Trans,  of  14 
pers:  Robert  Newby  twice,  Antho.  Bar- 
ly,  Tho.  Walgrave,  Wm.  Kinge,  Richard 
Robison,  Jno.  Allen,  Giles  Robison, 
Margaret  Gudloe,  Mary  Savory,  Jone 
Barby,  Margaret  Arnoll,  Constant  Win- 
shew,   Tho.  Knowles. 

CAPT.    WILLIAM    CANFILL,     (or 

Caufill),  550  acs.  Surrey  Co.,  24  Jan. 
1656,  p.  52,  (77).  On  Wwd.side  of 
Lyons  Cr.,  bounding  on  N.  with  Hog 
Is.  Cr.,  on  E.  &  Wwd.  with  James  River 
&  on  S.  side  with  his  own  land  formerly 
patented  &  land  of  Lt.  William  Cocka- 
ram  &  Jno.  Midemore.  Trans,  of  11 
pers:  Walter  Taylor,  Joane  Gurney, 
Fran.  Butler,  Hugh  Kennicke,  Gillien 
Cornen  (or  Conners),  Onory  (or 
Onoris)  Sullivan,  Onory  (or  Onoris) 
Linsey,  Joane  Davis,  Mary  Hall,  James 
Filline,  Timothy  Issall. 

WILLIAM  CRUMPE  &  MR.  HUM- 
PHRY VAULX,  1000  acs.  James  City 
Co.,  26  Jan.  1656,  p.  52,  (77).  Neare 
Richohock  path  &  behind  land  somtimes 
of  Thomas  Gibson,  deed.,  beg.  in  Kiseo- 
honsicke  Sw.,  running  S.  E.  by  the  head 
of  Weekenoskeekicke  (?)  Sw.  Trans, 
of  20  pers:  Tho.  Preston,  Jno.  Steevens, 
Jno.  Lyon,  Jno.  Caldecock  (?)  Rebecca 
Molson,  Tho.  Ballister,  Jane  Goss,  John 
Short,  John  Hort,  Elinr.  Flettcher,  John 
Taylor,  Anne  Phipps,  &  8  Negroes.  All 
assigned  by  Maj.  Chroshaw. 

MR.  PEETER  RANSON,  950  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  6  Dec.  1656,  p. 
53,  (78).  Upon  N.  side  of  the  divid- 
ing creek,  &  Sly.  upon  land  of  George 
Waterman  &  John  Willis.  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  20  Nov.  1654. 

RALPH  GREENE,  400  acs.  Gloster 
Co.,  15  Dec.  1656,  p.  53,  (79).  Upon 
N.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.,  beg.  at  mouth  of 
Joneses  Cr.,  E.  S.  E.  upon  cr.  dividing 
this  &  land  of  Col.  Richard  Lee,  W. 
N.  W.  upon  land  of  William  Thorne, 
assigned  to  him  by  Col.  Lee.  Renewal 
of  patent  dated  16  Feb.  1653. 

MAJOR  WILLIAM  LEWIS,  2600 
acs.  on  the  S.  W.  side  of  the  freshes  of 
Yorke  Riv.,  including  halfe  the  devdt. 


comonly  called  portholy  alias  Chymaho- 
cans,  purchased  by  sd.  Lewis  of  Col. 
Jno.  West  containing  1550  acs;  bounded 
from  the  mouth  of  Mattadequin  Cr.,  S. 
S.  W.  towards  head  of  Tanxe  Weynoake 
Run  &c.  to  Mr.  Joseph  Crawshawes  line 
to  Chimahocans  devdt.  &c.  775  acs. 
purchased  of  Col.  Jno.  West  &  1825 
acs.  for  trans,  of  37  pers:  John  Smith, 
Junr.,  Tho.  Holliday,  Joseph  Peasly, 
Isack  Franklin,  Xpr.  Meadcroft,  John 
Smith,  Senr.,  Daniell  Odaley,  Abigail 
Millis,  Mary  Cuffin,  Margaret  Isom, 
Francis  Barnell,  Henry  Barnell,  (or 
Burnell),  John  Holley,  John  Brocas, 
Sarah  Constable,  Mary  Bartlett,  Tho. 
Younge,  George  Maurice;  16  persons 
upon  certificate  from  Warwick  Cr.  & 
assigned  to  Major  Lewis  by  Mr.  Jerom 
Ham  (or  Hans).  Assignees  by  Mr. 
Francis  Burnell.  20  Jan.  1656,  p.  54, 
(79). 

HENRY  SOANE,  gent.,  2200  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  10  Dec.  1656,  p.  55, 
(80).  On  N.  E.  side  of  Chichohominy 
Riv.  called  by  the  name  of  Richahocke; 
beg.  at  Richahocke  Cr.  above  Mattapony 
Necke  &c.  including  John  Lings  planta- 
tion, running  through  Thomas  Brookes 
corne  field,  by  line  of  Richard  New  & 
including  Nantupcoy  (?)  &  Pemacrey 
(?)  Necks  with  a  small  island  called 
Papacoone  (?).  Due  by  purchase  from 
Alexander  Shepard  &  Margarett  his 
wife,  the  daughter  and  heire  of  Francis 
Barrett,   dee'd. 

JOHN  BROMFIELD,  1200  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  near  the  head  of 
Archers  Hope  Cr.,  15  Dec.  1656,  p.  55, 
(81).  Running  up  deere  bone  Valley 
&c.  to  Tuttyes  Necke,  etc.,  unto  trees 
dividing  this  from  land  of  Mr.  Richard 
Brewster  &c.  to  the  mouth  of  Weare 
Cr.  Formerly  granted  unto  Wm.  Davis, 
27  Mar.  1643,  whoe  dyeing  intestate  & 
noe  heire  apeareing,  it  was  ordered  by 
the  Govr.  &c.  on  the  15  Dec.  1656  that 
the  sd.  Bromefield,  whoe  marryed  the 
relict  of  sd.  Davis,  should  have  a  patent 
for  the  same  &  for  trans,  of  24  pers: 
Abraham  Sinckler,  Wm.  Mosse,  Sarah 
Allyson,  Rebecca  Bradshew,  Francis 
Chambers,  Sarah  Allyson,  Morgan  Wil- 
liams, Rob.  Paddison,  Mathew  Bur- 
rowes,  Margarett   Hilton    (or   Hibton). 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


337 


HESTER  OAKHAM,  150  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  on  N.  side  of  James  Riv.,  30 
Oct.  1656,  p.  56,  (81).  S.  E.  on 
Matthew  Warriners  land,  S.  W.  on 
Capt.  Elice  &  Mr.  Fry  &  N.  E.  on  the 
heires  of  the  land  of  Rice  Wolfes. 
Trans,  of  3  pers:  Margarett  Delton, 
Sarah  Coe,  Mary  Hull. 

CAPT.  JNO.  SMITH,  400  acs.  upon 
branches  of  Milford  haven,  beg.  at 
Richd.    Longs    land.    8    Oct.    1656,    p. 

56,  (82).  Granted  unto  Thomas  Mor- 
ris 25  Nov.  1655  &  assigned  unto  James 
Foster,  who  assigned  same  unto  sd. 
Smith,  and  now  renewed  etc. 

THOMAS  BELL,  134  acs.  Gloster 
Co.,  10  Oct.  1656,  p.  56,  (82).  Run- 
ning up  from  a  small  creek  of  Poropo- 
tanke,  W.  S.  W.  by  Jno.  Kings  land, 
N.  E.  by  land  of  Jno.  Bennett  &  Tho- 
mas Leechman.  84  acs.  granted  unto 
him  6  Dec.  1652  &  50  acs.  for  trans, 
of  Wm.  Watts  (altered  to  Witts.) 

THOMAS  SALSBURY,  650  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,   4  June   1656,  p. 

57,  (83).  300  acs.  on  S.  side  of  great 
Wicoeomico  Riv.,  N.  N.  E.  upon  Vul- 
cans  Cr.  &  E.  S.  E.  upon  land  of  Henry 
Weeker;  300  acs.  along  the  head  of  sd. 
Weeker  to  Hulletts,  to  Faucett,  Free- 
mans  &  Conowayes  land,  thence  to  land 
of  Thomas  Kedby  sold  to  Tho.  Bales 
(or  Boles).  300  acs.  granted  sd.  Sals- 
bury  13  Oct.  1653  &  350  acs.  due  for 
trans,  of  7  pers:  Francis  Gray,  Alice 
his  wife,  Mary  Gray,  Joshua  Gray,  Ann 
Gray,  Wm.  Butler.  Note:  Said  Sals- 
bury  gave  300  acs.  first  mentioned  to 
his  son  Thomas,  who  had  a  patent  for 
the  same  dated  28  Jan.  1662  &  350  acs. 
the  residue  to  Andrew  Pettigrew,  who 
married  Salsbury's  widow. 

HERBERT  SMITH,  Gent.,  500  acs. 
Westmoreland  Co.,  3  Oct.  1656,  p.  57, 
(84).  S.  Wly.  upon  upper  Matchoticke 
Riv.  &c.  to  the  head  line  of  Thomas 
Peake,  deed.,  now  land  of  sd.  Smith 
250  acs.  granted  to  him  15  Sept.  1651 
&  the  residue  for  trans,  of  5  pers:  John 
Ingrum,  John  Varnham,  John  Simmes, 
Edward  Stephens,  Math  Skipp.  Renewed 
18  Mr.  1662. 


MAJOR  THOMAS  CURTIS,  630  acs. 
on  N.  side  of  Ware  River  in  Mocke 
Jack  bay,  beg.  on  E.  side  of  Browns 
Bay,  &c.  by  marked  trees  dividing  this 
from  land  of  Mr.  Thomas  Boswell.  8 
Oct.  1656,  p.  58,  (84).  542  acs. 
granted  him  20  Sept.  1652  &  88  for 
trans,  of  2  pers:  Elizabeth  Boston, 
Hannah  Blackwell. 

EDWARD  MOORE,  200  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  9  Oct.  1656,  p.  58,  (85). 
At  Occahannocke  Cr.,  beg.  at  the  head 
of  a  former  devdt.,  bounded  on  the  S. 
by  lands  of  Nuswattocks.  Trans,  of  4 
pers:  Edward  Moore,  Senr.,  Mary 
Moore,  Edward  Moore,  Junr.,  Rich. 
Moore. 

NICHOLAS  WADDILOW,  350  acs. 
Northampton  Co.  at  Nuswattocks  Cr., 
8  Oct.  1656,  p.  58,  (85).  Bounded  on 
W.  with  a  branch  of  sd.  Cr.  dividing 
this  from  the  land  of  Nicholas  Grainger. 
Trans,  of  7  pers:  Geo.  Johnson,  Wm. 
Smithson,  Wm.  Willson,  Cornelius 
Clinton,  Derrick  Arryson,  Derrick  Arb- 
son,  John  Willy  (or  Wilby). 

EDMOND  KEMPE,  gent.,  1100  acs. 
on  N.  side  of  Peanketancke  Riv.,  beg. 
on  E.  side  of  Blands  Cr.,  parallel  to 
land  of  Peregrin  Bland,  deed.,  &c. 
Crosse  branches  of  Bonners  Creek,  etc. 
to  Wwd.  side  of  the  Gleab  land  Cr. 
which  divides  this  &  land  of  Col.  Jno. 
Matron,  deed.  4  Nov.  1656,  p.  59, 
(86).  600  acs.  by  patent  to  Capt. 
George  Reade,  22  Oct.  1651;  186  acs. 
by  patent  to  Col.  George  Ludlow  6  Oct. 
1654,  &  314  acs.  for  trans,  of  7  pers.* 

GEORGE  TAYLOR,  530  acs.  on  N. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  in  Corrotoman  Riv., 
along  land  of  Henry  Lee.  6  Oct.  1656, 
p.  59,  (86).  Renewal  of  patent  dated 
5  Sept.   1650. 

HOELL  PRICE,  1000  acs.  New  Kent 
Co.,  5  Oct.  1656,  p.  59,  (87).  Beg.  on 
N.  side  of  a  branch  of  Poropotanke 
Swamp.    Trans,  of  20  pers.* 

MR.  HENRY  SOANES,  2800  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  25  Mar.  1656,  p.  60, 
(87).  On  N.  side  of  Matapony  Riv. 
beneath  land  of  Mr.  William  Wiatt, 
running  down  the  river  to  the  Indian 


338 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Ferry,  &  adj.  his  own  land.  1200  acs. 
by  patent  dated  10  Mar.  1653,  &  1600 
acs.  for  trans,  of  32  pers:  Robert  Elly- 
son,  Jno.  Walton,  Wm.  Morgan,  Daniell 
Whitby,  Jno.  Lirgson,  Joane  Cole, 
Henry  Pate,  Ann  Hardin,  Ann  Mattocks, 
Tho.  Torrowgood,  Julian  Allerweck 
(?),  Robert  Jermin,  Eliz.  Pate,  Susan 
Knott,  Anthony,  Negroe,  Katherine 
Pate,  Jane,  Negroe,  Dorathy  Miller,  Jno. 
Hamellton,  Derminuff  (?)  Galium, 
Robert  Trueman,  Wm.  Jolly,  Wm. 
Appellton,  Abraham  Harris,  Thomas 
Peckin,  Robert  Cock,  Jno.  Hathrone, 
Wm.  Stephenson,  Jno.  Whitty,  (or 
Whitby),  Jno.  Hopkins,  Wm.  Sewins, 
Mathew,  Negro. 

JNO.  BAULDWIN,  15  acs.  69 
perches,  in  James  Island,  between  the 
main  river  &  the  back  river,  4  Oct. 
1656,  p.  60,  (88).  10  acs.  Ely.  upon 
Mr.  James'  land,  N.  upon  the  backe 
river  &  the  land  hereafter  mentioned, 
W.  upon  the  main  river  &  S.  upon  the 
slash  which  lies  between  the  State  house 
&  sd.  Mr.  James;  5  acs.  &  69  perches 
at  the  old  blocke  house,  etc. 

RALPH  GREENE,  500  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  13  Nov.  1656,  p.  60,  (88). 
Bounded  on  the  S.  S.  W.  with  his  own 
land,  W.  N.  W.  with  Arakiaco  Swamp 
&  E.  S.  E.  with  land  of  Leonard  Cham- 
berlaine. 

WILLIAM  POPE,  190  acs.  Nansi- 
mond  Co.,  8  Oct.  1656,  p.  61,  (89). 
Beg.  at  the  miles  end  of  Symon  Simons 
&c.  to  Capt.  Goodwin's  land.  Trans. 
of  4  pers:  Obedience  Perkins,  John 
Godwin,  Rob.  Beadle. 

THOMAS  MERRIDETH,  380  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  28  Oct.  1656,  p.  61, 
(89).  On  S.  side  the  freshes  of  Yorke 
Riv  by  land  of  Mr.  Richard  Barnehouse. 
200  acs.  granted  to  Major  William 
Hoccoday  9  Mar.  1654;  &  180  acs.  for 
trans,  of  4  pers:  Wm.  Parkes,  Francis 
Webb,  Margarett  Feeres,  Isaack  Watson. 

JOHN  WILLIAMS,  250  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  17  Mar.  1655,  p.  61,  (90). 
On  S.  side  of  Pungotegue  Riv.,  Ely.  up- 
on Pocomoke  Cr.,  Nly.  upon  land  of 
Thomas  Teagle,  Wly.  upon  land  of  An- 


thony Johnson,  Negro,  &  Sly.  upon  land 
of  John  Johnson,  Negro.  Trans,  of  5 
pers:  Jno.  Williams,  Eliz.  Hobson, 
Rob.  Atkins,  Tho.  Brodway,  Alexander 


NICHOLAS  MEREWETHER  & 
JOHN  LEACH,  200  acs.  James  City 
Co.,  23  Oct.  1656,  p,  62,  (90).  On 
N.  E.  side  of  Powhitan  maine  Swamp, 
beg.  in  Sir  William  Berkeley's  line. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  Eliz.  Heines,  Jno. 
Bradbury,  Tho.  Abreshall,  Tho.  Allen. 

RICHARD  WHEELER,  300  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  15  Dec.  1656,  p.  62, 
(91).  Joyneing  to  land  of  Robert 
Grimes.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Mary  Bog- 
gis,  Rob.  Boggis,  Jno.  Boggis,  Geo. 
Sheeres  (or  Sheevs),  Eliz.  Bond,  Jno. 
Harris. 

JAMES  PRICE,  300  acs.  Northamp- 
ton Co.,  9  Oct.  1656,  p.  62,  (91).  At 
Matchotanke  Cr.,  bounded  on  S.  by  land 
of  Matilda  Scarbrough.  Trans,  of  6 
pers:  Wm.  Hammack,  Elder  Adkin, 
Ann  Smith,  Barbara  Mathewes,  Eliz. 
Eaton,  Wm.  Barker. 

GEORGE  ABBOTT,  gent.,  1000  acs. 
Nansemond  Co.,  4  Oct.  1656,  p.  63, 
(91).  Adj.  land  of  Mr.  William 
Wright  &  crossing  Marrocone  Cr. 
Trans,  of  20  pers:  Ann  Warburton, 
William  Adams,  Francis  Croffa,  Thomas 
Perry,  Robert  Bayly,  John  Jones,  Tho. 
Dowde,  John  Bowinge,  Maria  (a) 
Negro,  John  an  Irishman,  Margarett  an 
Irishwoman,  Robert  Murry,  Tho.  Ingan, 
Eliz.  his  wife,  Wm.  Moore. 

JNO.  BILLIOTT,  1050  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  9  Oct.  1656,  p.  63,  (92). 
Near  the  seaboard  side,  Nly.  on  branch 
of  forked  Cr.  parting  this  from  land  of 
Thomas  Bell  &  to  marked  trees  parting 
this  from  land  of  Robert  Foster.  Trans. 
of  21  pers:  An  Smith,  Knora  Nimca- 
hoe  (?),  Derreman  Machoone,  Eliza- 
beth Winn,  Susan  Dowridge,  Alice 
Deane,  Robert  Bright,  Mary  Fawne, 
Charity  Jenkins,  Morrice  WhitsorreH, 
Sarah  Greene,  Jno.  Twoale,  Dennis 
Mokezann  (?),  Edwd.  Brockham,  Mary 
LefTore,  Joane  Newes,  Mary  Joanes,  Ann 
Winn,  Xphr.  Cox,  Ann  Benhowe.   (?) 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


339 


RICHARD  BAYLY  (Baily),  100  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  17  Mar.  1655,  p. 
63,  (93).  At  the  head  of  a  branch  of 
Nuswattocks  Cr.,  Wly.  on  land  of 
Stephen  Horsey  &  Ely.  on  a  ridge  by 
Occahannocke  path.    Trans,  of  2  pers.* 

MR.  THOMAS  BOSWELL,  972  acs. 
on  N.  side  of  Ware  Riv.  in  Mock  Jack 
bay,  8  Oct.  1656,  p.  64,  (93).  Run- 
ning by  marked  trees  dividing  this  & 
land  of  Major  Curtis.  800  acs.  by 
patent  dated  6  May  1652,  &  172  acs. 
for  trans,  of  4  pers.* 

WILLIAM  STEPHENS,  son  &  heir 
of  Wm.  Stephens,  Cooper,  320  acs. 
Warwicke  Co.,  18  Nov.  1656,  p.  64, 
(93).  Beg.  at  land  formerly  Mr.  Bul- 
locks, running  to  trees  of  Humphrey 
Gibs  &  by  Yorke  path  to  Col.  Ludlow's. 
250  acs.  by  patent  to  Wm.  Bullocke  & 
residue  for  trans,  of  2  pers.* 

MR.  MARTIN  BAKER,  1750  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  28  Nov.  1656,  p.  64, 
(94).  Beg.  by  Henry  Ashwells  path  to 
Jno.  Basbyes  path,  thence  to  Thomas 
Collins  corner,  etc.  Trans,  of  35  pers: 
Robert  West,  William  West,  Mary 
West:  twice  transported;  Henry  West, 
Jno.  Sell  (?),  Adam  Miles,  Margarett 
Turner,  Nicholas  Porter,  Adam  Miles, 
John  Midleton,  Tho.  Stacy,  Margarett 
Turner,  John  Smith,  John  Vaultres, 
Mathew  Wilson,  Elizabeth  Porter,  Jno. 
Smith,  Robert  Woodby,  Nich.  Porter, 
James  Tanner,  Wm.  Sansons,  Geo. 
Fisher,  Tho.  Jackson,  David  Ritch. 

RICHARD  BARNEHOUSE,  Gent., 
380  acs.  James  City  Co.,  28  Oct.  1656, 
p.  65,  (95).  On  W.  side  of  Burchen 
Swamp.  Trans.  of  8  pers:  Eliz. 
Bakone,  Jno.  Spencer,  Edwd.  Stringer, 
Tho.  Jenkins,  Robert  Shoare,  Wm. 
Squire,  Hugh  Lowell. 

JOHN  GARNELL,  400  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  30  Mar.  1656,  p.  65, 
(95).  Upon  S.  side  of  great  Wiccoco- 
moco  Riv.,  bounded  on  S.  E.  with  Fish- 
ing Cr.,  &  opposite  land  of  Thomas 
Sassall  (or  Salsall).  Granted  unto 
William  Thomas   19  Oct.   1653. 

NICHOLAS  WADDILOW,  350  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  8  Oct.   1656,  p.  65, 


(96).  Bounded  on  S.  with  Nuswat- 
tockes  Cr.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  Alexan- 
der Coote,  Derman  Usshullevan,  Daniell 
Ushullevan,  Teague  Longe,  Nath. 
Broughoe,  Tho.  Southerne,  Elizabeth 
Tarry. 

THOMAS  BIRAM,  300  acs.,  S.  Ely. 
upon  the  mouth  of  great  Wicomoco 
Riv.,  N.  Ely.  upon  a  creek  dividing  this 
from  land  of  John  Essex  &  Henry  Huft 
&  S.  W.  upon  a  creek  dividing  this 
from  land  of  Mr.  Richard  Bud  (or 
Bird.)  11  Oct.  1656,  p.  66,  (96). 
Said  land  formerly  belonged  to  Col. 
Wm.  Claiborne,   Secretary. 

JOHN  CURTIS,  350  acs.  at  the  head 
of  the  Backe  Cr.  in  the  North  River  in 
Mockjack  bay,  running  by  marked  trees 
of  Major  Curtis  &  Mr.  Harris.  8  Oct. 
1656,  p.  66,  (97).  Trans,  of  7  pers: 
Silvanus  Wood,  John  Snell,  Dolla  (a) 
Negro,  2  Negro  women,  2  Negro  men. 

RICHARD  GIBLE,  800  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  Dec.  1656,  p.  66, 

(97).  Ely.  by  S.  upon  a  creek  dividing 
this  &  lands  of  John  Hull,  Hugh  Souch 
&  James  Magregor,  N.  by  E.  upon  land 
of  Robert  Newman  &  W.  by  N.  upon  a 
creek  dividing  this  &  land  of  Mr.  Pres- 
ley. Trans,  of  16  pers:  Robert  New- 
man, Wm.  Winterton,  Mary  Robinson, 
Ann  Pettito,  John  Dunnidge,  John 
Wilkenson,  Anne  Wilkenson,  Vincent 
Stanford,  Wm.  Chapman,  John  Branch, 
Mary  Branch,  Mary  Branch,  Junr.,  Ed- 
ward Toogood,  David  Griffin,  John 
Willis,  Wm.  Wade.  Note:  Renewed 
in  the  name  of  Danll.  Holland  &  Wm. 
Cornish,  to  whom  it  was  sold  by  sd. 
Gible,  9  Dec.  1662. 

MARGARETT  MYLES,  (Miles) 
1200  acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  1  Feb. 
1656,  p.  67,  (98).  On  S.  side  of  Poto- 
make  Riv.,  behind  the  cliffs  of  Cora- 
woaman,  etc.,  opposite  land  of  Mr. 
Thomas  Broughton.  Trans,  of  24  pers: 
Margarett  Miles,  Francis  Roland,  Sarah 
Smith,  Katherine  Russell,  Jane  Leech, 
Abraham  Feilds,  John  Tushan,  Walter 
Morgan,  Thomas  Powell,  George  Watts 
&  his  wife,  Xpian.  Looker,  Mundeff 
Leiby. 


340 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


MR.  CHARLES  GRYMES,  Clerk, 
1000  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  3  Dec.  1656, 
p.  67,  (99).  Upon  N.  W.  side  of 
Moraticon  Cr.,  upon  Ewd.  side  of  a 
small  branch  dividing  this  &  land  of 
Thomas  Stephens.  Renewal  of  patent 
granted  18  Oct.  1653. 

SAME.  600  acs.,  same  county  & 
date,  p.  68,  (99).  N.  W.  upon  Myem 
Cocke  Cr.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  16 
Nov.  1653. 

MR.  ROBERT  HUBBERD  &  MAJOR 
WM.  LEWIS,  2000  acs.  Westmoreland 
Co.,  6  Feb.  1656,  p.  68,  (99).  Upon 
S.  side  of  Pattewmacke  Riv.  behind  the 
head  of  Nominy  Riv.  on  back  of  land 
of  John  Rosier,  Clerke.  Trans,  of  40 
pers.* 

JNO.  PAGE,  gent.,  2700  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  last,  of  Oct.  1656,  p.  68, 
(100).  1350  acs.  being  18  mi.  above 
Nancemum  Towne  on  N.  side  of  Rappa. 
Riv.  1350  acs.  residue  about  18  mi. 
above  sd.  town  on  the  S.  side  of  sd. 
Riv.,  sd.  2700  acs.  called  Pages  Pil- 
grimage. 1400  acs.  by  purchase  from 
Nicholas  Merrewether  &  1300  for  trans, 
of  26  pers.* 

JOHN  PHIPS,  (Phyps),  120  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  23  Feb.  1656,  p.  69, 
(101).  Part  thereof  in  "James  Cittyes 
Lybertyes,"  beg.  on  the  N.  side  of  the 
backe  street;  formerly  granted  unto  Dr. 
Jno.  Potts,  20  Sept.  1628  &  by  Capt. 
Potts,  heir  of  sd.  Dr.  Potts,  assigned 
unto  Robert  Bristow  &  by  Joane,  the 
relict  of  sd.  Bristow,  assigned  unto  Ed- 
ward Prince,  who  assigned  unto  Wil- 
liam Parry,  who  assigned  to  Sir  Wm. 
Berkeley,  &  by  him  assigned  unto  sd. 
Phips.  108  acs.  on  a  new  tytle,  beg.  at 
Eastermost  cor.  of  the  first  survey, 
bounded  by  land  of  Mr.  Richard  James 
on  the  N.  side  &  the  branch  of  Pitch  & 
Tarr  Swamp,  Ely.  to  a  point  of  high 
land  on  Mr.  Edward  Travers  land,  on 
E.  &  S.  with  land  of  Lancelott  Elay  &c. 
Trans,  of  3  pers:  Eliz.  Leichfeild, 
Jonas  Page. 

THOMAS  BINNS,  343  acs.  Surry 
Co.,  no  date,  p.  70,  (102).  On  S.  side 
of  James  Riv.,  from  Mr.  Bishops  cor- 


ner &c.  to  the  Ready  Swamp,  etc.,  adj. 
Sly.  on  Mr.  Edwards  land.  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  25  Feb.  1653  &  due  for 
trans,  of  7  pers:  Phillip  Weyfield, 
Judith  Ballard,  Peeter  Knowles,  Wm. 
Pryde,  Wm.  Aman  (a  man),  Rebecca 
Bullifant,  Wm.  Sincklar. 

ROBERT  HUBERD,  (Hubbard),  500 
acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  10  June  1654, 
p.  70,  (103).  On  the  S.  side  of  Peeto- 
make  Riv.,  being  known  by  the  name  of 
the  Sandy  point  opposite  to  the  Dauges 
present  seate,  &  N.  E.  near  land  of  Col. 
Thomas  Burbadge.    Trans,  of  10  pers.* 

MR.  ROBERT  HUBBARD,  500  acs. 
Westmoreland  Co.,  10  June  1654,  p.  71, 
(103).  Upon  the  head  of  Chappawancy 
Cr.,  bounded  on  E.  with  land  of  Mr. 
Nathaniell  Pope,  on  S.  with  a  run  divid- 
ing this  &  land  of  Mr.  Walter  Brod- 
hurst.    Trans,  of  10  pers.* 

MRS.  ELIZABETH  CUTTS,  Wid- 
dow,  late  wife  of  Capt.  Baker  Cutts, 
925  acs.  in  Petowmack  Riv.,  adj.  land 
of  Capt.  Giles  Brent  &  is  the  moiety  of 
a  patent  granted  unto  Peeter  Knight  & 
sd.  Capt.  Cutt,  13  Oct.  1653.  Due  by 
last  will  &  testament  of  sd.  Capt.  Cutt 
&  also  for  trans,  of  19  pers.*  Renewal. 
26  Feb.  1656,  p.  71,   (103). 

MR.  PEETER  KNIGHT,  925  acs.,  in 
Petowmack  Riv.  adj.  Chappawansicke 
Cr.  9  Oct.  1656,  p.  71,  (104).  Moiety 
of  patent  for  1850  acs.  (As  above) 
Renewal.  Retaken  up  by  new  rights  & 
trans,  of  19  pers:  John  Waddington, 
Andrew  Cockerin,  Wm.  Ballingall, 
Edwd.  Meeres,  Wm.  Mundy,  Rich. 
Wall  &  1  servt.  named  Thomas,  James 
Hawly,  Ann  his  wife,  3  children,  Jno. 
Foster,  Ruth  Darlinge,  James  Hill, 
James  Loyd,  Jno.  Seaman,  Wm.  Seaman, 
Gilbert  Seaman. 

RALPH  DUNSTON,  350  acs.  Surrey 
Co.,  27  Feb.  1656,  p.  72.  (105).  S. 
side  James  Riv.,  Nly.  from  ^  Major 
Sheapards  plantation  about  3  mi.,  on  a 
branch  of  Blackwater  &  N.  W.  from  the 
Indian  path.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  Ralph 
Dunston,  Ester  Clarke,  Robt.  Wells, 
Johanna  Mathews,  Grace  Harly,  Tho. 
Busby,  Ester  Clarke. 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


341 


LT.  WILLIAM  COCKERAM,  1230 
acs.  Surry  Co.,  27  Feb.  1656,  p.  72, 
(105).  On  S.  W.  side  of  James  Riv., 
from  a  white  oak  behind  Hog  Island 
marsh  &c.  to  John  Blands  lyne,  with 
land  of  Capt.  Wm.  Canfills,  to  Tarrpitt 
Sw.,  thence  to  channel  of  Banfords  Cr. 
&c.  on  Chipoakes  Cr.  to  head  of  David 
Williams  land,  thence  to  Nicholas 
Spencers  clerefield  &c.  to  Jno.  Mide- 
mores  land  &c.  1100  acs.  due  said 
Cockeram  as  marrying  the  daughter  of 
Mr.  Spencer  (Nicholas)  to  whom  it 
was  granted,  &  130  acs.  for  trans,  of  3 
pers:  Henry  Armestrong,  John  Pinder, 
Robert  Jenckinson.  Renewed  in  sd. 
Cockram's  name  18  Mar.  1662. 

CAPT.  THOMAS  BREAMOR,  300 
acs.  Gloster  Co.,  8  Dec.  1656,  p.  73, 
(106).  Adj.  his  own  land.  Trans,  of 
6  pers:*  "The  rights  by  venue  of  a 
pattent  formerly  granted  to  the  sd. 
Bremor  &  received  from  him  by  Ann 
orphant."     (Ann,   his   orphan   ?). 

NICHOLAS  MERIWETHER,  297 
acs.  James  (City)  Co.,  15  Dec.  1656,  p. 
73,  (107).  On  E.  side  of  Chicohominy 
Riv.,  commonly  called  by  name  of  Hogs 
Land.  Granted  to  Mr.  Henry  Soanes  24 
Nov.  1651  &  deserted  by  John  Merry- 
man,  his  assignee.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
Wm.  Corker  twice,  Lewis  De  Courtier, 
Jno.  MacLery,  (or  MacLeny),  Jno. 
Giles,  Jno.  MacLenny. 

JOHN  SHARPE,  300  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  10  Oct.  1655,  p.  73,  (107).  Upon 
W.  N.  W.  side  of  Morraticon  Cr.  op- 
posite land  of  Edward  Myles,  abutting 
S.  S.  W.  upon  a  branch  of  sd.  Cr. 
dividing  this  from  land  of  Capt.  Moore 
Fanteleroy.  Granted  unto  Nicholas  Fer- 
man,  20  July  1652  &  by  him  deserted. 
The  following  names  appear  under  this 
record:  Tho.  Mawe,  Charles  Thorrow- 
good,  Tobias  Maynard,  Jno.  Macklayer, 
Jno.  Rampe,  James  Rushy. 

ROBERT  GRYMES,  200  acs.  on  the 
head  of  a  creek,  being  a  branch  of  the 
W.  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  5  Jan.  1656, 
p.  74,  (108).  150  acs.  granted  unto 
Henry  Hooper  13  Aug.  1640,  who  as- 
signed same  to  Francis  Bright,  who  as- 
signed   to    James    Mathews,    by   whom 


whom  it  was  assigned  to  Wm.  Titcocke 
&  Wm.  Bancroft,  who  assigned  to  sd. 
Grymes,  &  50  acs.  for  trans,  of  Arthur 
Dennis. 

HENRY  BERRY,  140  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  27  Feb.  1656,  p.  74,  (109).  On 
S.  side  of  Occapason  Cr.,  running  nigh 
miles  end  of  Richard  Lawson  &c.  Trans, 
of  3  pers:  Jno.  Humphreys,  Peeter 
Hamlin,  Ralph  Perry. 

MR.  RICHARD  LAWSON,  640  acs. 
on  S.  side  of  Occapason  Cr.,  beg.  about 
V/z  mi.  from  sd.  Cr.,  extending  near 
land  of  Richard  Coleman  &c.  27  Feb. 
1656,  p.  75,  (109).  Trans,  of  13  pers: 
Rich.  Cooper,  Jno.  Cornelis,  Hen.  Clay, 
Jane  Bedicant,  Eliza.  Warner,  Wm. 
Crispe,  Jno.  Browne,  Francis  Atkins, 
Jno.  Dixon,  Kath.  Jones,  Gilb.  Broake- 
bank. 

MR.  JOHN  CHANDLER,  1500  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  28  Jan.  1656,  p. 
75,  (HO).  Upon  certain  branches  of 
Wicocomico  &  Chichacone  Rivers,  on 
the  left  hand  of  a  path  that  goes  from 
Chichacone  to  Morraticon;  800  acs. 
bounding  N.  W.  upon  sd.  path  &c;  600 
acs.  Nly.  upon  a  line  which  crosses  a 
great  branch  of  Chichacone  called  Snake 
Sw.,  Ely  upon  land  of  Francis  Clay  & 
100  acs.  adj.  these  two  tracts.  Trans,  of 
30  pers:  Jno.  Brigges,  Anth.  Taylor, 
Ja.  Francis,  Anne  Stannenite,  Jane  Cates- 
by,  Jno.  Stubb,  Marg.  Francklin,  Jno. 
Lea,  Marg.  Morfrey,  Tho.  Woodham, 
Roger  Stilwell,  Wm.  Mace,  Nich. 
Prichard,  Nich.  Thomas,  Roger  Moore, 
Wm.  Morrice,  Est.  Fenton,  Henry  Stan- 
ley, Jno.  Tucker,  Charles  Thompson, 
Marg.  Long,  Jere.  Cottrell,  Nich.  Spront 
(or  Sprout),  Hen.  Copley,  Nich. 
Wazon,  Hump.  Smith,  Zach.  Foster, 
Wm.  Robinson,  Alice  May,  Samuell 
Dobson.    Renewed   11  Jan.   1663. 

SAME.  350  acs.  Same  county  & 
date,  p.  76,  (111).  Trans,  of  7  pers: 
David  Watson,  Dunken  Ryd,  Jno. 
Blacke,  Thomas  Kamp,  Robt.  Parry, 
Lewis  Sheapard,  Jno.  Chickett.  Renewed 
11  Jan.  1663. 

MR.  RICHARD  RICE,  400  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,   28  Jan.   1656,  p. 


342 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


76,  (111).  On  S.  W.  side  of  Matta- 
pony  Riv.,  N.  Ely.  upon  land  of  Robert 
Bradshaw  &  John  Bradshaw,  N.  Wly. 
on  land  of  Laurence  Dameron  &  a 
branch  of  Broad  Cr.  &  S.  Ely.  above 
the  head  of  land  of  Mr.  Thomas 
Broughton.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Morgan 
Rossers  (or  Roffers),  Maudlin  Allen, 
Ann  Cooper,  Sarah  Bride,  Robert 
Parkes,  Giles  Wilson,  John  Drunkin, 
Tho.  Davis.  Renewed  in  name  of 
James  Johnson,  to  whom  it  was  as- 
signed, 18  Mar.  1662. 

MR.    RICHMOND    TERRILL,    640 

acs.  New  Kent  Co.,   28  Nov.   1656,  p. 

76,  (112).  On  S.  W.  side  of  Yorke 
Riv.,  from  the  N.  E.  side  of  Cattayle 
Sw.,  running  by  a  branch  of  Diascun 
Sw.,  neare  Richahock  path  &  by  Charles 
Edmonds  lyne.  Trans,  of  13  pers: 
Richmond  Terrell,  Thomas  Elsford, 
Nicholas  Jarsey,  (or  Tarsey),  Wm. 
Spiltamore,  Thomas  Knight,  Marth. 
Kirke,  Israeli  Hardeman,  Dorothy  Gib- 
son, Francis  Cole,  David  Causey,  the 
trans,  of  Robert  Terrell  3  severall 
tymes. 

MAJOR  WM.  HOCCADAY,  640 
acs.   New  Kent  Co.,    2   Nov.    1656,   p. 

77,  (113).  Upon  S.  side  of  Yorke  Riv., 
adj.  the  devdt.  he  is  now  seated  on; 
beg.  at  Warreny  Cr.,  running  S.  E.  by 
S.  to  the  Indian  field  path  &c.  Trans. 
of  13  pers.* 

MR.  WILLIAM  BLACKEY,  1000 
acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  28  Nov.  1656,  p. 
77,  (113).  On  E.  side  of  Little  Queens 
Cr.,  running  by  lands  patented  by  Mr. 
Thomas  Vause  to  land  of  Wm.  Cox  &c. 
Trans,  of  20  pers:  Joseph  Stowell, 
Poare  Leassure,  Jno.  Jackson,  Jno.  Lace, 
Michaell  Lovett,  Abra.  Griffton,  Jno. 
Proude,  Edmond  Machin,  Jno.  Dringe, 
Ro.  Tard,  James  Fox,  Tho.  Abbott,  Ed- 
ward Goodson,  Henry  Wassell,  Rich. 
Carrott,   Jno.    Lareington,    Eliz.    Stokes. 

WILLIAM  LACY  (Lacey),  100  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  28  Nov.  1656,  p.  78, 
(114).  On  E.  side  of  Little  Queens 
Cr.  branch,  beg.  at  Wm.  Cox,  S.  by 
land  of  Mr.  Blackey  &c.  Trans,  of  2 
pers:    Mary  Reeds,  Thomas  Jones. 


REES  HUGHES,  410  acs.  New  Kent 
Co.,  2  Dec.  1656,  p.  78,  (114).  On 
S.  W.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.,  from  marked 
tree  beneath  George  Smith,  running  in 
Mr.  Langston's  lyne  &c.  Trans,  of  9 
pers:  John  Morely,  Eliz.  Harwood, 
Griffith  Jones,  Jane  Urlin,  Martin 
Weele,  Margarett  &  Jno.  &c. 

By  Samuel  Mathews,  Esqr. 

MR.  HUMPHREY  BOOTH,  50  acs. 
in  Rappahannock  Co.,  3  Mar.  1656,  p. 
78,  (115).  On  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
about  30  miles  up  the  same,  beg.  neare 
mouth  of  Morraticon  Cr.  &  parallel  to 
first  line  over  a  marsh  parting  this  & 
land  of  Nicholas  Firman.  Trans,  of 
David  Jones. 

MR.  ROBERT  BOTT,  380  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  3  Mar.  1656,  p.  79,  (116). 
At  the  head  of  the  S.  branch  of  Eliz. 
Riv.,  adj.  land  formerly  taken  up  by 
Tristam  Nazworthy.  Trans,  of  8  pers: 
Andrew  Sheetes,  Bartho.  Batt,  (or 
Pratt),  Marg.  Allen,  Tho.  Evered,  Brid- 
gett  Ellinor.  (The  last  may  refer  to 
two  persons.) 

CAPT.  WM.  CANFILL,  1230  acs. 
Surrey  Co.,  4  Mar.  1656,  p.  79,  (116). 
On  S.  W.  side  of  James  Riv.,  bounded 
from  a  white  oak  behind  Hogg  Is. 
Marsh  to  Lawnes  Cr.,  dividing  this  & 
land  of  Mr.  Jno.  Bland  &c,  from  Lieut. 
Wm.  Cockeram's  &c.  with  Tarr  Pitch 
branch  &c.  1100  acs.  part  of  patent 
granted  unto  Wm.  Spencer  &  afterwards 
in  the  tenure  of  Major  Robert  Sheapard 
&  by  him  sold  to  sd.  Canfill;  130  acs. 
for  trans,  of  3  pers:  Margery  Webber, 
James  Wilson,  Thomas  Bayly. 

JOHN  SHELL,  300  acs.  James  City 
Co.,  4  Mar.  1656,  p.  80,  (117).  On 
the  N.  side  of  James  Riv.  &  S.  W.  side 
of  Moses  Cr.,  bounde  Nly.  on  Wm. 
Phillips  land,  S.  E.  on  Wm.  Wolfe's 
land,  S.  W.  towards  land  formerly  Rice 
Howes  &  N.  W.  towards  land  of  Tho- 
mas Jones,  &  the  Long  Thicken.  Trans, 
of  6  pers.*    Renewed   18  Mar.   1662.* 

THOMAS  WOLMESLEY,  450  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  4  Mar.  1656,  p.  80, 
(118).  On  N.  side  of  James  Riv.,  Ely. 
side  of  Chickohominy,  Nly.  on  Tyascun 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


343 


Sw.,  Ely.  on  Edward  Gillid  &  Thomas 
Brookes,  Sly.  on  sd.  Brookes  &  Richard 
New  &  Wly.  on  Mr.  Dorman.  Trans, 
of  9  pers.* 

MR.  FRANCIS  EMPEROR,  Marcht. 
(Merchant),  200  acs.  Low.  Norf.  Co., 
3  Mar.  1656,  p.  80,  (118).  In  Eliz. 
Riv.,  being  a  neck  of  land  called  Wat- 
kins  Land;  Renewal  of  patent  dated  18 
Feb.  1653  by  new  rights  &  for  trans, 
of  4  pers.*  Renewal  in  name  of  Nich. 
Wise  18  Mar.  1662,  who  purchased 
same  of  Lewis  Vandermillen  to  whom 
it  was  assigned  by  sd.  Emperor. 

MR.    WM.    UNDERWOOD,    Gent., 

1400  acs.,  upon  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
upon  Eastermost  side  of  Milbecke  Cr., 
adj.  land  of  James  Wmson.  (William- 
son). 10  Mar.  1656,  p.  81,  (119). 
Renewal  of  patent  dated  22  May  1650. 

MR.  GERVASE  DODSON,  600  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  3  Mar.  1656,  p.  81, 
(119).  On  S.  side  of  Corrotomen  Cr., 
issueing  out  of  Fleets  Bay,  being  the 
next  creek  Nly.  to  Haddywayes  Cr.,  S. 
Ely.  upon  land  surveyed  for  Toby  Hor- 
ton  by  some  called  Mr.  Wetherleys  land 
&  S.  Wly.  upon  land  of  Jno.  Taylor, 
deed.  Trans,  of  12  pers:  Jno.  Gland- 
feild,  Jno.  Newman,  Tho.  Blackborne, 
Walter  Sparr,  Wm.  Greenhoure,  Wm. 
Watts,  Wm.  Smoocker,  Eliz.  Hopkins, 
Abra.  Watson,  Tho.  Priors,  Jno.  Bunch, 
Tho.  Habe  (or  Hake). 

MR.  EDWIN  CONAWAY  &  MR. 
GERVASE  DODSON,  1000  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  3  Mar.  1656,  p.  82,  (120). 
Upon  Corotomen  Cr.,  where  the  Coro- 
tomen  Indians  lately  seated  on  N.  side 
of  sd.  Cr.,  &  opposite  land  of  said  Dod- 
son.    Trans,  of  20  pers.* 

ROBERT  WILSON,  400  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  3  Mar.  1656,  p.  82, 
(120).  Near  the  head  of  great  Wicco- 
comoco  Riv.,  S.  Ely.  on  land  of  Capt. 
Richard  Bud,  and  N.  Ely.  on  land  of 
Gervase  Dodson.  Trans,  of  8  pers: 
Jno.  Ball  (only  name  appearing.)  Re- 
newed 7  Apr.  1662. 

MR.  JNO.  BURTON,  900  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  3  Mar.  1656,  p.  82,  (121). 


On  branches  of  Corotomen  Riv.,  S.  Ely. 
upon  land  of  Mr.  Enoch  Hawker  &  S. 
Wly.  upon  land  of  Thomas  Harrisse. 
Trans,  of  18  pers.* 

THOMAS  CONIERS,  550  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  8  June  1657,  p. 
83,  (121).  N.  upon  Petomacke  Riv.  & 
Wly.  upon  land  of  George  Foster,  Gent. 
Granted  unto  Wm.  Parry,  11  Nov. 
1651,  who  assigned  same  unto  sd. 
Coniers,  who  assigned  unto  Peter  Ash- 
ton. 

WM.  REYNOLDS,  650  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  2  Apr.  1657,  p.  83, 
(122).  Ely.  upon  Pattomake  Riv.  & 
Sly.  upon  land  of  Phill.  Silvester.  Re- 
newal of  patent  granted   6  May   1651. 

MR.  PEETER  KNIGHT,  500  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  30  Mar.  1657,  p. 

83,  (122).  On  S.  side  of  great  Wicco- 
comico  Riv.,  N.  N.  E.  upon  another 
seate  belonging  to  him,  formerly  Mr. 
Flints,  &  S.  E.  upon  a  lyne  dividing  this 
from  land  of  Gervase  Dodson.  Trans. 
of  10  pers:  Robert  Burwell,  &  his 
wife,  3  children,  Wm.  Bradby,  Deborah 
Conne,  James  Jones,  Jno.  Gerrell,  Wm. 
Flinton. 

OLIVER  GREENE,  450  acs.  Gloster 
Co.,  30  Mar.  1657,  p.  84,  (122).  Be- 
hind the  land  of  John  Day,  on  both 
sides  of  a  great  branch  of  a  swamp  that 
runs  into  Mock  Jack  Bay.  Trans,  of  9 
pers.*    Renewed  2  Mar.  1662. 

By  Edward  Digges,  Esqr. 

COL.  RICHARD  LEE,  600  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,   4  Mar.    1656,   p. 

84,  (123).  Upon  S.  side  of  the  divid- 
ing creek,  S.  E.  upon  his  own  land  & 
N.  W.  Nly.  upon  Freemans  Ford. 
Trans,  of  12  pers:  Col.  Richd.  Lees  3d 
adventure,  Mrs.  Anne  Lees  2nd  adven- 
ture, John  Roper,  Nich.  Britton,  Owen 
Kelly,  Richd.  Porke,  Walter  English, 
Coniers  Murally,  Anne  Firsh,  Morris 
Roch,  Doctar  Goodrand  (?),  Alice 
Parker. 

MILES  DIXON,  Gent.,  500  acs. 
Northumberland   Co.,   4  Mar.    1656,   p. 

85,  ((124).  Upon  S.  side  of  the  Divid- 
ing Cr.  &  Sly.  upon  another  creek  divid- 


344 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


ing  this  &  land  of  Capt.  Hugh  Wilson, 
&  N.  W.  upon  a  creek  dividing  this  & 
land  of  Col.  Richard  Lee.  Trans,  of 
10  pers:  Anthony  Alford,  James  Whit- 
tle, Richd.  Goade,  Tho.  Lawson,  Rob. 
Lipp,  Geo.  Shelly,  Wm.  Wilson,  Geo. 
Everrett,  Edwd.  Flowers,  Jno.  Dule;  the 
last  6  persons  by  assignment  from  Col. 
Richd.  Lee. 

CAPT.  HUGH  WILSON,  4  Mar. 
1656,  p.  85,  (124).  500  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  upon  N.  E.  side  of  the 
Dividing  Cr.,  S.  upon  Bluff  Point  Cr. 
&  N.  W.  from  a  creek  dividing  this  & 
land  of  Mr.  Miles  Dixon.  Trans,  of  10 
pers:  Wm.  Thorpe,  Tho.  Robinson, 
Michaell  Allen,  Gowen  Canada,  Richd. 
Lilborne,  Wm.  Barefott,  Lawrence 
Stockwell,  Richd.  Lee,  Anne  Lee, 
Clorentine  Paine.  By  assignment  of  Col. 
Lee. 

By  Samuel  Mathews,  Esqr. 

THOMAS  GRAVES,  300  acs.  West- 
moreland Co.,  2  Mar.  1656,  p.  86, 
(125).  On  S.  W.  side  of  Match 
Choaticke  Riv.,  beg.  at  a  marked  ches- 
nut  dividing  this  &  land  of  Jno.  Wood, 
formerly  surveyed  for  George  Watts, 
extending  to  a  small  creek  dividing  this 
&  land  of  Henry  Roach.  Trans,  of  6 
pers.  assigned  by  Thomas  Broughton: 
Moore  Lyon,  Garrett  Hamon,  George 
Streaton,  Jno.  Canadie,  Tho.  Derricke, 
John  Davis. 

PEETER  GREENE,  200  acs.  Surrey 
Co.,  5  Mar.  1656,  p.  86,  (125).  On 
S.  side  of  James  River,  and  S.  E.  side  of 
the  head  of  Sumpton  Marsh,  beg.  about 
a  quarter  of  a  mile  below  the  Mill. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  John  Wms.  (Wil- 
liams), Rich.  Henson,  Thomas  Sarson, 
Eliz.  Sawer. 

OWEN  HAES  (or  Hoes),  140  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  in  Linn  Haven  parish, 
26  Mar.  1656,  p.  86,  (126).  Trans.  3 
pers.* 

MR.  ROBERT  VAULX,  330  acs. 
York  Co.,  10  Apr.  1657,  p.  87,  (126). 
On  S.  side  of  York  Riv.  &  N.  side  of 
Queens  Cr.  225  acs.  part  granted  unto 
Jno.  Judson  21  Nov.  1637,  assigned  un- 
to Arthur  Price  4  Mar.   1639,  who  as- 


signed unto  Anthony  Parckhurst  29 
Aug.  1640,  who  assigned  unto  William 
Burwell  26  May  1643,  assigned  unto 
Jno.  Davis  17  Dec.  1644,  assigned  unto 
Mr.  James  Stone  2  Apr.  1646  &  unto 
sd.  Vaulx  as  Admr.  of  sd.  Stone;  105 
acs.  for  trans,  of  3  pers:  Mr.  Charles 
Woodington,  Ann  Michell,  Jno.  Clarke. 

CAPT.  FRANCIS  POTT,  1000  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  14  Apr.  1657,  p.  87, 
(127).  On  Mockon  Island,  Sly.  on  a 
bay  lying  between  Smiths  Island  &  the 
Long  point  (which  is  part  of  sd.  Pott's 
devdt.  of  Goulden  Quarter)  &  running 
towards  Matchepungoe.  Due  by  virtue 
of  moiety  of  patent  for  2000  acs.  by 
him  relinquished. 

LIEUT.  COL.  EDWARD  DOWG- 
LAS,  600  acs.  Northampton  Co.,  16 
Apr.  1657,  p.  88,  (128).  On  S.  side  of 
Old  plantation  Cr.,  Wly.  on  same  & 
land  of  Thomas  Burdett,  Sly.  on  land  of 
Mr.  Edward  Littleton  &  Nly.  on  his 
own  land.  Trans,  of  12  pers:  Wm. 
Prichard,  Robt.  Bowlson,  Wm.  Barrett, 
Alice  Staples,  Alice  Alsop,  Jno.  Powell, 
Gilb.  Couling,  Hugh  Eglestone,  Charles 
Hollingworth,  Marian  Cole,  Thomas 
Poynter,  Wm.  Miller. 

ROBERT,  THOMAS  &  WILLIAM 
MOSSE,  Brothers,  800  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  12  Apr.  1657,  p.  88,  (128).  On 
S.  side  the  freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg. 
on  N.  W.  side  of  a  creek  dividing  this 
&  land  of  Jno.  Wiere.  Formerly 
granted  unto  sd.  Brothers  20  Nov.  1654. 
Renewed  23  Mar.  1659  &  again  renewed 
20  Feb.  1662. 

EDWARD  RACKLEY,  400  acs.  on 
S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  behind  land  of 
Jno.  Gilliott,  about  12  mi.  above  Nanse- 
mond  Towne.  21  Apr.  1667,  p.  88, 
(129).  Due  by  8  rights  taken  from 
Jno.  Weirs  patent  of  4000  acs.  Re- 
newed 18  Mar.  1662. 

JNO.  GILLIOTT,  600  acs.  on  S.  side 
of  Rappa.  Riv.,  opposite  to  lower  part 
of  Nanzimum  Towne,  bounded  on  N. 
W.  by  Bests  Cr.  &  on  S.  E.  with  Cedar 
Cr.  21  Apr.  1657,  p.  89,  (130).  Trans, 
of  12  pers.*  Rights  are  to  be  taken 
from  patent  to  John  Weir  &  others  for 
4,000  acs.  &c.    Renewed  18  Aug.  1662 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


345 


in  name  of  Mr.  Thomas  Button,  he  hav- 
ing intermarried  with  the  relict  of  Jno. 
Gillet. 

CHARLES  SNEADE,  883  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  21  Apr.  1657,  p.  89,  (130).  800 
acs.  adj.  his  700  acs.  purchased  of  Jno. 
Meriman  &  Morgan  Haines,  &  land  of 
Jno.  Wiere;  beg.  at  an  Indian  path  &c. 
adj.  land  of  John  Paine  &c.  Trans,  of 
18  pers:  Geo.  West,  Rich.  Rice,  Rich. 
Jones,  Jno.  Price,  Step.  Hall,  Anne 
Hall,  Jno.  Moore,  Eliz.  Moore,  Giles 
Cooke,  Gilb.  May,  Hanah  Price,  Ja. 
Toogood,  Tho.  Bird,  Joane  Griffith, 
Mary  Jnoson  (Johnson),  Peeter  Wild, 
Geo.  Bucke,  Edm.  Herbert,  David  Jones. 
Note:  The  last  right  for  50  acs.  for 
Humphrey  Booths  Patent. 

MR.  THOMAS  LUCAS,  Senr.,  1405^ 
acs.  on  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  21  Apr. 
1657,  p.  90,  (131).  Beg.  at  a  little 
creek  about  a  mile  above  Richard  Cole- 
man's first  devdt.  Including  647  acs. 
formerly  granted  unto  him,  320  acs. 
purchased  of  Thomas  Wilkinson  &  438 
acs.  due  for  trans,  of  9  pers.*  Renewed 
20  Feb.  1662. 

THOMAS  PAGE,  281^  acs.  on  S. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,   21   Apr.   1657,  p. 

90,  (132).  Between  two  branches  of  a 
creek  and  nigh  land  of  John  Jennings. 
Trans,  of  6  pers.* 

MRS.  MARY  BRENT,  1250  acs. 
Westmoreland    Co.,    25    May    1657,    p. 

91,  (133).  On  S.  side  of  Petomack 
Riv.  600  acs.  part  being  a  patent  dated 
11  Sept.  1653,  bounded  N.  W.  by  N. 
upon  Mathias  Point,  S.  W.  by  S.  to 
land  of  Mrs.  Jones,  etc.  650  acs.  beg. 
at  the  mouth  of  a  gutt  in  a  marsh  which 
divides  this  from  land  of  Jno.  Jenckin, 
which  was  granted  unto  Richard  Browne 
22  Mar.  1654  &  assigned  unto  Giles 
Brent,  Esqr.,  who  assigned  same  unto 
said  Mary  Brent.  Renewed  28  Nov. 
1662. 

HENRY  FOOTMAN,  300  acs.  West- 
moreland Co.,  no  date,  p.  91,  (134). 
On  S.  side  of  Oquio  Riv.,  S.  S.  E.  on 
a  swamp  dividing  this  &  land  of  Mr. 
Pattent  &  W.  S.  W.  upon  land  of  Rich- 


ard Codsford.  Granted  unto  Edward 
Parker  10  June  1654  &  assigned  unto 
sd.  Footman,  which  assignment  was 
acknowledged  in  Westmoreland  Court 
on  31  Mar.  last  by  Thomas  Wilsford, 
Atty.  of  sd.  Parker.    Renewal. 

GILES  BRENT,  Esqr.,  1340  acs. 
Westmoreland  Co.,  25  May  1657,  p.  92, 
(134).  1040  acs.  by  patent  dated  20 
Aug.  1651  &  300  acs.  by  patent,  6  June 
1654,  which  tract  adj.  land  of  Christo- 
pher Bowes.    Renewed  3  Nov.  1662. 

MAJOR  THOMAS  CURTIS,  730  acs. 
upon  N.  side  of  Ware  Riv.  in  Mock- 
jack  bay,  beg.  on  E.  side  of  Browns 
Bay,  to  marked  trees  dividing  this  from 
land  of  Mr.  Thomas  Boswell  &c.  3 
June  1657,  p.  92,  (135).  542  acs.  by 
patent  dated  20  Sept.  1652  &  188  acs. 
for  trans,  of  4  pers:  Wm.  Browne,  Jno. 
Dowdy,  Wm.  Harman,  &  his  wife  Alice. 

WM,  DUDLEY,  2000  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  21  June,  1657,  p.  92,  (136).  On 
S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  by  land  of 
Cutberd  Potter,  N.  W.  to  land  of  Mr. 
Jno.  Haward  &  S.  E.  to  land  of  sd. 
Potter.  Trans,  of  40  pers:  Alice  Smith, 
John  Russell,  Abraham  Jones,  Tho. 
Hooper,  Wm.  Overy,  John  Fletcher, 
Margarett  Welton,  Eliz.  Forrest,  Tho. 
Floid,  Jno.  Stoke,  Wm.  Jones,  Tho. 
Machir,  Tho.  Farthinge,  Tho.  Clerke, 
John  Wilson,  Edwd.  Hix  (or  Fox), 
Wm.  Jones,  Rich.  West,  Sarah  Newell, 
Edward  Wilson,  Jno.  Norman,  Edwd. 
More,  Henry  Forrest,  &  his  wife,  John 
Brown,  Joseph  Wellman,  Eliz.  Hunt, 
Ann  Kinge,  Jno.  Danse  (or  Dause), 
Jacob  Jnoson  (Johnson),  Mary  Horner, 
Mary  Barnham  (?). 

WILLIAM  WHITE,  Clerk,  1000  acs. 
on  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  &  on  Wwd. 
side  of  John  Gillet.  1  May  1657,  p. 
93,  (136).  Due  by  patent  dated  7  Sept. 
1654  unto  James  Yates,  who  assigned 
same  unto  Mr.  Thomas  Brice,  now 
dec'd.,  who  assigned  unto  Martha  Brice 
&  by  her  unto  sd.  White. 

GEORGE  VEZIE  &  NATHANIELL 
BROWNE,  250  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  1 
June  1657,  p.  93,  (137).  On  N.  side 
of    Rappa.    Riv.    at    a    place    formerly 


346 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


known  by  the  name  of  Deepe  Creeke, 
Sly.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Thomas  Powell. 
Due  by  part  of  the  rights  of  a  patent  of 
300  acs.,  dated  27  July  1652,  unto 
David  Fox,  who  assigned  same  to  them. 
Renewed  18  Mar.  1662. 

PETER  KNIGHT,  1500  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  3  June  1657,  p.  94, 
(138).  Renewal  of  2  patents  for  500 
acs.  each.  700  acs.  N.  N.  E.  upon  a 
cr<=ek  deviding  this  &  land  of  Mr. 
Nicholas  Morrice,  W.  N.  W.  upon 
Scoggins  Cr.,  etc.  &  800  acs.  N.  N.  E. 
upon  said  land,  S.  E.  upon  land  of 
Thomas  Read  &  David  Kiffin,  etc.  500 
acs.  for  trans,  of  10  pers.* 

SAME.  1200  acs.  Same  county,  date 
&  page.  Renewal  of  patent  for  700  acs. 
granted  him  2  Oct.  1654  &  500  acs. 
granted  unto  Thomas  Scoggin,  who  de- 
serted same,  and  now  due  for  trans,  of 
10  pers.*  The  name  Rich.  Shortland 
appears  under  this  record. 

COL.  RICHD.  LEE,  1000  acs.  upon 
S.  side  of  Patomek  Riv.,  beg.  at  the 
mouth  of  a  creek  issueing  out  of 
Matchotick  Riv.,  dividing  this  from  land 
of  Mr.  Lewis  Burwell.  11  Oct.  1657, 
p.  95,  (139).    Trans,  of  20  pers.* 

WILLIAM  YARRET,  500  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  6  June  1657,  p.  95,  (140). 
Lying  upon  Pagan  Cr.  (350  acs.  being 
the  moiety  of  700  acs.  patented  by  Hugh 
Winne,  Mar.  3  1640)  By  order  of  Govr. 
&c.  repatented  and  the  new  patent  for 
the  whole  700  acs.  granted  unto  Mrs. 
Elizabeth  Winne  since  her  husband's 
decease  to  be  made  voyd,  for  it  is 
proved  that  sd.  Yarrett  had  right  to  it 
by  copartnership  &c.  150  acs.  Upon 
Pagan  Cr.,  Seawards  Cr.  and  Goose  hill 
Creek  &  due  for  trans,  of  3  pers:  Fran- 
cis Short,  Anne  Morris,  Edward  Tyson. 

JNO.  CUSTIS,  Senr.,  200  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  8  Oct.  1657,  p.  96,  (141). 
Beg.  at  land  of  Wm.  Burditt,  dec'd., 
unto  land  formerly  belonging  to  George 
Smith.  Said  land  formerly  belonged  to 
George  Travelor,  dec'd.,  &  by  him  & 
his  heires  deserted.  Due  for  trans,  of 
4  pers.* 


CAPT.  LEONARD  CHAMBERLINE, 

650  acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  on  branches  of 
Arraciaco  Sw.,  22  May  1657,  p.  96, 
(142).  300  acs.  by  patent  dated  27 
Oct.  1653;  350  acs.  for  trans,  of  7 
pers:  Mary  Wooderd  (?),  Jno.  Lee, 
Jno.  Martin,  Jno.  Hooke,  Rich.  White, 
John  Hogg,  Tho.  Maple. 

NICHOLAS  HEALE,  500  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  1  June  1657,  p.  97,  (143). 
Upon  N.  E.  side  of  the  N.  W.  branch 
of  Corotoman  Riv.,  opposite  to  planta- 
tion of  Henry  Davis.  Being  one-half  of 
a  patent  granted  unto  Enoch  Hawker, 
29  July  1652  &  purchased  by  sd.  Heale. 
Renewed  9  Feb.  1663. 

WILLIAM  STEPHENS,  son  &  heir 
of  William  Stephens,  Cooper,  570  acs., 
Warwick  Co.,  1  May  1657,  p.  97, 
(144).  100  acs.  from  the  N.  side  of 
the  black  Sw.  running  between  Yorke 
path  &  the  ponds;  150  acs.  over  against 
Capt.  Brocas'  land  &  320  acs.  on  N. 
side  of  the  black  Sw.,  beg.  on  land 
formerly  Mr.  Bullocks,  running  to 
Humphrey  Gibbs,  by  sd.  path  to  Col. 
Ludlows.  250  acs.  granted  unto  Willm. 
Bullock,  assigned  &  made  over  by  Mr. 
John  Walker,  assignee,  to  sd.  Stephens, 
dec'd.,  &  due  sd.  Stephens  as  above; 
320  acs.  for  trans,  of  7  pers:  James 
Colles,  Rich.  Partlett,  Math.  Perry, 
Mary  Purgrave,  Edmund  Ivory,  Hen.  a 
Negro.    Renewed  18  Mar.  1662. 

CAPT.  LEONARD  CHAMBERLINE, 

70  acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  adj.  a  former 
survey  of  400  acs.,  beg.  at  corner  of 
Ashwell  Batten,  to  Aracaico  Sw.  &c.  22 
May  1657,  p.  98,  (145).  Trans,  of  2 
pers:  Jno.  Woodington,  Charles  Wood- 
ington.  Renewed  in  John  GofFes  name, 
5  Feb.  1663. 

CLEMENT  HERBERT,  300  acs.  on 
S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  opposite  to  point 
between  Nancemond  &  Nansatiquond 
towne,  and  N.  W.  upon  Ceedar  Cr., 
which  divides  this  &  land  of  John  Gil- 
lett.  21  Apr.  1657,  p.  98,  (145). 
Trans,  of  6  pers.* 

LT.  COL.  ROBERT  ABRALL,  950 
acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  8  June  1657,  p.  98, 
(146).    On  N.  side  of  the  narrows  of 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


347 


Mettopony  River,  beg.  at  Mr.  Digges' 
lower  devdt.  Granted  unto  Mr.  John 
Hansford  16  Dec.  1653,  by  him  deserted 
&  now  granted  by  order  of  the  Govr. 
&c.  &  retaken  by  new  rights:  James 
Tyler,  Mary  Rodes,  David  Otley,  Roger 
Patter,  Robert  Mallett,  Robert  Wade, 
Eliza  Ware,  (or  Ward),  Tho.  Parker, 
Jane  Roper,  Jacob  Kickerley,  George 
Mosse,  Tho.  Dissey,  Jone  Evans,  John 
Okelly,  Edward  Cooke,  Edmond 
Thacker,  Jenkin  Yearkey,  Tho.  Coury 
(?).    Renewed  11  Mar.   1662. 

HENRY  COLLIER,  50  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  28  Aug.  1657,  p.  99,  (147). 
Beg.  at  cor.  of  land  of  Capt.  Chamber- 
lines  &  Ashwell  Batten,  running  N.  to 
Araciaco  Swamp  &c.  Trans,  of  John 
Rasly.  Renewed  in  name  of  John 
Davies,  18  Mar.  1662,  to  whom  it  was 
assigned  by  sd.  Collier. 

THOMAS  DREW,  Gent.,  490  acs. 
Chas.  City  Co.,  on  N.  side  of  Flower 
de  hundred  Cr.,  4  June  1657,  p.  99, 
(147).  N.  upon  land  purchased  by  Mr. 
Pace,  S.  upon  said  Cr.  &  N.  E.  upon 
Snow  Cr.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  26 
Oct.  1650.  The  following  names  appear: 
Robert  Bourne,  Wm.  Gabell,  Wm.  Peck, 
Arthur  Perce,  Archebald  Sinclur,  Hugh 
Coeman,  Jno.  Moore,  Hen.  Meccremore 
(?),  Edward  Lay,  Rich.  Mappin.  Re- 
newed 26  Mar.  1666. 

MAJOR     THOMAS     GOODRICH, 

600  acs.  on  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  near 
miles  end  of  patent  taken  up  by  Bartho- 
lomew Hoskins,  &  running  parallel  to 
land  of  John  Gillett.    10  June  1657,  p. 

99,  (148).  500  acs.  by  patent  dated 
1  Aug.  1652  to  Clement  Thrush  &  as- 
signed unto  sd.  Goodrich  14  Apr.  1656 
&  100  acres  for  trans,  of  2  pers:  John 
Gouldinge,  Edmond  Reeves. 

THOMAS  MERREDITH,  420  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  on  S.  W.  side  of  the 
narrowes  of  York  Riv.,  1  July  1657,  p. 

100,  (148).  Beg.  at  his  own  corner,  by 
Mr.  Hurds  path,  by  a  branch  of  War- 
reny  Sw.  and  thence  to  Capt.  Richd. 
Barnhouse.    Trans,  of  9  pers.* 

MR.  HENRY  RANDOLPH,  150  acs. 
Henrico    Co.,    22    July    1657,    p.    100, 


(149).  At  Appamattock  Riv.,  Nly.  up- 
on the  first  creek  by  the  wading  place, 
adj.  Ely.  upon  land  of  Mary  Box,  thence 
Sly.  etc.  Granted  unto  William  Hatcher 
29  May  1638,  by  whom  it  was  deserted, 
&  due  sd.  Randolph  for  trans,  of  3 
pers.* 

THOMAS  WOODHOUSE  &  WIL- 
LIAM HOOKER,  100  acs.  James  City 
Island,  below  Goose  hill  house,  21  July 
1657,  p.  100,  (150).  Nly.  upon  land 
formerly  Major  Holts,  now  in  possession 
of  John  Barber,  &  N.  on  John  Pinhorne, 
N.  E.  on  Parthmores  Cr.  &  S.  E.  on 
Willm.  Sarfnett  (?).    Trans,  of  2  pers.* 

COL.  JOHN  WEST,  Esqr.,  1000  acs. 
Gloster  Co.,  2  June  1657,  p.  101, 
(150).  On  the  N.  E.  side  of  Mette- 
pony  Riv.,  beg.  at  Westermost  cor.  of 
land  of  Ralph  Greene,  bounded  on  E. 
by  land  of  Tho.  Bell  &  on  the  N.  W. 
with  land  of  Capt.  Robt.  Abrall.  Re- 
newal of  patent  dated  27  May  1654. 
Assigned  by  Capt.  West,  son  of  sd. 
West,  &  renewed  in  name  of  Mr.  Tho. 
Ramsey,   10  Mar.  1662. 

RICHARD  SPANN,  350  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  last  day  of  August, 
1657,  p.  101,  (151).  Nly.  upon  little 
Wiccocomoco  Riv.,  opposite  land  of 
Mr.  Coltclough,  &  S.  upon  Coales  Cr. 
Renewal  of  patent  dated  28  Oct.  1651, 
for  300  acs.,  &  50  acs.  for  trans,  of 
Mary  Alcock.    Renewal   18  Mar.   1662. 

CHARLES  EDMONDS,  730  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  29  June  1657,  p.  101, 
(151).  Adj.  his  own  land,  running  to 
land  of  Geo.  Smith,  by  tancks  Pasbe- 
haies  feild  &  Cattaile  Swamp.  Trans, 
of  15  pers:  Jno.  Clerke,  Tho.  Maddin, 
Nicho.  Dewes,  Rebecca  Clerke,  Tho. 
Burton,  Ra.  Wms.  (Williams),  Ann 
Clerke,  An  Savage,  Mary  Savage,  Ann 
Mitchell,  Wm.  Bartlett,  Robert  Tuck, 
Paul  Ceser,  Tho.  Wms.,  Wm.  Tuck. 
Renewed  18  Mar.  1662. 

DOMINICK  FERRIATT,  of  Coroto- 
man,  in  Lancaster  Co.,  1600  acs.,  2 
June  1657,  p.  102,  (152).  At  the  head 
&  upon  main  branch  of  Corotoman  Riv. 
which  divides  this  &  land  of  Mr.  Ed- 
win Connaway  &  S.  W.  upon  Claphams 


348 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Cr.  Trans,  of  32  pers:  Wm.  Ball  4 
times,  Hugh  Davis,  Rich.  Ball,  Wm. 
Butler,  Joane  his  wife,  2  maid  servants, 
Wm.  Perkins,  John  Jones,  Sarah  Lee, 
Ann  Whone  (?),  Patience  Martin, 
Nicho.  Jackson,   Francis  Jackson,  Wm. 

Sparrow,  Rich.  Franklin  &  Francis , 

Tho.  Coote,  Eliz.  Blay,  Judith  Sewell. 
Renewed  18  Mar.  1662. 

CAPT.  ROBERT  ELLYSON,  577 
acs.,  26  Aug.  1657,  p.  102,  (153).  377 
acs.  in  New  Kent  Co.,  in  the  narrowes 
of  York  Riv.,  S.  W.  by  land  of  George 
Chapman,  &  S.  E.  to  land  of  Willm. 
Cox  &  John  Hope;  200  acs.  in  James 
City  Co.  on  E.  side  of  a  branch  of 
Burchen  Sw.  377  acs.  granted  unto 
Rob.  Priddy,  who  sold  same  to  Edward 
Waite,  by  whom  it  was  deserted,  &  now 
granted  by  order  of  court,  etc.  The 
whole  amount  due  sd.  Ellyson  for  trans, 
of  12  pers.* 

CLEMENT  HERBERT,  150  acs.  on 
S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  21  Apr.  1657,  p. 
103,   (154).    Trans,  of  3  pers.* 

DAVID  KIFFIN,  650  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  last  day  of  August  1657, 
p.  103,  (154).  On  S.  side  of  great 
Wicocomoco  Riv.  400  acs.  N.  Ely.  up- 
on sd.  river  opposite  land  of  John  Bar- 
don  &  Thomas  Saffall  &  S.  Ely.  upon 
Fishing  Cr.  30  acs.  bet.  this  &  land  of 
Mr.  Little;  220  acs.  E.  S.  E.  upon  first 
mentioned  land  &  Mr.  Foxcraft  &  a 
branch  of  Fishinge  Cr.  &  N.  N.  E.  upon 
lands  of  Mr.  Little,  Mr.  Morrice  & 
Daniell  Crosby.  400  acs.  by  purchase 
of  John  Garnell  &  250  acs.  for  trans. 
of  5  pers.*    Renewal  18  Mar.  1662. 

CLEMENT  HERBERT,  150  acs.  on 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  in  the  freshes, 
21  Apr.  1657,  p.  103,  (155).  Part  of 
sd.  land  begins  against  land  of  John 
Gillett.    Trans,  of  3  pers.* 

TOBY  SMITH,  Gent.,  1350  acs., 
called  by  the  name  of  Rockingham,  in 
Rappa.  Co.,  10  June  1657,  p.  104, 
(155).  On  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg. 
at  an  oak  dividing  this  from  land  of 
Thomas  Paine.  900  acs.  by  patent 
dated  18  Feb.  1652,  &  450  acs.  for 
trans,   of  9  pers:    Abigail  Ridge,  Tho- 


mas Crowd er,  Seth  Edwards,  Tho.  Bum- 
bridge,  Wm.  Swann,  Wm.  Talbott,  Jno. 
Warner,  Jno.  Clowen,  Katherine  Ma- 
coughan. 

THOMAS  BROUGHTON,  500  acs. 
in  Patomeck  freshes,  beg.  a  mile  above 
the  first  creek  about  the  narrowes  of 
Pascattaway  on  W.  side  of  the  Riv. 
where  John  Woods  land  ends.  7  Sept. 
1657,  p.  104,  (156).  Trans,  of  10 
pers:  Mary  Dibbin,  Jno.  Margarets, 
Joseph  Bennett,  Margarett  Tucker,  Ann 
Shepard,  Mary  Midleton,  Tho.  Meddars, 
Jno.  Rose,  Jno.  Badworth,  Eliz.  Phillips. 
Assigned  by  Mr.  Edward  Sanderson. 

WILLIAM  NEWMAN,  400  acs. 
Gloster  Co.,  20  Apr.  1657,  p.  105, 
(157).  Below  land  of  Oliver  Greene. 
Trans,  of  8  pers:    Robert  Davis,  Wm. 

Jenkins,     Jno.     Foster,     Daniell    , 

James  Fisher,  Tho.  Jones,  Adam  Church, 
John  Turbis. 

ANTHONY  ARNELL,  500  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  25  Oct.  1657,  p.  105,  (157). 
Beg.  on  N.  E.  side  of  a  branch  of 
Chicahominy  Sw.,  running  N.  by  Mary 
Cosbye.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  John 
Roberts,  Mary  Evans,  Tho.  Kirby,  John 
Dibbin,  Wm.  Tucker,  Mary  Rassey, 
John  Holme,  Tho.  Daniell,  Rich.  Bud- 
worth,  Wm.  Adriggin  (?). 

THOMAS  BELL,  250  acs.  New  Kent 
Co.,  29  June  1657,  p.  105,  (158).  On 
N.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.  &  N.  W.  side  of 
Bennetts  Cr.  Trans,  of  5  pers:  Hannah 
Howard,  Edward  Huntstone,  Rich. 
Davis,    Humphrey  ,   John   Hunter. 

SAMUELL  MATHEWES,  Govr., 
5,211  acs.,  abutting  E.  on  Potomeck 
Riv.,  S.  on  Chapawansick  Cr.  &  N.  on 
Quantecot  Riv.  or  Cr.  (Granted  by  the 
Council)  23  Nov.  1657,  p.  106,  (158). 
Trans,  of  105  pers:  Henry  Peckett, 
Henry  Lawrence,  Edmond  Potter,  John 
Mather,  Arthur  Coventon,  Lewis  Beck- 
with,  Richard  Hand,  Rich.  Tiller,  James 
Harris,  Tho.  Harris,  Marmaduke  Ladd, 
Jerem.  Burditt,  Wm.  Richardson,  Jane 
Bell,  Rebecka  Goldinge,  Mary  Killingell, 
Eliza.  Bowyer,  Mary  Ramsey,  Jone  Wel- 
son,  Andrew  Keateley,  Ambrose  Parkes, 
James    Wyner,     James     Hunt,     Olliver 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


349 


Jewitt,  Nich.  Lawrence,  Edward  Arney, 
Samuell  Jeffers,  Richard  Lacy,  Anth. 
Barrwell,  Robert  Moores,  Hugh  Jones, 
Robert  Whitelige,  Bartho.  Crosse,  Peter 
Heath,  John  Smallwood,  John  Hancock, 
Martha  Fryer,  Fran.  Rolls,  Katherine 
Hart,  Paul  Cartwright,  Benjamin  Chand- 
ler, Robert  Biggs,  Lawrence  Ashpoole, 
John  Cornelius,  Mary  Cornelius,  Adolph 
Johnson,  Sarah  Greene,  Mary  Lessford, 
Jone  Heors,  Ann  Benbowe,  Robert 
Masclaken,  Fran.  Gurman,  Adrian 
Adrianson,  Tho.  Tawtan,  Morris  Vict- 
sorrell,  John  Corneliouson,  John  Slaitor, 
John  Turner,  John  Gibbins,  Robert  Hig- 
ginson,  Rich.  Kent,  Timothy  Gunter, 
Daniell  Ingoll,  Richard  Walton,  Joane 
Palmer. 

ZACHERY  CRIPPS,  800  acs.  Ware 
necke,  6  June  1657,  p.  107,  (159). 
Beg.  at  Mr.  Peaches  land,  running  to  a 
swamp  dividing  this  &  land  of  Mr. 
Mordecai  Cooke.  300  acs.  by  patent 
dated  24  Mar.  1655  &  residue  for  trans, 
of  10  pers:  Charles  Grimes,  Ralph 
Dauby  (or  Danby),  Rich.  Stone,  Tho. 
Faulkner,  Jno.  Woodgeare,  Jno.  Wil- 
loughby,  Ann  Hegnone,  Jno.  Worke- 
man,  Jno.  Elcock,  Mingo — Negro. 

MAJOR  EDWARD  BRUMFEILD 
(Bromfeild),  &  MR.  JOHN  SNELL- 
INGE,  1100  acs.  on  W.  side  of  Hocca- 
daies  Cr.  in  Peanketank  Riv.,  6  June 
1657,  p.  107,  (159).  Trans,  of  22 
pers:  Jno.  Snellinge,  Edward  Brom- 
feild, Wm.  Simpson,  Wm.  Feild,  Jno. 
Mutton,  Jno.  Williams,  Hen.  Coniers, 
Georg.  Harber,  Sarah  Mashy,  Nath. 
Ruford,  Nath.  Pincon  (?),  Jno.  Abbott, 
Ann  Delue  (?),  Rob.  Hollaway,  Jno. 
Cranfeild,  Xpher  Hanes,  Winifred 
James,  Rob.  Fletcher,  Tho.  a  Scott, 
Thorn  a  Boy,  a  maid  servant,  James 
Hunts  wife. 

JOHN  HANY,  200  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  5  Oct.  1657,  p.  108, 
(160).  Upon  S.  side  of  great  Wiccoco- 
moco  Riv.,  Sly.  upon  land  of  Geffery 
Goche  &  N.  Wly.  upon  Vulcan  Cr. 
which  divides  this  from  land  of  Thomas 
Salsbury.  Part  of  a  patent  of  1000  acs., 
granted  to  Thomas  Coniers,  who  as- 
signed same  to  Michaell  Brookes,  by 
whom  it  was   assigned   unto  sd.   Hany. 


SAME.  600  acs.  Same  county,  date 
&  page,  (161).  Adj.  land  of  James 
Macgrigory  &  Hugh  Fowch  and  Jno. 
Hulett.  Part  of  a  patent  of  1000  acs., 
as  above  noted. 

HENRY  LAYNE,  (or  Sayne),  150 
acs.  10  Oct.  1657,  p.  108,  (161).  100 
acs.  granted  unto  John  White,  25  Nov. 
1653  &  assigned  unto  sd.  Layne,  &  50 
acs.  for  trans,  of  Wm.  Miller. 

GEORGE  SMITH,  850  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  8  Sept.  1657,  p.  109  (162). 
On  S.  W.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.,  running 
to  a  branch  neere  Richahock  path  to 
Chicahominy  Fort  &  to  Smith's  now 
dwelling.  500  acs.  granted  unto  Rees 
Hughes,  8  Mar.  1652  &  assigned  to  sd. 
Smith;  200  acs.  formerly  granted  unto 
him,  &  450  acs.  for  trans,  of  9  pers: 
James  Davis,  Tho.  Redinge,  Roger 
Gibbs,  Wm.  Rogers,  Edward  Darry, 
Mary  Crusty,  Eliz.  Smith,  Mary  Codin, 
Jone  Walter. 

FRANCIS  BURNELL,  Gent.,  312 
acs.  on  S.  W.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.,  14 
Oct.  1657,  p.  109,  (163).  Behind  land 
of  Mr.  Vaulx.  Granted  unto  Wm.  Cox, 
23  Apr.  1653  &  by  him  deserted.  Now 
due  for  trans,  of  7  pers:  Margarett 
Boaton,  Jno.  Needham,  Tho.  Coppinge, 
Robert  Craft,  Rob.  Allen,  Jno.  Clerke, 
Eliz.  Railinge. 

GEORG  CHAPMAN,  Gent.,  160  acs. 
New  Kent,  Blisland  Parish,  12  Oct. 
1657,  p.  109,  (163).  Beg.  at  Tho. 
Holmes  corner.    Trans,  of  4  pers.* 

FRANCIS  BURNELL,  500  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  28  Oct.  1657,  p.  110,  (164). 
Adj.  his  own  land.  Trans,  of  10  pers: 
Willmott  Allinge,  Elizabeth  Holt,  Rich. 
Needham,  Kath.  Bridge,  Mary  Holmsly, 
Mary  Blunder,  Mary  Maues  (?),  Phillip 
Russell,  Jno.  Hoeman. 

WM.  CLAPHAM,  Junr..  500  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  31  May  1657,  p.  110, 
(164).  On  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
neere  the  head  of  a  creek  which  divides 
the  land  of  Major  Carter  from  land 
formerly  belonging  to  Mr.  Ephraditus 
Lawson,  deed.,  now  sd.  Clapham's. 
Bounding  N.  W.  upon  the  main  branch 


350 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


dividing  this  from  lands  of  Mr.  Thomas 
Carter  &  S.  W.  on  Blunt  point  Cr. 
Trans,  of  10  pers:  Clemt.  Corbell, 
Angell  his  wife,  Gabriell  Corbell,  Jno. 
Corbell,  Rich.  Masfell  his  wife,  Georg 
Stubbs,  Samll.  Percy,  Jno.  Andrewes, 
Hannah  Rogers,  Jno.  Heath. 

WILLIAM  ALLEN,  250  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  on  N.  side  of  James  Riv.,  18 
June,  1657,  p.  110,  (165).  On  E.  side 
of  Rickahock,  Nly.  upon  land  of 
Lazerus  Thomas,  &  Wly.  on  sd.  Ricka- 
hock path  which  divides  this  land  of 
of  Major  Holt.  Trans,  of  5  pers: 
Georg  Mosse,  Tho.  Smith,  Wm.  Cox, 
Davey  (or  Darcy)  Murbey  (or  Markey), 
Horatio  Vere. 

MR.  GEORG  MARSH,  1000  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  13  Oct.  1657,  p.  Ill, 
(165).  At  Matchepungoe ;  being  a 
moiety  of  2000  acs.  granted  to  Capt. 
Francis  Pott,  15  Apr.  1653,  by  him  re- 
linquished &  due  sd.  Marsh  for  trans, 
of  20  pers:  David  Miles,  Andrew 
Scott,  Hugh  Percy,  Jno.  Allen,  Rich. 
Grimes,  Robert  Peck,  Tho.  Powell, 
Tomboy  &  Maria — Negroes,  Tho.  Hat- 
ton,  Nola  Evorahoo  (?),  Geo.  Hickson, 
Joseph  Chizell,  Tho.  Cooke,  Ralph 
Brickes,  Jno.  Parker,  Daniell  Cooper, 
Wm.  Coll,  Edward  Foster,  Jno.  Walker. 

CLEMENT  HERBERT,  500  acs. 
Rappa.  Co.,  8  Oct.  1657,  p.  Ill,  (166). 
On  N.  W.  side  of  Morraticon  Cr.,  beg. 
at  land  formerly  surveyed  for  Mr.  Tho- 
mas Glascock,  extending  N.  E.  on  land 
of  Mr.  Wm.  Whitby,  S.  E.  on  land  of 
Nicholas  Ferman  &  Thom.  Stephens. 
Granted  unto  John  Sharpe,  Senr.,  6 
Sept.  1654.  Deserted  &  now  due  for 
trans,  of  10  pers.* 

JOHN  MADDISON,  800  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  28  Aug.  1657,  p.  112,  (166). 
Upon  N.  side  of  Mattapony  Riv.,  beg. 
at  his  own  600  acs.,  running  E.  to  Mr. 
Hollands  land  &c.  Trans,  of  16  pers: 
Jno.  Reynolls,  Timothy  Pell,  Wm. 
Hardin,  Tho.  Ancell,  Robert  Titterton, 
Robt.  Dale,  Wm.  Clerke,  Lawrence 
Baker,  Robt.  Soale,  Tho.  Lee,  Robt. 
Dart,  Tho?  Watkins,  Nich.  Parsins, 
Joseph  Ridge,  Robt.  Wheelden.  Re- 
newed 18  Mar.  1662. 


JOHN  BARROW,  800  acs.  in  the 
freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  13  Oct.  1657,  p. 
112,  (167).  Adj.  land  of  Wm.  Yarrett, 
running  to  an  oake  dividing  this  &  land 
surveyed  for  Mr.  Toby  Smith.  Former- 
ly patented  by  Walter  Dickenson  &  de- 
serted.   Due  for  trans,  of  16  pers.* 

JAMES  YEATES,  600  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  13  Oct.  1657,  p.  112,  (167).  Up- 
on S.  side  &  in  the  freshes  of  Rappa. 
Riv.  opposite  to  Nanzemum  Towne, 
bounded  on  N.  W.  with  a  swamp  which 
divides  this  &  tract  surveyed  for  Abra- 
ham Moone.  Granted  unto  Nicholas 
Meriweather,  4  Oct.  1654,  &  assigned 
unto  John  Barrow,  who  assigned  to  sd. 
Yeates. 

JOHN  EDWARDS,  Chirurgion,  700 
acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  3  June  1657,  p.  113, 
(168).  Upon  head  of  the  Easternmost 
branch  of  Corotoman  Riv.,  neere  a  path 
called  Morattico  or  Wiccocomoco  path. 
Renewal  of  patent  dated  26  Feb.  1653. 

VINCENT  STANFORD,  300  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  6  June  1657,  p.  113, 
(169).  On  N.  side  of  Peanketanke 
Riv.,  on  the  head  of  devdt.  of  Col.  John 
Mattrom.  Granted  unto  JOHN  ASH- 
LY  &  THOMAS  HAMPIER  10  Mar. 
1653  &  by  them  assigned  unto  sd. 
Stanford. 

FRANCIS  ROBERTS,  500  acs.  be- 
yond Col.  Speakes  land  &  the  Doegs 
Island,  Ely.  upon  James  Magregory's 
land  &  running  to  Mr.  Jernews.  15 
July  1657,  p,  114,  (169).  Trans,  of  10 
pers:  James  Mac  Donnell,  Hugh  Carty, 
Tho.  Holder,  Ro.  Barnes,  Rob.  Huett, 
Edmond  Taylor,  Richd.  Johnson,  Peeter 
Edwards,  Rob.  Jones,  Jane  Bently.  Re- 
newed 11  Mar.  1663  in  name  of  Joseph 
Feilding  &  Jno.  Gardner,  to  whom  it 
was  assigned  by  sd.  Roberts. 

JOHN  WOOD,  of  Wicocomocoe, 
500  acs.  Ely.  upon  Petomeck  Riv.,  in 
the  freshes  above  the  Narrowes  at  Pus- 
cattoway,  Sly.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Hugh 
Lee.  15  July  1657,  p.  114,  (170). 
Trans,  of  10  pers:  Susan  Bury,  Jane 
Bluney,  Rob.  Jackson,  Wm.  Huntly, 
Roger  Harlston  (?),  Judeth  Page,  Eliz. 
Weaver,  Eliz.  Maior,  Mary  Smith,  Han- 
nah Dixon. 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


351 


MR.  HUGH  LEE,  1100  acs.  in  Peto- 
meck freshes  above  Puscatoway,  on  the 
Wwd.  side  of  the  river,  bounding  Sly. 
upon  Mr.  Claies  land,  Nly.  along  the 
river  &  parallel  to  Mr.  Cley.  15  July 
1657,  p.  114,  (170).  Trans,  of  22 
persons:  Jonathan  Marrow,  Mary 
Marrow,  Dorithy  Marrow,  Wm.  Browne, 
Wm.  Hanniver,  Geo.  Wilson,  Hannah 
Lee,  Mr.  David  Linsey,  Anne  Murrall, 
Joshua  Esto,  Anne  Moore,  Junr.,  Anne 
Moore,  Senr.,  Dan  Lile,  Jno.  Carr, 
Eliz.  Parry,  Mary  Harris,  Eliz.  Hardinge, 
Mary  Barkinton,  Anne  Murrall,  Joshua 
Estoe,  Wm.  May,  Rob.  Smart. 

EDWARD  WILLIAMS,  500  acs. 
Ely.  upon  Petomeck  freshes  above  Pus- 
catoway, Sly.  upon  land  of  Robert  Brad- 
shew  &  James  Cloughton.  15  July 
1657,  p.  115,  (171).  Trans,  of  10 
pers: 

WILLIAM  DAVIS,  500  acs.  Ely.  up- 
on Petomeck  Riv.  in  the  freshes  above 
Puscatoway  &  Sly.  upon  land  called 
William  Butler's.  15  July  1657,  p. 
115,  (171).  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Hen: 
Thornton,  James  May,  James  Jolly,  Rob. 
Brooke,  James  Battin,  John  Covell,  Edd. 
Mason,  Sil.  Baker,  Edd.  Snape,  Mathew 
Shorte. 

JOHN  WOOD,  300  acs.  Nly.  upon 
Yosococomoco  Cr.  in  Petomeck  freshes 
&  adj.  his  own  land.  15  July  1657,  p. 
115,  (171).  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Grace 
Harrison,  Geo.  Burton,  James  Davis, 
Nich.  Coaleman,  Hen.  Rouse,  Mary  (or 
Marg.)   Linton. 

JOHN  RAVEN,  500  acs.  on  Wwd. 
side  of  Petomeck  Riv.  above  Puscato- 
way., Ely.  upon  sd.  river,  Sly.  upon  land 
called  Mr.  Wm.  Preslyes.  15  July 
1657,  p.  115,  (172).  Trans,  of  10 
pers:  Lancelott  Heines,  Peeter  Greene, 
Patrick  Davison,  Eliz.  Norton,  Prudence 
Neale,  Diana  Johnson,  Margaret  Bell, 
Jane  Denny,  Paule  Hinson,  Roger  An- 
drews. 

MR.  WILLIAM  PRESLY,  1000  acs. 
in  Petomeck  freshes  about  3  mi.  above 
land  called  Mr.  Robert  Clerke's  land, 
Ely.  upon  sd.  river,  Sly.  upon  land  of 
Mr.  Francis  Grey  &  John  Lancelott.    15 


July  1657,  p.  116,  (172).  Trans,  of  20 
pers:  Roger  Bell,  James  Arden,  Ro. 
Rodes,  Tim.  Lawrence,  Bernard  Nash, 
Jno.  Varnell,  Edd.  Cooper,  Law.  Seines, 
Dan.  Armstronge,  Hugh  Davis,  Tho. 
Madrin,  Nich.  Peake,  Rand.  Jackson, 
Tho.  Beale,  Peeter  Hughes,  Mary  James, 
Martha  Hiller,  Judith  Chroshaw,  Wm. 
Batty,  Corl.  May. 

ROBERT  CASTLETON,  1000  acs.  in 
Petomeck  freshes  on  the  N.  side  of  a 
creek  below  Puscatoway  but  on  opposite 
side  of  sd.  river  &  S.  Wly.  on  Hopkins 
Cr.  &  N.  Ely.  towards  land  surveyed  for 
Mr.  Henry  Vincent.  15  July  1657,  p. 
116,  (172).  Trans,  of  20  pers:  Wm. 
Gill,  Richd.  Heath,  Eliz.  Arnold,  Rob. 
Stone,  Jane  Hunt,  Avis  Browne,  Ales 
Tiller,  Geo.  Ray,  Fra.  Coney,  Anth. 
Barwick,  Walter  Pratt,  Jasper  Grey, 
Arth.  Newcombe,  Tho.  Farrington, 
Prudence  Greene,  Wm.  Corey,  James 
Slaner,  Isabell  Meldron,  Jane  Mount- 
ford,  Willm.  Holeman. 

JOHN  WOOD,  300  acs.  NEly.  upon 
Yosococomocoe  Cr.  in  Petomeck  freshes, 
N.  Wly.  upon  land  by  him  called  John 
Tingies.  15  July  1657,  p.  116,  (173). 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Mary  Jones,  James 
Coxe,  Edwd.  Burly,  Richd.  Atkins, 
Richd.  Alcock,  Mich.  Waller. 

JOHN  WOOD,  500  acs.  Westmore- 
land Co.,  15  July  1657,  p.  116,  (173). 
Upon  the  head  of  Robert  Yeo's  land. 
Trans,  of  10  pers:  Walter  Bird,  Wm. 
Lacy,  Wm.  Lee,  Jeremy  Lawes,  James 
Lewis,  Rob.  Haines,  John  Fryer,  Ellinr. 
Read,  Joane  Sands,  Jane  Williams. 

JOHN  HAYLES,  100  acs.  N.  Ely. 
upon  Petomeck  Riv.  in  the  freshes  above 
Anacosta  Hand,  S.  Ely.  upon  Vincent 
Cockes  land  belonging  to  John  Wood. 
15  July  1657,  p.  117,  (174).  Trans,  of 
2  pers:    Tho.  Fourty,  James  Wilkinson. 

PEETER  SMITH,  500  acs.  in  Peto- 
meck freshes,  N.  Ely.  upon  a  creek 
above  Col.  Speakes  land  &  S.  Ely.  upon 
land  called  Gosnells  land.  15  July  1657, 
p.  117,  (174).  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Rob. 
Clerke,  Rob.  Holmes,  Math.  Wardle, 
Anne  Hamond,  Tho.  Dorwood,  Anne 
Forty,  John  Ayres,  Francis  Ayres,  Richd. 
Hardman,  Tho.  Webster. 


352 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


RICHARD  YOUELL,  orphant  son  of 
Mr.  Tho.  Youell,  of  Nomeny,  500  acs. 
Ely.  upon  Petomeck  Riv.  in  the  freshes 
&  Sly.  on  land  called  Richard  Holden's. 
15  July  1657,  p.  117,  (174).  Trans,  of 
10  pers:  Edmond  Ayres,  Richd.  Ayres, 
Eliz.  Swaney,  Tho.  Pope,  Hen.  Joice 
(?),  Anne  Williams,  Mary  Ellice,  An- 
drew Burchett  (or  Burchell),  James 
Staple,   Martha  Wright. 

WILLIAM  THOMAS,  1000  acs. 
Westmoreland    Co.,    15    July    1657,    p. 

117,  (175).  On  S.  side  of  Petomeck 
Riv.,  beg.  at  Francis  Jones  corner  & 
parallel  to  sd.  River.  Trans,  of  20  pers: 
Fra.  Low,  Xph.  Dancfeild,  Wm.  Hut- 
chins,  Rob.  Baymond,  Wm.  Salter,  Wm. 
Smith,  Barnaby  French,  Sam.  Smith. 
Note:  600  acs.  by  certificate  granted  to 
Geo.  Lob,  who  assigned  to  Jno.  Wood 
&  by  him  assigned  unto  sd.  Thomas,  the 
names  being  omitted  to  be  inserted  in 
the  certificate. 

THOMAS  ROWE,  500  acs.  upon 
Petomeck  in  the  freshes,  Sly.  upon  land 
of  Walter  Dun.  15  July  1657,  p.  118, 
(175).  Trans.  of  10  pers:  Hen. 
Cockett,  Wm.  Rose,  Tho.  Hart,  Joane 
Wright,  Peeter  White,  Edward  Whit- 
inge,  John  How,  Edmond  Williams, 
Wm.  Clerke,  Jeffery  Moore. 

JOHN  GOSNELL,  500  acs.  beyond 
land  of  Col.  Speake  in  Petomeck  freshes, 
above  the  doegs  Hand  &c,  Ely.  upon 
land  called  Newberry's.  15  July  1657, 
p.  118,  (175).  Trans,  of  10  pers.* 
The  rights  by  assignment  of  Nich.  Mery- 
wether  being  part  of  a  pattern  of  550 
acs.  purchased  of  John  Williams,  dec'd. 
This  land  was  given  by  will  of  Jno. 
Gosnell  to  Elizabeth  Ireland  &  renewed 
in  her  name  18  Mar.  1662. 

JOHN  WOOD,  500  acs.,  Ely.  in 
Petomeck  freshes  beyond  land  of  Col. 
Speake,  above  the  Doegs  Hand  &  S.  Ely. 
upon  Philpotts  land.    15  July  1657,  p. 

118,  (176).  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Edd. 
Spicer,  Nich.  Titbury,  Mich.  Waterford, 
Hugh  Jeffers,  Bar.  Stilt,  Jeffry  Speed, 
Rob.  Fostly,  Tho.  Tiller,  Jno.  Macko- 
mack,  Marg.  Merrick. 

ROGER  WALTERS,  300  acs.  on  S. 
W.  side  of  Aquaconde  Riv.,  called  the 


W.  branch  in  Petomeck  freshes,  beg. 
where  Mr.  Vincent's  land  ends  &c.  15 
July  1657,  p.  118,  (176).  Trans,  of  6 
pers:  Joice  Coventon,  Andrew  Moss, 
Hen.  Walker,  James  Bowles,  Richd. 
Perrin,   Charles   Howard. 

THOMAS  MOLTEN,  500  acs.  upon 
a  branch  of  Petomeck  freshes,  beyond 
Col.  Speakes  land  above  the  Doegs 
Hand,  S.  Ely.  upon  land  called  Peeter 
Smith's.  15  July  1657,  p.  119,  (177). 
Trans,  of  10  pers:  Tho.  Hartly,  Jno. 
Greene,  Wm.  Moore,  Alex.  Herringe, 
Jno.  Barber,  Richd.  Packer,  Jno.  Chad- 
wick,  Jno.  Huckle,  Eliz.  Williams, 
Edwd.  Gibbs. 

ROBERT  BRADSHEW  &  JAMES 
CLOUGHTON,  600  acs.  above  Puscato- 
way  in  Petomeck  freshes,  Ely.  upon  sd. 
River,  &  Sly.  upon  land  called  Mr. 
James  Ashton's.  15  July  1657,  p.  119, 
(177).  Trans,  of  12  pers:  Tho.  Man- 
nor,  Tho.  Webster,  Eliz.  Phillips,  Mary, 
John,  &  Mary,  Eliz.  Hartford,  John 
Butcher,  Tho.  Rogers,  Tho.  Dixon, 
James  Lessell,  Wm.  Collings. 

JOHN  TINGY,  500  acs.  Ely.  upon 
Petomeck  Riv.  in  the  freshes  &  Sly.  up- 
on land  of  Edward  Williams.  15  July 
1657,  p.  119,  (177).  Trans,  of  10 
pers:  Isack  Hart,  Wm.  Hatly,  Mary 
Merredith,  Kath.  Hermy,  Alec.  Foy, 
JefFry  Munson,  Tho.  Dallison,  John 
Hall,  Dan  Ross,  Marmaduk  Clanton. 

WILLIAM  WALTHALL,  Merchant, 
1600  acs.  Henericoe  Co.,  4  Oct.  1657, 
p.  120,  (178).  Upon  N.  side  of  Appa- 
mattock  Riv.  in  Bristoll  Parish.  550 
acs.  lying  next  above  the  land  now  in 
possession  of  Thomas  Lyne,  running  W. 
N.  W.  &c,  &  E.  S.  E.  on  the  Swift  Cr; 
250  acs.  lyeth  on  the  head  of  sd.  tract 
of  550  acs;  850  acs.  adj.  said  250  acs., 
running  N.  W.  thence  N.  E.  on  Ashen 
Swamp.  750  acs.  by  purchase  from  Mr. 
John   Baugh  &   850   acs.   for   trans,   of 

17  pers:  Wm.  Walthall,  Anne  Hughs, 
Joane  Watts,  Rob.  Plaine,  Geo.  Dice, 
Ed.  Markham,  Jam.  Ekin,  Gab.  Bolton, 
Edwd.  Craford,  Richd.  Jamson,  Joseph 
Parsons,  Marg  Heines,  Eliz.  Thomas, 
Hamond  Woodhouse,  Edwd.  Atkins, 
Alice  &  Willm.  Irish  persons.    Renewed 

18  Mar.  1662. 


w 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


353 


WILLIAM  EDWARDS,  Gent.,  490 
acs.  Surry  Co.,  17  Sept.  1657,  p.  120, 
(178).  On  S.  side  of  James  Riv.,  op- 
posite James  Citty,  W.  upon  Crouches 
Cr.  dividing  it  from  land  formerly  Mr. 
Tho.  Rolfe's,  E.  upon  the  run  of  a  little 
swamp  dividing  it  from  land  of  John 
Senior.  200  acs.  being  long  since 
granted  unto  Capt.  Powell  &  his  heirs 
dying  &  leaving  no  heirs  the  sd.  land 
escheated  &  granted  unto  Sir.  William 
Berkly  by  order  of  court  and  he  assigned 
same  unto  Col.  Wm.  Claiborne,  who 
assigned  unto  sd.  Edward.  290  acs.  for 
trans,  of  6  pers:  Wm.  Avery,  Mary 
Gonn,  Jno.  Hoskins,  Eliz.  Johnson, 
Marg.  Maddison,  Wethers  Cocken. 
Note:  June  12,  1657:  Mr.  Wm.  Ed- 
wards had  order  from  Govr.  &c.  to 
patent  certaine  marsh  &  wood  land 
formerly  granted  to  James  Mason  & 
John  Bishopp  &  by  them  deserted  which 
land  is  included   in  the  above  pattern. 

THOMAS  BELL,  227  acs.  Northamp- 
ton Co.,  27  Nov.  1657,  p.  121,  (179). 
At  the  head  of  Nuswattock  Cr.,  Sly.  on 
a  branch  parting  it  from  land  of  John 
Tilney  &  John  Johnson,  Jr.  &  Nly.  by 
land  of  John  Pepper.  Trans,  of  5  pers: 
Elinor  Lathberry,  Howell  Gladinge, 
Wm.  Mitchell,  Mary  Batch elor. 

ROBERT  WARREN,  150  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  27  Nov.  1657,  p.  121, 
(180).  Nly.  on  land  of  John  Wilkins 
&  Sly.  on  John  Many  (?).  Trans,  of 
3  pers:  Susanna  Spratlin,  Wm.  Rodul- 
phus,  Kath.  Rodulphus. 

MR.  THOMAS  STRATTON,  300 
acs.  Northampton  Co.,  27  Nov.  1657,  p 
121,  (180).  Sly.  on  Dun  branch,  Ely 
on  land  of  Farmer  Jones  &  Geo.  Travel 
ler  &  Nly.  on  Major  Willm.  Walters 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Ann  Clay,  Wm 
Collum  (or  Collins),  John  Denny, 
Marg.  Irish  (person  ?),  Darman 
Neheuallin,  Mary  Turrough. 

WILLIAM  ROBERTS,  600  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  27  Nov.  1657,  p. 
121,  (180).  Neare  Matchepungoe,  Ely. 
upon  devdt.  of  John  Browne,  at  Phil- 
lips' Cr.  &  Sly.  upon  a  branch  parting 
it  from  land  of  Thomas  Bell.  Trans,  of 
12    pers:    Rich.   Richard,   Kath.   Florra, 


Owen    Adwin,    Tonnath    Dennis,    Law. 
Stegg. 

JOHN  CUSTIS,  Jr.,  250  acs.  in  old 
plantation  creek,  Wly.  upon  land  of 
Willm.  Burdett  &  Ely.  on  Bagwells  Cr. 
5  Oct.  1657,  p.  122,  (181).  Trans,  of 
5  pers:  Wm.  St  John,  Wm.  Marshall, 
George  Wolfe,  Joseph  Curtis  (or  Cus- 
tis).    Renewed  29  Oct.  1662. 

THOMAS  HILL,  500  acs.  in  Peto- 
meck  freshes,  on  S.  W.  side  of  Aqua- 
conde  Riv.,  beg.  about  half  a  mile  below 
the  falls  on  S.  W.  side  of  John  Wood's 
land  assigned  to  a  Scottish  man  &  run- 
ning W.  S.  W.  &c.  18  Sept.  1657,  p. 
122,  (181).  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Capt. 
Thomas  Hill  3  times,  Mary  Bushrode 
twice,  Jno.  Hill,  Georg  Hill,  Thomas 
Hill,  Mary  Hill,  Francis  Hill. 

HENRY  VINCENT,  500  acs.  in 
Petomeck  freshes  about  halfe  a  mile  be- 
low the  falls  of  Aquacond  Riv.,  called 
the  western  branch.  18  Sept.  1657,  p. 
122,  (181).  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Ann 
Leson,  Elinor  an  Irish  mayd,  James 
WmSon.  (Williamson),  Tho.  Lynard, 
Tho.  Hackett,  Rob.  Hogg,  Jno.  Lucas, 
Eliz.   Edom,   Eliz.   Pettus,   Jno.  Rookes. 

JOHN  BARKER,  Jr.,  600  acs.  Surry 
Co.,  15  Oct.  1657,  p.  122,  (182).  On 
S.  side  of  James  Riv.  about  7  or  8  mi. 
from  the  head  of  upper  Chipoakes  Cr. 
Trans,  of  12  pers:  Edmond  Jeneck  (?), 
Tho.  Wakefeild,  Jno.  Fairepoint,  Anna 
de  Wild,  Roger  Wmson.  (Williamson), 
Wm.  Foster,  Petronella  Jackson,  Tho. 
Good,  Rich.  Bidolph,  Arthur  Patience, 
Jno.  Staples,  Fran.  Lattur  (?). 

LT.  COL.  HENRY  FLEETE,  2000 
acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  25  Aug.  1657,  p.  123, 
(182).  On  N.  side  of  the  river  towards 
the  head  of  great  Rappa.  Cr.,  adj.  his 
own  land,  &  towards  the  head  of  a 
creek  called  by  the  Indians  Gibson. 
Trans,  of  40  pers.* 

LT.  COL.  MILES  CARY  (Carey), 
3000  acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  7  Oct. 
1657,  p.  123,  (183).  Bounded  on  S. 
W.  with  Ohoquin  Riv.  &  on  S.  E.  with 
land  surveyed  for  Mr.  Draiton  &  upon 
a    swamp    dividing    this    from    land    of 


354 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Col.  Humphrey  Higgenson.  Renewal  of 
patent  5  Oct.  1654,  retaken  by  new 
rights  for  trans,  of  60  pers.* 

WILLIAM  GAPEINGE,  50  acs. 
Surry  Co.,  15  Oct.  1657,  p.  124,  (183). 
On  S.  E.  side  of  Upper  Chippoakes  Cr. 
commonly  called  Swan  Bay,  S.  W.  on 
Capt.  Bishopp  &  N.  E.  on  Mary  Em- 
mett.  Trans,  of  Mary  Willsford.  Re- 
newed 15  Mar.  1663  in  name  of  Tho. 
Clarke  as  marrying  sd.  Gapeing's  widow. 

WILLIAM  BACON,  Gent,  390  acs, 
28  Aug.  1657,  p.  124,  (184).  Between 
land  of  Edward  Walker  &  Richard 
Holdinge.  Due  by  assignment  from 
Edward  Walker. 

CAPT.  JOHN  SMITH,  500  acs. 
Glocester  Co,  14  Oct.  1657,  p.  124, 
(184).  Running  Wly.  down  Poropo- 
tanke  Cr.  to  the  river  &c.  Trans,  of  10 
pers:  Thomas  Lacy  (or  Lucy),  George 
Lacy,  Jno.  Drewe,  Tho.  Berry,  Richard 
Langly,  Wm.  Pritchett,  Katherine  Rock, 
Margarett  Watten,  Jane  Hutchison,  Jno. 
Readman. 

CHARLES  GRIMES,  1000  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co,  8  Oct.  1657,  p.  125,  (185). 
Upon  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv,  S.  W. 
upon  the  head  of  a  Cr.  upon  N.  side  of 
Rappahanock  Towne  called  Fleetes  Cr. 
Renewal  of  patent  dated  26  Dec.  1653. 

SAME.  960  acs.  Same  county,  date 
&  page.    Renewal  as  above. 

SAME.  600  acs.  Same  county,  date 
&  page,  (186).  Renewal  of  patent  dated 
4  Sept.  1654. 

SAME.  600  acs.  Same  county  & 
date.  Page  126,  (186).  Renewal  as 
above. 

THOMAS  BALLARD,  600  acs.  upon 
the  head  of  Pyanketanke  Riv.  &  W.  N. 
W.  upon  land  of  Capt.  Stephen  Gill, 
dec'd.  15  Oct.  1657,  p.  126,  (186). 
Granted  unto  Abraham  Moone  1  Nov. 
1654,  &  by  him  assigned  unto  sd.  Bal- 
lard. Renewed  2  Apr.  1662  in  name  of 
Major  David  Cant,  assignee  of  sd. 
Ballard. 


MR.  EDMOND  AYRES,  500  acs. 
Northumberland  Co,  28  Oct.  1657,  p. 
126,  (187).  Beg.  at  the  W.  corner  of 
George  Watts'  land  betwixt  branches  of 
the  head  of  Machoatick  &  Nominy 
Rivers  by  land  of  Mr.  Hawkins,  dec'd. 
Trans,  of  10  pers.* 

CHARLES  KINGE,  40  acs.  Lancaster 
Co,  1  Dec.  1657,  p.  127,  (187).  On 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv,  near  Corotoman 
Riv.  mouth,  beg.  at  land  of  John  Merri- 
man  on  parting  Cr.  &c.  along  trees 
dividing  this  and  land  of  Thomas  Har- 
wood.    Trans,  of  1  per.* 

SARAH  HANCOCK,  300  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co,  in  Lyn  haven  Parish,  23  Nov. 
1657,  p.  127,  (188).  200  acs.  beg.  at 
the  head  of  Mr.  Moselyes  land  neere 
the  head  of  Faram  Cr.  &  neer  a  place 
called  Turkey  ridge;  thence  S.  S.  W.  to 
John  Carrawaies  land  &c.  100  acs.  part 
of  a  patent  granted  unto  Thomas  Holt 
22  May  1637  &  purchased  by  her  hus- 
band Symon  Hancock  &  due  her  as  relict 
&  Admx,  and  200  acs.  for  trans,  of  4 
pers.* 

JOHN  JOHNSON,  150  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co,  in  Linhaven  parish,  24  Nov. 
1637,  p.  127,  (189).  Beg.  at  a  red  oake 
standing  on  the  bay  side  &c.  Trans,  of 
3  pers.* 

THOMAS  TANNER,  250  acs.  Charles 
Co,  27  Nov.  1657,  p.  128,  (189).  On 
S.  side  of  James  Riv.  &  E.  side  of 
Powells  Cr.  neere  the  old  Towne, 
bounded  W.  upon  land  of  Charles 
Sparrow  &  Richard  Tye,  N.  on  head  of 
sd.  Cr.  &  E.  on  the  Pynie  Swamp. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Richard  Hughes,  Ed- 
ward Willson,  Arthur  Downes,  Robert 
Wyes,  John  Price,  Ann  Tinker. 

MAURICE  ROSE,  1400  acs.  Chas. 
City  Co,  10  Oct.  1657,  p.  128,  (189). 
On  S.  side  of  James  Riv.  &  on  Easter- 
most  side  of  the  head  of  Wards  Cr.  beg. 
on  land  formerly  of  William  Haneat 
(?),  &c.  1000  acs.  granted  unto  Adam 
Coate  (or  Coale),  by  him  deserted; 
granted  unto  Hoell  Price  who  assigned 
his  interest  to  sd.  Rose  together  with 
rights  to  make  the  whole  devdt.  good 
for  trans,  of  28  pers:    Herbert  Greene, 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


355 


Elizabeth  Tanner,  Marg.  Hally,  Robert 
Bory  (?),  David  Humphryes,  John 
Elliott,  Elinor  Fowler,  Alice  Towardy, 
Bryan  Watts,  Wm.  Whittingham,  Tho. 
Beale,  Robert  Kerby,  Antho.  Royes, 
James  Preston,  Humphry  Paine,  Henry 
Speede,  Edward  Carrington,  Robert 
Smith,  Fran.  Hull,  Wm.  Wells,  Arth. 
Arnold,  Archebell  MacCraw,  John  Com- 
ings, Hueh  Merrit,  Sarah  Lacie,  Jane 
Mabbett,  Henry  Wench  (or  French), 
Tho.  Wade,   (or  Wood). 

WILLIAM  WHITE,  Clerke,  1000 
acs.  on  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  &  Wwd. 
side  of  John  Gillett.  5  June  1657,  p. 
129,  (190).  Granted  unto  John  Yates 
7  Sept.  1654,  assigned  unto  Thomas 
Brice,  who  assigned  unto  his  wife 
Martha  Brice  &  by  her  assigned  to  sd. 
White. 

GEORG  SEATON,  300  acs.  West- 
moreland Co.,  9  Oct.  1657,  p.  129, 
(191).  On  N.  side  of  Apamatuck  Cr. 
comonly  called  Hollis'  Cr.  &  Ely.  upon 
land  of  William  Freke.  Trans,  of  6 
pers:  Ann  Kinge,  Cary  Fitts,  Jno. 
Burton,  Daniell  Mokoy  (?),  John  Hill, 
Hutton  Tritter. 

EDMOND  MOORE,  200  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  in  Lin  haven  parish,  24 
Nov.  1657,  p.  129,  (191).  Bounded 
on  E.  with  Wm.  Basnetts  land  &  50 
acs.  part  W.  by  N.  on  Cypress  branch 
issueing  from  William  Capps'  dams. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  Black  Jacke  (?), 
Henrick  Henderson. 

MR.  GEORG  KEMPE,  200  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  in  Linhaven  Parish,  24  Nov. 
1657,  p.  130,  (192).  Beg.  at  corner  of 
land  whereon  he  lives.  Trans,  of  4 
pers:  Robert  Buckler,  Tho.  Willmott, 
James  Macoy,  Phillip  Browne. 

WILLIAM  CORNIX,  500  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  in  Linhaven  Parish,  24  Nov. 
1657,  p.  130,  (192).  Called  by  the 
name  of  Salsbury  Plaines,  beg.  at  a  Cy- 
presse  branch  running  W.  to  aswamp 
&c.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Daniell  Hoser, 
Rich.  Midleton,  Fran.  Gray,  Henry 
Smith,  Symon  Cooke,  Dorathy  Mason, 
Jno.  Andersly,  Wm.  Blacke,  David  An- 
derson, Wm.  Shawe. 


WM.  SHORTE  &  WM.  LIPPEATE, 

400  acs.  in  Lancaster  Co.,  1  Sept.  1657, 
p.  130,  (193).  Upon  Fleete's  Bay,  beg. 
at  the  mouth  of  Haddawaies  Cr.,  run- 
ning to  mouth  of  Corotomon  Cr.  Trans, 
of  8  pers:  Teage  Flide  &  Eliz.  his  wife, 
Robert  Milliscent,  Jno.  Braddie,  Alice 
Juxon  (?),  Constant  Harrwood,  Henry 
Barten,  Giles  Kinge.  Assigned  unto 
Hugh  Brent,  who  assigned  one  half  to 
Eppy.  Bonnison,  &  renewed  in  their 
names   18  Mar.   1662. 

MR.  RICHARD  FLINTE,  150  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  26  Sept.  1657,  p. 

131,  (193).  At  N.  W.  side  of  Yoeco- 
mocoe  Riv.,  N.  Wly.  upon  land  of  Tho- 
mas Shepard  &  James  Cloughton.  Trans, 
of  3  pers:  Elizabeth  James,  Margaret 
Davis,  Joane  Pawly.  Assigned  unto 
Thomas  Beagles  &  renewed  18  Mar. 
1662. 

WILLIAM  EDWARDS,  1800  acs. 
Surrey  Co.,  in  Southwarke  Parish,  run- 
ning to  Mr.  Warren's  path.  28  Sept. 
1657,  p.  131,  (194).  1080  acs.  granted 
to  Rice  Davis,  &  sd.  Edwards,  10  July 
1648,  &  720  acs.  due  him  for  trans,  of 
14  pers:  Mrs.  Sarah  Newton,  Barnaby 
Goffe,  Francis  Warne,  Teige  OSwillan, 
Walter  Rouse,  Katherine  a  Negro,  Wal- 
ter Lashley,  Dorathy  Moule,  Elizabeth 
Bashwell,  Geo.  Harrison,  Thomas  Ben- 
son, Jane  Watkins,  Antho.  Evans, 
Robert  Willson.    Renewed  Mar.  6,  1662. 

EDWARD  MOALSON,  50  acs.  in 
County  &  Parish  of  Yorke,  25  Nov. 
1657,  p.  132,  (194).  Adj.  land  of  Wm. 
Hawkins  &  Samuell  Tucker.  Trans,  of 
1  per.*    Renewed  18  Mar.   1662. 

RICHARD  WHITE,  Cooper,  500  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  2  Dec.  1657,  p.  132, 
(195).  Opposite  to  Nansemond  Towne, 
N.  E.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Charles  Grimes, 
S.  W.  upon  Abraham  Moone  &  S.  E. 
upon  Rappa.  Riv.  Renewal  of  patent 
dated  12  Dec.  1654. 

WILLIAM  BACON,  Gent.,  250  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  28  Aug.  1657,  p. 

132,  (195).  In  Yeocomocoe,  running 
E.  by  N.  to  Richard  Holdings  land  & 
to  Knotts  Cr.  110  acs.  by  assignment 
from  Georg  Knott;   65   acs.   by  assign- 


356 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


ment  from  Edward  Walker  &  75  acs. 
for  trans,  of  2  pers:  John  Flincher, 
Robert  Jaggins  (?). 

WILLIAM  JENNINGS,  350  acs. 
Surry  Co.,  8  Nov.  1657,  p.  133,  (196). 
On  S.  side  of  James  Riv.,  beg.  at  Col. 
Browne's.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  Mercy 
Briggs,  Wm.  Lewes,  Abraham  Land, 
Ann  Wosye. 

MR.  RICHARD  JAMES,  150  acs.  in 
James  City  Island,  5  June  1657,  p.  133, 
(196).  Beg.  at  Friggott  Landing  on 
back  Cr.,  to  branch  of  Pitch  &  Tarr 
Swamp,  by  Phipps'  line  &  Mrs.  Har- 
mers  cart  path  to  the  slash  behind 
Major  Holt's  house.  Trans,  of  3  pers: 
Rich.  James  twice,  Phillip  Minton. 

ROBERT  WARREN,  150  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  27  Nov.  1657,  p.  133, 
(197).  Nly.  on  John  Wilkins  land  & 
Sly.  upon  John  Many.  Trans,  of  3 
pers:  Susanna  Spratlin,  Wm.  Rodalphus, 
Renewed  9  Mar.  1663. 

WILLIAM  ROBERTS,  600  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  27  Nov.  1657,  p. 
134,  (197).  Near  Matchepungo,  Ely. 
upon  a  devdt.  of  John  Brown  at  Phil- 
lipps  Cr.  &  Sly.  upon  a  branch  parting 
it  from  land  of  Thomas  Bell.  Trans, 
of  12  pers:  Richard  Richards,  Katherine 
Florra,  Owen  Adroune,  Tonath  Dennis, 
Lawrence  Hogge  (Or  Hegge),  Jno. 
Williams,  Elizabeth  Hobson,  Robert  At- 
kins, Tho.  Broadways,  Alexander  , 

David  Connawin,  Jno.  Derrowe, 

THOMAS  BELL,  227  acs.  Northamp- 
ton Co.,  27  Nov.  1657,  p.  134,  (198). 
At  the  head  of  Nuswattocks  Cr.,  Sly. 
upon  a  branch  parting  it  from  land  of 
Jno.  Tillney  &  Jno.  Johnson,  Junr.  & 
Nly.  on  land  of  John  Peper.  Trans,  of 
5  pers:  Ellinor  Lashberry,  Hoell  Glade- 
inge,  Wm.  Mitchell,  Mary  Batcheller, 
Elizabeth  Roseer. 

THOMAS  STRATTON,  300  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  27  Nov.  1657,  p. 
134,  (198).  Ely.  on  land  of  Farmer 
Joanes  &  George  Traveller  &  Nly.  on 
Major  William  Waters.  Trans,  of  6 
pers:  Ann  Cley,  Wm.  Collum,  John 
Densy,  Darman  Nehevellin  (?),  Mary 
Turrough,  Margarett  Irish. 


WM.  DENSON,  Gent.,  450  acs. 
Nansamond  Co.,  6  Sept.  1657,  p.  135, 
(198).  Upon  Indian  Cr.,  a  branch  of 
the  W.  branch  of  Nansamond  Riv.,  adj. 
land  of  John  Garrett.  Trans,  of  9  pers: 
Peter  Dunkey,  Jno.  Bevington,  Elizabeth 
Ireland,  Richard  Wilden,  Jno.  Groome, 
Elizabeth  White,  Thomas  Kinder,  Fran- 
cis Kinder,  Robert  Arnold.  Renewed 
27  Mar.  1661. 

RICHARD  HOLDINGE,  525  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  28  Aug.  1657,  p. 
135,  (199).  In  Yeocomocoe  Necke. 
450  acs.  by  assignment  from  Edward 
Walker  &  residue  for  trans,  of  2  pers.* 
Renewed  30  Oct.  1662. 

VINCENT  STANFORD,  500  acs.  on 
N.  side  in  the  freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
about  6  mi.  above  Nanzemum  Towne. 
12  Oct.  1657,  p.  135,  (199).  Beg.  at 
a  swamp  dividing  this  &  land  of  John 
Gillett.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  20 
Nov.  1654. 

SAME.  12  Oct.  1657,  p.  136,  (200). 
Renewal  of  patent  dated  20  Nov.  1654 
for  800  acs. 

JOHN  ROBISON,  360  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  5  June  1657,  p.  136,  (201).  Upon 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  &  running  along 
land  of  Col.  Burbage.  Renewal  of 
patent  for  300  acs.  dated  last  of  Mar. 
1653  &  60  acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers.* 

RICHARD  COX,  809  acs.  lyeing  on 
a  swamp  which  runneth  down  Cow  Cr. 
in  Ware  Riv.  in  Mockjack  Bay,  beg.  at 
marked  tree  of  Joseph  Gregories.  5 
June  1657,  p.  136,  (201).  700  acs. 
granted  unto  Henry  Peasley,  2  Oct. 
1650  &  assigned  unto  sd.  Cox,  &  109 
acs.  for  trans,  of  3  pers.* 

THOMAS  BRERETON,  1000  acs.  in 
Patomeck  Riv.,  8  Oct.  1657,  p.  137, 
(202).  Granted  unto  Mr.  Thomas 
Speake,  11  Sept.  1653,  by  him  deserted 
for  want  of  seating  &  now  due  for  trans, 
of  20  pers:  Mr.  Thomas  Manninge, 
twice,  Mr.  Henry  Bastard,  Mr.  Wm. 
Bastard,  Jno.  Abrams,  Tannika  Bastian, 
Arryanka  Ariays  (?),  Peter  Franke, 
Wm.  Midleton,  James  Cunningham, 
Robert     Raddocke,     Henry     Alexander, 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


357 


Wm.    Millett,    Robert    Stedman,    Tho. 
Wilson,   Mr.   Daniell,    Mary   Calloway, 

Susan    Bennett,    William    ,    Mary 

Hamon;     assigned     by     Mr.     Thomas 
Manninge. 

THOMAS  PICKLES,  150  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  30  Oct.  1657,  p.  137,  (202). 
In  the  parish  of  Blisland,  beg.  at  corner 
of  Thomas  Merridayes  land  &  by  Mr. 
Brushes  swamp.  Trans,  of  3  pers.* 
Renewed  18  Mar.  1662. 

JOHN  MAIOR  (Major),  300  acs.  on 
N.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.,  28  Dec.  1657, 
p.  137,  (202).  200  acs.  abutting  N.  E. 
upon  land  of  Joseph  Haies  &  N.  W. 
upon  land  of  John  Perine  &  100  acs. 
adj.  sd.  tract.  200  acs.  granted  unto 
Thomas  Bell,  3  Apr.  1651  &  assigned 
unto  sd.  Maior  &  residue  for  trans,  of 
2  pers.*    Renewed  9  Feb.  1663. 

THOMAS  PATTISON,  200  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  2 
June  1657,  p.  138,  (203).  Upon  the 
head  of  a  branch  of  Burnham  Cr.  Trans, 
of  4  pers.* 

SAME.  400  acs.,  same  county,  date 
&  page.  N.  W.  upon  land  of  Robert 
Chowninge.  200  acs.  granted  unto  Tho- 
mas Kidd  last  of  Mar.  1653  &  assigned 
unto  sd.  Pattison  &  200  acs.  for  trans. 
of  4  pers.* 

CAPT.  JOHN  ROGERS,  200  acs., 
Northumberland  Co.,  last  of  Aug.  1657, 
p.  138,  (204).  Nly.  upon  his  own  & 
land  of  Henry  Toppin,  Ely.  upon  land 
of  Mr.  Hugh  Lee  &  the  Gleabe  &  Wly. 
upon  land  of  John  Kent,  and  Mattapony 
Sw.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Abraham  Joyce, 
Roro  Molletta,  John  Roe,  Rich.  Smith. 

ALPHONSO  BALL,  350  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  31  Mar.  1658,  p.  139, 
(205).  Wly.  upon  marked  trees  of 
Richard  Smith  in  Capt.  Thomas'  Neck, 
Sly.  upon  land  of  Wm.  Taylor  &  Nly. 
towards  Pungoteague.  Trans,  of  7  pers: 
Ellinor  Collins,  Ann  Cooke,  Wm.  Scott, 
Sam.  Younge,  Rich.  Nuttingham,  Eliz. 
Nuttingham,   Step.  Yeo. 

MR.  THOMAS  TEAGLE,  Minister, 
200    acs.    Northampton    Co.,    31    Mar. 


1658,  p.  139,  (205).  Between  Nan- 
dewe  &  Caratocke  Creeks,  the  main  bay 
on  the  W.,  land  of  Jenkin  Price  now  in 
possession  of  John  Milby  on  the  N.  & 
E.  &  his  own  land  on  the  S.  Trans,  of 
4  pers:  Andrew  Abernath,  Arter  Gillett, 
Patrick  Comball,  Thomas  Davis. 

JOHN  JOHNSON,  Jr.,  400  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  31  Mar.  1658,  p.  139, 
(205).  S.  W.  upon  the  head  of  land 
of  Jno.  Williams  &  his  own  land  &  run- 
ning towards  the  seaboard  side.  Trans, 
of  8  pers:  John  Garnell,  Walter  Hawes, 
Tho.  Willson.    Renewed  29  Oct.  1662. 

WILLIAM  JORDAN,  (Jorden),  550 
acs.  Northampton  Co.,  31  Mar.  1658,  p. 
140,  (206).  300  acs.  granted  unto 
Robert  Jones,  24  July  1657,,  being  at 
Ocahanocke  Cr.,  beg.  on  Eastermost  part 
of  Alexander  Addison's  land;  which 
land  was  purchased  of  James  Barnaby. 
The  other  250  acs.  bounded  Nly.  on 
Ochanocke  Cr.,  Ely.  on  land  of  Arthur 
Upshott  and  John  Toulson  which  lies 
on  the  seaboard  side  Wly.  on  land  that 
was  Roger  Johns.  Trans,  of  5  pers: 
Alexander,  Thomas  &  Roger  Mountney; 
John  &  Leonard  Mountny. 

PETER  ASHTON,  Gent.,  550  acs. 
Northumberland  now  called  Westmore- 
land, Co.,  13  Mar.  1657,  p.  140.  (206). 
Nly.  upon  Patomeck  Riv  &  Wly.  upon 
land  of  George  Foster,  gent.  Granted 
unto  Thomas  Coniers  8  June  1657  & 
assigned  unto  sd.  Ashton. 

GEORGE  THOMPSON,  400  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  11  Mar.  1657,  p.  140, 
(207).  Wly.  upon  Tabbs  Cr.,  Ely.  up- 
on Fleets  bay  &  Sly.  upon  Nantipolzey 
Cr.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Robert  Franke, 
Elizabeth  Woolbridge,  Giles  Sallett, 
Jno.  Patriarch,  Gloys  Blaze,  Jno.  Guy, 
Tho.  Peteete,  James  Fisher. 

JOHN  SMITH  &  &  WM.  SMITH, 
the  sons  of  Robert  Smith  of  Yeocomo- 
coe,  500  acs  on  S.  W.  side  of  Aqua- 
conde  Riv.  the  W.  branch  of  Patomacke 
Riv.,  N.  Wly.  upon  land  called  Robert 
Lamden's.  25  Sept.  1657,  p.  141,  (207). 
Trans,  of  10  pers:  Mathew  Hill,  Ann 
Smith,  Sarah  Smith,  Rose  Gilbert,  Jno. 
Clare,  Wm.  Stratford,  Mary  Strattford, 
Alike  Rogers,  Ralph  Lee,  Su.  Lee. 


358 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


HENRY  VINCENT,  500  acs.  in  the 
freshes  of  Patomeck  Riv.,  on  N.  E.  side 
of  a  creek  opposite  to  Chingomuxon. 
25  Sept.  1657,  p.  141,  (208).  Trans. 
of  10  pers:  Jno.  Watson,  Moses  Hill, 
Rob.  Bryan,  Arthur  Kinge,  Tho.  Mor- 
rice,  James  JnoSon.  (Johnson),  Henry 
Boswell,  John  Berry,  Mary  Berry,  Ruth 
Mason. 

CAPT.  JOHN  BLAKE,  150  acs.  at 
the  head  of  Parkers  Cr.,  adj.  land  of 
Silvester  Baker.  1  Apr.  1658,  p.  141, 
(208).  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Franciscoe 
a  Negro,  Francis  Deplace,  Jno.  Carpen- 
ter.   Renewed  30  Oct.  1662. 

SAME.  400  acs.  In  Mathewes  Cr., 
a  branch  of  the  S.  branch  of  Nansamond 
Riv.  1  Apr.  1658,  p.  142,  (209). 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  Susan  Ashly,  Wm. 
Jones,  Tho.  Peterson,  Mary  Corbett, 
Wm.  Daniell,  Andrew  Ston,  Tymothy 
Jones,  Wm.  Norcott.  Renewed  as  above. 

SILVESTER  BAKER,  250  acs.,  1  Apr. 
1658,  p.  142,  (209).  Beg.  at  the  head 
of  Parkers  Cr.,  joining  his  own  land. 
Trans,  of  5  pers:  James  Mote,  Alexan- 
der Jemmison  (or  Jennison),  Bryan 
Farrell,  Margarett  Farrell,  Wm.  Low- 
der.    Renewed   18  Mar.   1662. 

MR.  THOMAS  BRIDGE,  10  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  24  Nov.  1657,  p.  142, 
(210).  In  Linn  haven  Parish,  bounded 
W.  S.  W.  with  Mr.  Hogskins  Cr.,  N. 
W.  upon  land  of  Georg  Ashwell  &  S. 
S.  E.  with  Mr.  Hogskins  land.  Trans, 
of  1  per.*    Renewed  18  Mar.  1662. 

CAPT.  EDWARD  STREATER,  3000 
acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  19  Mar.  1657, 
p.  143,  (210).  Upon  S.  side  of  Pato- 
meck Riv.  at  the  head  of  Niopsco  Cr., 
N.  E.  upon  Ochaquim  Riv.,  S.  E.  to 
Freston  pointe,  to  Mussell  Island. 
Granted  unto  Elizabeth  Burbage  30 
Mar.  1655  but  now  deserted  for  want 
of  seating  &  now  granted  for  trans,  of 
60  pers:  Miles  Atkinson,  Wm.  Brick- 
well,  Rich.  Hogson,  Thompson  Symons, 
Wm.  Massinborne,  Eliz.  Hooper,  Jno. 
Ward,  Jno.  Debarr,  Mary  Benfor,  Rob. 
Niccolls,  Rich.  Goodman,  Jno.  Throught, 
Wm.  Higginbottom,  Jno.  Morgan,  Bryan 
Harkin,  Rich.  Stanton,  Donaugho  Bryan, 


Wm.  Stephens,  Wm.  Sharpe,  Eliz. 
Brooke,  Dennis  Shollman,  Edwd.  Jones, 
Edwd.  Tanner,  Roger  Preston,  Tho. 
Beedes,  Robert  Mason,  Wm.  Wildy  (or 
Wildes),  Andrew  Bonny  (?),  Eliz. 
Ackers,  Rob.  Brenore,  Wm.  Mundy, 
Rowland  Trevers,  Edmond  Methoe, 
Wm.  Hurden,  Clemence  Herbert,  Paul 
Waller,  Garrett  Sennett,  Edwd.  Legge, 
Wm.  Paine,  Roger  Wilkins,  Margarett 
Davis,  Mary  Leamore,  Jno.  Clerke,  Jno. 
Henland,  George  Merritt,  Rich.  Browne, 
Rob.  Younge,  Tho.  Ringe,  Wm.  Webb, 
Jno.  Tunstead,  Jno.  Hackey,  Fra.  Ste- 
phens, Sam.  Yates,  Nath.  Pally,  Jno. 
Peury,  Wm.  Breeham,  Wm.  Greens, 
Richard  Nelmes,  Wm.  Rayle,  Wm. 
Clemence. 

JOHN  TEAGE  &  EDWARD  MOR- 
GAN, 150  acs.  on  the  N.  side  of  Home 
Harbour  Cr.,  beg.  on  the  river  side  at 
a  former  devdt.  purchased  by  them  of 
Lt.  William  Worlich.  16  Mar.  1657, 
p.  143,  (211).  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Jno. 
Peade,  Richard  Cherry,  Wm.  South. 

THOMAS  GRAVES,  55  acs.  about  a 
mile  beyond  the  head  of  Timber  neck 
Cr.,  Glocester  Co.,  20  Mar.  1657,  p. 
144,  (211).  Beg.  at  a  tree  dividing  this 
&  land  of  Christopher  Abbott,  Trans, 
of  2  pers:  Phillipp  Stephens,  Thomas 
Fear   (or  Feard). 

SAME.  240  acs.  Same  county,  date 
and  page,  (212).  On  a  swamp  betwixt 
Severne  &  the  Indian  Path.  Trans,  of 
5  pers:  Edward  Lasly,  Sam.  Claton, 
Phillipp  Soloman,  Judith  Haselwood. 

MR.  HENRY  CORBYN,  800  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  28  Apr.  1658,  p.  144, 
(212).  At  the  head  of  Moratticoe  Cr. 
in  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  at  an  Indian  Path 
that  goes  from  Moraticoe  to  Corotoman. 
Trans,  of  16  pers:  Edmond  Benson, 
Stephen  Webb,  Richard  White,  Susan 
Burham,  Penelope  Staples,  Jo.  Richings, 
Diana  Perkins,  Jno.  Freeman,  Gillam 
Parrett,  Mary  Molden,  Martha  Ludgford, 
Thomas  White,  2  Negroes. 

COL.    WILLIAM    CLAIBORNE,    3 

several  parcels  of  marsh  &  sunken  land 
on  N.  side  York  Riv.,  containing  1600 
acs.,    adj.    his    plantation    a    devdt.    of 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


359 


Ramongack,  24  Dec.  1657,  p.  145, 
(213).  600  acs.  at  lower  end  of  sd. 
devdt.,  lying  above  Col.  West',  adj.  S. 
on  the  neck  where  Wm.  Hodgson  now 
lives  &  bounded  by  the  Riv.  &  lands  of 
John  Austin,  Francis  Burnell  &  Wm. 
Blackey;  the  second  parcel  is  all  the 
marsh  called  Tococomans,  containing 
500  acs.,  over  against  land  lately  George 
Lyddall's;  &  500  acs.  called  Cohoke. 
Trans,  of  32  pers.* 

SAME.  5000  acs.  between  Mattapony 
&  Rappa.  Rivers,  on  both  sides  of  Pean- 
ketanck  main  swamp.  Same  date,  p. 
146,  (213).    Trans,  of  100  pers.* 

CAPT.    GEORG    LYDDALL,    2390 

acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  27  Dec.  1657,  p. 
146,  (214).  1750  acs.  behind  land  of 
Capt.  John  West  called  Chamockin,  run- 
ning to  Croshawes  extent;  640  acs.  on 
S.  side  of  Blacke  Cr.  behind  land  of 
Mr.  Brookes.  Renewal  of  patent  for 
1750  acs.  granted  him  25  Nov.  1654  & 
640  acs.  for  trans,  of  13  pers:  Wm. 
Hill,  Robert  Harman,  Francis  Smith, 
Thomas  Smith,  Jno.  Makepeace,  Thomas 
Masque,  Charles  Havannest,  Penelope 
Best,  Michaell  Tacker,  Roger  Parker, 
Daniell  Welch,  John  Davis,  Tho.  Jones. 

WILLIAM  PULLAM,  1000  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  20  Jan.  1657,  p.  147,  (215). 
On  S.  side  of  York  Riv.  &  N.  W.  side 
of  Black  Cr.,  beg.  at  Southermost  cor. 
of  land  surveyed  for  Mr.  Joseph  Cro- 
shawe.  Trans,  of  20  pers:  George 
Morris,  Ellianor  Morry,  Jno.  Brame  (or 
Braine),  Katherine  Baker,  Robert  Tucke, 
Elias  Williams,  Humphry  Jones,  Mary 
Clerke,  Ann  Clerke.  Rowland  Powell, 
Elliz.  Pullum,  Tho.  Blake,  Judith  Row- 
lett,  Fran.  Falkner,  James  Hulett,  Ste- 
phen Rogeris.  Vallentine  Morgan.  Wm. 
Syacknell,  Rebecca  Cole,  Henry  Clavill. 

MRS.  JANE  CLAIBORNE,  Spinster, 
1450  acs.  Northumberland  Co.,  10  Feb. 
1657,  p.  147,  (215).  On  N.  side  of 
great  Wiccocomocoe  Riv.,  Sly.  upon  land 
of  Mr.  John  Bardon,  Mr.  Radford, 
deed.,  &  William  Downeinge  (bought 
of  Martin  Cole,  Jno.  Edwards  &  others) 
&  Ely.  upon  land  of  Roger  Walters  & 
John  Motley.  750  acs.  granted  to  Col. 
William  Claiborne,  Secretary,  her  father, 


14  June  1653,  &  750  acs.  for  trans,  of 
14  pers:  Tho.  Mow,  Rich.  Dobbins, 
Wm.  Bingly,  John  Edgcome,  Wm.  An- 
gell,  Abra.  Paternoster,  Henry  Bellamy, 
Walter  Rich,  Robert  Norton,  Kath.  Sil- 
verton,  Andrew  Trelton,  Edward  Bar- 
nett,  Rich.  Albert,  Tho.  Minstrell. 

MR.  EDWIN  CONNAWAY,  & 
MRS.  HANNAH  MOUNTNEY,  Wid- 
dow,  1650  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  5  Feb. 
1657,  p.  148,  (216).  Near  the  head  of 
Corrotoman  Riv.,  S.  W.  upon  land  of 
sd.  Connaway,  a  little  below  Moratticoe 
path,  N.  W.  upon  a  branch  dividing 
this  from  land  of  Mr.  Dominick  Theriott 
(Ferriott).  Trans,  of  33  pers:  Henry 
Patten,  Thomas  Roffe,  Griffin  Thomas, 
Paul  Harwood,  Robert  Wilson,  Thomas 
Parrish,  Robert  Watts,  Fortune  Greene, 
Georg  Hawkins,  Alex  Mountney,  Tho- 
mas Mountney,  Jno.  Mountney,  Leonard 
Mountney,  Edward  Jno. son  (Johnson), 
Bryan  Harris,  Roger  Mountney,  Rich. 
Rostall,  Georg  Hewes,  Nicholas  Batt- 
inge,  Nicholas  Peryne,  Wm.  Berryman, 
Tho.  Howell,  Mary  Linsey,  Mary  Hall, 
Henry  Paulle,  Wm.  Edwinn,  Roger 
Winter,  Geo.  Shabin,  Wm.  Duce,  Edwd. 
Goodwinn,  Ann  Boyle,  Ann  Lightfoole, 
Rich.  Ashworth. 

WM.  WILDY,  1000  acs.  on  Wwd. 
side  of  Hopkins  Cr.  in  Patomeck  freshes. 
27  Jan.  1657,  p.  148,  (216).    Trans,  of 

20  pers:  Tho.  Radly,  Thomas  Chester, 
Jno.  Withers,  Dorathy  Jones,  Eliz. 
Cook,  Tho.  Hopkins,  John  Hopkins, 
Richard  Walter,  Isaack  Hill,  Eliz. 
Briggs,  Jno.  Morgan,  Jno.  Tally,  Robert 
Digby,  Mary  Sadler,  Elizabeth  James, 
Katherine  Chester,  Roger  Poyton,  David 
Lewellin,  Richard  Luckett,  Jno.  Adlome 
(or  Adcome).  Note:  This  patent  is 
taken  up  in  the  name  of  Georg  Col- 
clough. 

MR.  GEORGE  COLCLOUGH,  2266 
acs.  Northumberland  Co.,  25  Jan.  1657, 
p.  149,  (217).  Beg.  at  the  head  of 
Bridges  Cr.,  running  to  a  creek  issueing 
out  of  Patomeck  Riv.  known  by  the 
name  of  Herring  Cr.  &c.  600  acs.  by 
patent  dated  3  Sept.  1651;  850  acs. 
granted  unto  Elizabeth  Hull,  Widdowe, 

21  Oct.  1643,  by  her  sold  to  Thomas 
Broughton    &    Richard    Lake,    both    of 


360 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


whom  assigned  unto  sd.  Colclough;  250 
acs.  granted  unto  Jno.  Mattrom,  Jr.  10 
Dec.  1650,  assigned  unto  Wm.  Cocke 
&  by  Col.  John  Mattrom,  admr.  of  sd. 
Cocke,  assigned  unto  sd.  Colclough; 
300  acs.  granted  unto  John  Mattrom  4 
Jan.  1655  &  assigned  unto  sd.  Col- 
clough; 266  acs.  due  for  trans,  of  6 
pers.* 

WILLIAM  DREWE,  500  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  on  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv. 
about  14  mi.  above  Nanzemum  Towne, 
22  Mar.  1657,  p.  150,  (218).  Beg.  at 
a  swamp  dividing  this  &  land  of  John 
Weyre.  Granted  unto  John  Batt  & 
John  Phillipps  7  Sept.  1654,  by  them 
deserted  &  granted  unto  sd.  Drewe  for 
trans,  of  10  pers:  Foule  (?)  Watkins, 
Tho.  Udall,  Rich.  Smith,  Stafford 
Billson,  Katherine  Capman. 

JOHN  BAYLES,  550  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  15  Mar.  1657,  p.  150, 
(219).  300  acs.  granted  sd.  Bayley  30 
June  1650,  adj.  his  own  land  on  Ews. 
side  of  Cappetts  Cr.;  250  on  N.  W. 
side  of  sd.  Cr.  &  on  N.  E.  side  of  Pato- 
meck  Riv.,  which  land  was  granted  him 
10  Oct.  1652.    Renewed  9  Jan.  1662. 

RICHARD  HEABERD,  250  acs. 
Westmoreland  Co.,  27  Mar.  1658,  p. 
151,  (220).  S.  Ely.  upon  Anthony 
Munroes  Cr.  &  N.  Ely.  upon  land 
patented  by  William  Botham,  now  in 
possession    of    sd.    Heaberd.    Trans,    of 

5    pers:    Gerrott    Bicker,    (?)    his 

wife,  John,  Ficlor  (?),  Katherine  his 
children. 

CHARLES  EDMONDS  &  WILLIAM 
PULLAM,  830  acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  4 
May  1658,  p.  151,  (220).  Near  Mr. 
Ferrell's  land,  N.  W.  to  Georg  Smith's 
line  &  N.  W.  to  Dieiscum  Swamp. 
Trans,  of  17  pers:  Jane  Blinde,  Tho. 
Revells,  Wm.  Webb*  Renewed  18  Mar. 
1662. 

HENRY  GOODGAME,  334  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  1  Mar.  1657,  p.  151, 
(221).  Beg.  at  a  small  run  by  Mr. 
Martin  Baker's  land,  Sly.  upon  a  branch 
of  Skiminoe  &  Wly.  to  Thomas  Collins. 
Granted  unto  William  Pullam  1  Jan. 
1656  &  by  him  assigned.  Renewed  in 
name  of  Henry  Goodgaine  20  Oct.  1662. 


CHARLES  EDMONDS  &  WILLIAM 
PULLUM,  2520  acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  4 
May  1658,  p.  152,  (221).  Beg.  by 
Chickahominy  Sw.    Trans,  of  51  pers.* 

ROBERT  PRIDDY,  400  acs.  on  S. 
side  of  Yorke  Riv,  New  Kent  Co.,  8 
June  1658,  p.  152,  (222).  Bounded 
with  land  John  Butler,  Mr.  Joseph 
Croshaw  &  Mr.  Anthony  Langstone. 
Granted  unto  Robert  Priddy  28  June 
1655.  Renewed  11  Feb.  1663  in  name 
of  Tho.  Flaunders. 

FRANCIS  CLAY,  gent.,  200  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  8  June  1658,  p. 
152,  (222).  Upon  S.  side  of  Herringe 
Cr.,  upon  a  Western  branch  dividing 
this  &  land  of  Mr.  Yeo,  &  extending 
along  head  of  Major  Georg  Read's  land. 
Renewal  of  patent  in  his  name  dated  19 
Oct.  1653.  Renewed  9  Dec.  1662  in 
the  names  of  Wm.  Eaton  &  Adam 
Yarrett. 

SAME.  400  acs.  Same  county  & 
date,  p.  153,  (223).  On  S.  side  of  the 
head  of  Chickacone  Riv.,  S.  E.  upon 
land  of  Col.  John  Matrom  &  S.  S.  W. 
towards  branches  of  great  Wiccocomo- 
coe.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  4  June 
1655   . 

THOMAS  POWELL,  700  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  8  June  1658,  p.  153,  (223). 
Upon  W.  side  of  Corotoman  Riv.,  300 
acs.  granted  unto  William  Clapham, 
Jr.,  15  Sept.  1651,  assigned  unto  sd. 
Powell,  Sly.  upon  a  creek  dividing  this 
&  land  of  Anthony  Doine;  400  acs.  beg. 
at  his  own  land,  upon  a  branch  of  sd. 
river  dividing  this  &  land  of  Capt. 
Thomas  Hackett  (?).  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  26  Feb.  1653.  Renewed  11 
Dec.  1663  in  name  of  Wm.  Claphame. 

WILLIAM  CUSTIS,  200  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  22  Mar.  1657,  p.  153,  (224). 
Bounded  E.  S.  E.  on  land  of  Francis 
Stokely,  deed.,  now  in  possession  of  sd. 
Custis,  Sly.  on  Lt.  Col.  Edward  Doug- 
lace  &  Wly.  towards  land  of  Thomas 
Hunt.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Wm.  Custis, 
Wm.  Hamorell,  Elizabeth  Bankes,  Rich. 
Jones. 

THOMAS  BRERETON,  500  acs.  on 
S.  side  of  Patomeck  Riv.  at  the  mouth 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


361 


of  Machotick  Riv.  Granted  unto  Tho- 
mas Willkinson  18  Oct.  1650  &  by  him 
deserted.  8  June  1658,  p.  154,  (124). 
Trans,  of  10  pers:  Mary  Broder,  Jno. 
Multis,  James  Felton,  George  a  Scotch- 
man,  Francis  ,   Symon  Richardson, 

Mollettoe  (Mulatto  ?)  Jno.  Slattor,  Jno. 
Fornor,  Jno.  Gibbnie. 

THOMAS  PATTESON  &  ROBERT 
CHOWNINGE,  580  acs.  on  S.  side  of 
Rappa.  Riv.  between  the  head  of  Mr. 
Burnhams  Cr.  &  Pyancketank  Sw.  4 
Apr.  1658,  p.  154,  (225).  Trans,  of 
12  pers.* 

LEONARD  JOANES,  200  acs.  Rap- 
pa.  Co.,  23  Nov.  1657,  p.  154,  (226). 
On  Totoskies  Cr.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
John  Smith,  Elizabeth  his  wife,  Thomas 
Williams. 

MAJOR  JOSEPH  CROSHAW  (Chro- 
shaw),  500  acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  8  June 
1659,  p.  155,  (226).  On  S.  E.  side  of 
Mettepony  Riv.  on  N.  side  of  Thomas 
Sanders  land.  Granted  unto  Toby  West 
27  May  1654  &  by  him  assigned  unto 
sd.  Croshaw  &  due  for  trans,  of  10 
pers:  Tho.  Wharton,  Jno.  Taylor,  Jno. 
Fourth,  Wm.  Brown,  Cuthbert  Chro- 
shaw,  Noy  (?)  Croshaw,  Geo.  Tomlin, 
Eliz.  Broadert,  Rob.  Wigg,  Timothy 
Wigg. 

MR.  CHRISTOPHER  HARRIS,  450 
acs.  James  City  Co.,  neare  Richohock 
path,  21  Apr.  1658,  p.  155,  (227). 
Beg.  at  a  devdt.  of  Mr.  Sorrills  by  a 
branch  of  Timber  Sw.  Trans,  of  9 
pers:  Clemt.  Harris  twice,  Peeter  Arbo, 
Hen.  Richman,  Alex.  Rashbrook,  Wm. 
Alden,  Eliz.  Burnet,  Jane  Fowke,  Hanah 
Church. 

GEORGE  MARSH,  gent.,  2000  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  22  Mar.  1657,  p. 
155,  (227).  At  Matchepungoe.  Granted 
unto  Capt.  Francis  Pott  13  Feb.  1653, 
by  him  deserted.  1000  acs.  by  patent 
dated  13  Oct.  1657  &  1000  acs.  for 
trans,  of  20  pers.* 

EDWARD  WILLIAMS,  sonn  of  Ed- 
ward Williams,  500  acs.  5  June  1658, 
p.  156,  (228).  In  Potomeck  freshes, 
above  Puscatoway  &  adj.  his  own  land. 


Trans,  of  10  pers:  Tho.  Young,  James 
Gainsbrooke,  Abigail  Wills,  Edward 
Wale,  Eliz.  Dowseby,  Tho.  Shelton, 
Charles  Blackmore,  John  Greenfell,  Ro. 
Huffe,  Elizabeth  Sharpe. 

JAMES  CLOUGHTON,  500  acs.  in 
Petomeck  freshes  on  Swd.  side  of  the 
first  Cr.  above  Puscatoway.  5  June 
1658,  p.  156,  (228).  Trans,  of  10 
pers.* 

EDWARD  WILLIAMS,  500  acs.  in 
Petomeck  freshes,  on  the  Nwd.  side  of 
the  second  Cr.  above  Puscatoway.  5 
June  1658,  p.  156,  (229).  Trans,  of 
10  pers.* 

FRANCIS  CARPENTER,  1000  acs. 
in  Petomeck  freshes,  extending  N.  by 
W.  to  the  mouth  of  the  second  Cr. 
above  Puscatoway  &  E.  by  S.  along  land 
of  Mr.  Randolph.  5  June  1658,  p.  156, 
(229).    Trans,   of  20  pers.* 

CHRISTOPHER  ABBOTT,  350  acs. 
Gloster  Co.,  20  Jan.  1657,  p.  157, 
(229).  Beg.  by  the  great  swamp,  run- 
ning E.  by  N.  &c.  Trans,  of  7  pers.* 
Note:  "The  Certificate  for  the  sd  Land 
was  granted  by  the  Cort  of  Gloster 
bearinge  date  the  16th  of  Aprill  1656 
but  it  was  soe  torne  that  the  names 
could  not  bee  read." 

LT.  WILLIAM  NEWMAN,  575  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  20  Apr.  1658,  p.  157, 
(230).  Near  Ricohock  path,  running  to 
Mr.  Christopher  Harris'  corner  tree  &c. 
Trans,  of  12  pers.* 

JOHN  BENNETT,  150  acs.  West- 
moreland, 27  Apr.  1658,  p.  157,  (230). 
At  or  near  the  head  of  the  lower 
Matchotick  Riv.,  bet.  two  main  branches 
of  same  above  the  land  of  Mr.  Henry 
Roach.    Trans,  of  3  pers.* 

THOMAS  BREWER,  350  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  27  Apr.  1658,  p.  157, 
(231).  At  or  neare  the  head  of  devid- 
inge  Cr.,  bounding  N.  Ely  upon  the 
head  of  same  from  the  land  of  John 
Hull,  N.  Wly.  towards  land  of  Wil- 
liam Spicer  &  Mr.  Garlington.  Trans, 
of  7  pers:  Tho.  Pindleton,  Geo.  Pin- 
dleton,  Wm.  Harbutt,  Eliz.  Reinolls,  3 
Negroes. 


362 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


GEORGE  BRYER,  400  acs.  Rappa 
Co.,  16  Mar.  1657,  p.  158,  (232).  Up 
on  the  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg 
above  land  of  Mr.  James  Williamson 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  Wm.  Demster,  Sam 
Newman,  Jno.  Craig,  Anne  Willis,  Tho 
Gregory,  Tho.  Grey,  John  Fisher,  Jno 
Atheser.  Renewed  3  Dec.  1663  in  the 
name  of  Wm.  Denby,  assignee  of  Rich, 
James,  to  whom  this  land  was  granted 
24  Mar.  1661,  the  same  being  deserted. 

RICHARD  RUSSELL,  1000  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  25  Sept.  1657,  p. 
158,  (232).  Ely.  upon  Chinkahane  Cr. 
or  Mr.  Preslyes  Cr.,  Nly.  upon  land  of 
Col  Mattron,  sd.  Presly  &  Col.  Trussell, 
Wly.  upon  land  of  Gervase  Dodson  & 
Sly.  towards  Col.  Claiborne.  Trans,  of 
20  pers:  Richd.  Eaton,  Tho.  Arnoll, 
Jno.  Cross,  Tho.  Dakin,  Wm.  Cutts, 
Charles  Addams,  John  Varny,  Stephen 
Trapp,  Hen.  Bosworth,  Jane  Kinge, 
Wm.  Wilson,  Su.  Wilson,  Giles  Abbot, 
Joane  Emmett,  Abagile  Hare,  Wm.  Pot, 
Sarah  Pott,  3  Negroes. 

NICHOLAS  JERNEW,  1000  acs.  in 
Petomeck  freshes  beyond  Doegs  Island 
&  the  land  of  Col.  Speake,  Sly.  upon 
land  of  Robert  Lord  &  James  Magre- 
gory  &  Wly.  upon  a  seate  of  land  of 
John  Woods.  22  Mar.  1657,  p.  158, 
(232).  Trans,  of  20  pers:  Peter  Lefe- 
bur, Margaret  Lefebur,  Ab.  Lefebur, 
Isaack  Lefebur,  Jacob  Lefebur,  Tho. 
Williams,  Gilbert  Coop,  Anne  Burton, 
Patrick  Crispe,  John  Woodington  twice, 
Hen.  Hawkins,  Jno.  Reade,  Phillip 
Wadden,  Jno.  Giles. 


FRANCIS  BROWNE,  370  acs. 
Rappa.  Co.,  16  Mar.  1657,  p.  159, 
(233).  Upon  S.  side  of  Puscaticon  Cr., 
adj.  his  own  land.  Trans,  of  8  pers: 
James  Hughes,  Tho.  Jumper,  Mary 
Evelin,  Wm.  Brookes,  Jno.  Newburne, 
Fra.  Cooke,  Kath.  Greene. 

MA  TOR  THOMAS  GOODRICH, 
400  acs.  on  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  in 
the  freshes.  16  Mar.  1657,  p.  159, 
(233).  Trans,  of  8  pers:  4  Negroes; 
Ann  Blandon,  Ann  Higgins,  Ann  Hock- 
inge,  Wm.  Griffin.  Assigned  unto 
Antho.  Stephens  &  renewed  in  his  name 
18  Mar.  1662. 


WILLIAM  MARTIN,  gent.,  1000 
acs.  on  S.  side  of  Petomeck  Riv.,  West- 
moreland Co.,  15  Oct.  1657,  p.  159, 
(234).  On  S.  W.  side  of  Quantecot 
Cr.,  behind  land  surveyed  for  Honorable 
Col.  Samuell  Mathews.  Trans.  20  pers.* 

JOHN  WALKER  &  WILLIAM 
PEN,  360  acs.  in  Corotoman  Riv.  to- 
wards the  head  of  the  N.  W.  branch, 
N.  E.  by  a  lyne  of  trees  parting  this  & 
land  of  Nicholas  Hale.  16  Mar.  1657, 
p.  160,   (234).    Trans,  of  7  pers.* 

JOHN  SHERLOCK,  210  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.  on  Totoskey  Cr.,  23  Nov.  1657,  p. 
160,  (235).  Down  a  branch  or  gutt 
which  divides  this  from  the  land  of 
the  Indians.    Trans,  of  4  pers.* 

JAMES  HAWLY,  1000  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  13  Mar.  1657,  p.  160, 
(236).  On  S.  side  of  Petomeck,  on 
head  branches  of  Matchotick  Riv.,  beg. 
at  corner  of  George  Watts.  Trans,  of 
20  pers:  Susan  &  Rebecca  Orly,  Jno. 
Hill,  Dan.  Ryly,  Jno.  Benton,  Sarah 
Rasee,  Mr.  Geo.  Coltclough,  Mrs.  Ursu- 
la Coltclough,  Sarah  Tompson,  Phillip 
Nut,  Ral.  Stevenson,  Wm.  Osborne,  Jno. 
HighLand  (Highlander  ?),  Geo.  Cuny, 
Amy  Steevens,  Amy  Yeomans,  Elizabeth 
Esex.    Renewed  24  May  1664. 

COL.  HUGH  GWIN,  165  acs. 
Gloster  Co.,  11  Mar.  1657,  p.  161, 
(236).  Upon  S.  W.  side  of  land  of 
Edward  Clersifull  upon  Milford  Haven 
Cr.,  including  a  narrow  ridge  which 
runs  through  the  land.  Trans,  of  4 
pers:  4  Negroes:  Antonio,  Domingo, 
Calentia,  Mamia. 

THOMAS  LUCAS,  Jr.  &  VALEN- 
TINE ALLEN,  640  acs.  on  the  S.  side 
of  Rappa.  Riv.,  28  Sept.  1657,  p.  161, 
(237).  Beg.  about  2  mi.  above  Nanze- 
mum  Towne.  Trans,  of  13  pers:  Joane 
Hopkins,  Elizabeth  Hopkins* 

WILLIAM  BASNETT,  800  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  28  May  1658,  p.  161,  (237). 
Beg.  on  the  seaboard  side,  running  S. 
&c.  Trans,  of  16  pers:  Rob.  Perse- 
phers,  &  his  sonne,  Jno.  Hasnet,  Tho. 
Dickson,  Martin  Coale,  Amy  Morris, 
Eliz.    Bonden,    Gilbert    Fouch,    Richd. 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


363 


Satton,    Jone    Cornix,    Martha    Comix, 
Wm.  Cornix,  Tho.  Cornix,  Jane  Symons. 

RICHARD  PERROTT,  300  acs.  in 
Rappa.  Riv.  upon  the  S.  side  &  Ewd. 
side  of  Fisheing  Cr.  at  the  miles  end 
of  his  own  land.  6  Oct.  1657,  p.  162, 
(238).  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Richd.  Per- 
rot,  Mary  Crow. 

ANTHONY  LENTON,  400  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  on  the  Souther- 
most  branch  of  Yeocomocoe  Riv.,  1 
Dec.  1657,  p.  162,  (239).  Adj.  his 
own  &  land  surveyed  for  Mr.  Bacon. 
Trans,  of  8  pers.* 

RICHARD  PERROTT,  850  acs.  31 
Jan.  1657,  p.  162,  (239).  450  acs. 
about  18  mi.  up  Rappa.  Riv.  on  the  S. 
side  thereof,  N.  E.  from  the  mouth  of 
Wading  Muddy  Cr.  to  mouth  of  Fishe- 
ing Cr.,  &  400  acs.  at  the  miles  end  of 
sd.  tract,  between  lands  of  Minor  Min- 
sen  &  Robert  Kempe  on  the  N.,  &  Wil- 
liam Copeland  on  the  S.  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  13  Mar.  1649  &  400  acs. 
for  trans,  of  8  pers:  Sarah  Keggs,  Dan. 
Simpson,  Wm.  Dunston,  Henry  Sharpe, 
Jno.  Hadly  (?),  John  Hunt,  Arthur 
Jackson,  Jno.  Scoldinge. 

JOHN  GILLETT,  600  acs.  on  S.  side 
of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  at  miles  end  of  his 
own  land.  28  Sept.  1657,  p.  163,  (240). 
Trans,  of  12  pers:  James  the  old 
Cooper,  Wm.  Cresby,  Xpter.  Heard, 
Jno.  Atkins,  Jno.  Stead,  Elizabeth 
Wood,  Thomas  Liddell,  David  Hopkins. 
Note:  200  acs.  the  remainder  of  rights 
of  a  patent  of  1000  acs.  relinquished. 
Note:  Renewed  in  name  of  Mr.  Tho. 
Button,  Mar.  18,  1662,  having  married 
the  relict  of  sd.  Gillett. 

ANTHONY  STEPHENS,  850  acs. 
Westmoreland  Co.,  1  Sept.  1657,  p. 
163,  (241).  S.  Ely.  upon  lower 
Matchotix  Riv.,  E.  N.  E.  towards  land 
of  John  Wood  &  George  Watts. 
Granted  unto  Henry  Roach  13  Sept. 
1654,  by  him  deserted  &  now  due  for 
trans,  of  17  pers:  Himself e  4  times, 
Jno.  Pritchard,  Wm.  Dixon,  Wm. 
Bridges.  Note:  This  patent  is  recov- 
ered from  sd.  Stephens  by  sd.  Roach  by 
order  of  Govr.  &c.  &  Stephens  assigned 


the  rights  to  Robert  Armstrong  &  Robert 
Lynnee. 

GEORGE  POYNDEXTER  (Poindex- 
ter)  &  GEORGE  TOMPSON,  350  acs. 
Gloster  Co.,  15  Mar.  1657,  p.  163, 
(241).  At  the  head  of  Eagle  Nest  Cr. 
in  Milford  Haven,  beg.  at  marked  trees 
of  Richard  Longe,  running  to  the  head 
of  greene  branch  which  lyes  upon  the 
back  of  Conglins  land.  Trans,  of  7 
pers:    Mary     Joanes     1     Negro,     Eliz. 

Depthford,  Jno.  ,  Alex.  Duncombe, 

Christian   Bensly    (?),   James   Knuckly. 

THOMAS  BURDITT,  1050  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  11  June  1658,  p. 
164,  (242).  Ely.  on  the  seaboard  side, 
Nly.  on  land  formerly  belonging  unto 
Francis  Stokely,  now  in  possession  of 
William  Custis  &  Sly.  on  land  of  Wil- 
liam Emiss  knowne  by  the  name  of 
Piminoe.  Due  by  virtue  of  the  rights 
of  a  patent  granted  unto  his  father 
William  Burditt  conteyning  the  sd. 
quantity  &  by  him  deserted. 

JOHN  BASBY,  50  acs.  New  Kent 
Co.,  28  Nov.  1657,  p.  164,  (243). 
Adj.  his  own  land,  running  W.  by  N. 
to  Arrow  reed  Swamp.  Trans,  of  Ed- 
ward Taylor. 

CHRISTOPHER  REYNOLDS  (Rei- 
nolds-Reynolls),  350  acs.  Isle  of  Wight 
Co.,  25  Nov.  1657,  p.  164,  (243).  Beg. 
at  miles  end  of  land  patented  by  Chris- 
topher Reynolds,  deceased,  running 
along  Cypress  Cr.  to  land  lately  in  pos- 
session of  Mr.  Nutt.  Trans,  of  7  pers: 
Joseph  Kerby,  Jno.  Becham,  Jno. 
Moode,  William  Seller,  Edmond  Hows- 
den,  Margaret  Langridge,  Susan  Stub- 
bers. 

THOMAS  BROUGHTON,  1000  acs. 
above  the  Doegs  Hand  &  Col.  Speakes 
land  in  Petomeck  freshes,  S.  upon  sd. 
river,  Ely.  upon  land  called  Mr.  Wm. 
Wildyes.  20  Nov.  1657,  p.  164,  (244). 
Trans,  of  20  pers:  Jno.  Rodman  (or 
Redman)  Ann  Pomfrett,  Mary  Jess, 
Tho.  Darley,  Edward  Hull,  4  Irish  ser- 
vants, Roger  Fishpoole,  James  Poppey, 
Wm.  Clements,  James  Vazey,  Wm. 
Daniell,  Edward  Cooke,  Tho.  Haydin, 
Mary  Rutland,  Ed.  Arrundell,  Tho. 
Adames,  Prescilla  Parkes. 


364 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


THOMAS  WRIGHT,  298  acs.  on  N. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  about  a  mile 
from  same  on  the  W.  side  of  Pepetick 
Cr.,  extending  E.  by  S.  towards  land  of 
Tho.  Hawkins.  26  Nov.  1657,  p.  165, 
(244).    Trans,    of   6   pers.* 

JOHN  PAYNE,  653  acs.  on  N.  side 
of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  at  miles  end  of 
his  land  purchased  of  Fra.  Hobbs.  2 
June  1657,  p.  165,  (245).  Trans,  of 
13   pers.* 

THOMAS  BROUGHTON,  288  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  23  Mar.  1657,  p. 
165,  (245).  N.  E.  towards  land  of 
John  Mattrom,  gent.  Granted  unto 
Hugh  Lee,  22  Apr.  1654,  by  him  de- 
serted &  now  granted  for  trans,  of  6 
pers:  William  O  Kelly,  Mary  Smith, 
Rich.  Symons,  one  Irishman,  Edward 
Darby. 

SAME.  300  acs.  in  same  county.  1 
Dec.  1657,  p.  166,  (246).  Upon  the 
head  of  the  broad  Cr.,  between  Yeoco- 
moco  &  Metopony  Rivers,  N.Wly.  upon 
land  of  Anthony  Lenton  &  S.  Ely.  upon 
land  of  Lawrence  Dameron.  Granted 
unto  William  Bacon,  deserted  &  now 
due  for  trans,  of  6  pers:  Tho.  Davis, 
Wm.  Richards,  Mary  Edwards,  Kat. 
Chester,  Edward  Conny,  Rebecca  Haines. 

SAME.  100  acs.  Same  county,  date 
&  page.  N.  E.  upon  land  of  Jane  Perry, 
Widdow,  &  N.  W.  upon  Mettonpony 
Riv.  Granted  unto  Nicholas  Sebrell  30 
Jan.  1652,  deserted  &  due  for  trans,  of 
2  pers:  Richard  Cardy,  Humphry  Pes- 
ter. Renewed  in  name  of  Abraham 
Joyes   18  Mar.  1662. 

SAME.  70  acs.  Same  county,  date  & 
page,  (247).  S.  W.  upon  a  creek  divid- 
ing this  &  land  of  Thomas  Hayles  & 
N.  W.  upon  land  of  Edward  Walker. 
Granted  William  Bedlam  29  Nov.  1652, 
deserted  &  now  due  for  trans,  of  2  pers: 
Roger  Lar^e  &  John  Tanner. 

JOHN  STOELL,  1000  acs.  upon  a 
branch  of  Petomeck  freshes  beyond  land 
of  Col.  Speake,  Ely.  upon  Hand  Cr.  & 
Nly.  by  land  of  Mr.  Jernew.  27  Nov. 
1657,  p.  166,  (247).  Trans,  of  20 
pers.*  Assigned  unto  Phillip  Carpen- 
ter &  renewed  in  his  name  1  Feb.  1663. 


ABRAHAM  WATSON,  150  acs., 
called  by  name  of  Batchelours  banke, 
James  City  Co.,  10  Feb.  1657,  p.  167, 
(248).  E.  by  S.  upon  land  of  David 
Mansell,  W.  by  N.  upon  the  Gleab  & 
S.  by  W.  upon  the  back  river.  Trans, 
of  3  pers:    Mary  Goch,  Tho.  Carpenter. 

JOHN  KNIGHT,  300  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  20  Mar.  1657,  p.  167,  (248). 
On  N.  side  of  James  Riv.  &  S.  E.  side 
of  Chichohominy,  beg.  on  the  head  of 
a  path  leading  to  Capt.  Bennett  Free- 
man &  Edward  Harrison,  N.  to  Thomas 
Young,  to  Delonies  marked  trees,  thence 
to  Sir  William  Berkelyes  &c.  Trans,  of 
6  pers.* 

JOHN  HANDKIN,  200  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  16  Mar.  1657,  p.  167,  (249). 
Beg.  at  corner  of  Thomas  Bigins,  to 
Richohock  path,  to  Henry  Ashwells 
path,  to  Mr.  Bakers  corner  tree  &c. 
Trans,  of  4  pers.* 

THOMAS  CHRISTIAN,  100  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  15  Jan.  1657,  p.  167, 
(249).  On  N.  side  of  James  River  & 
E.  side  of  Chichohominy  Riv.,  along 
trees  of  Capt.  Bridges  Freeman,  S.  W. 
on  trees  of  Thomas  Young  &  N.  W.  on 
Hand  Cr.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Tho. 
Christian,  John  Wilkinson. 

DARCY  OATLY,  350  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  10  Feb.  1657,  p.  168,  (250). 
On  N.  side  of  James  Riv.,  beg.  at  the 
main  swamp  &  running  along  Edward 
Kinge  (or  Knight)  marked  trees  &c. 
Trans,  of  7  pers:  Darcy  Oatly,  Jno. 
Bayly,  Wm.  Stronge,  Xph.  Wingfeild, 
Ralph  Elkins,  Math.  Wms.  (Williams), 
Phillip  Gapper.  Assigned  unto  Thomas 
Hollyday  &  renewed  in  his  name. 

THOMAS  YOUNGE,  250  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  15  Jan.  1657,  p.  168,  (250). 
On  N.  side  of  James  Riv.  &  E.  side  of 
Chichohominy  Riv.,  N.  on  land  former- 
ly Mr.  James  &  now  in  possession  of 
John  Knight,  E.  on  Pagan  Cr.,  S.  to- 
wards Thomas  Harvyes  land  &  Wly.  on 
Capt.  Bennett  Freeman's  land  formerly 
Col.  Bridges  Freeman's.  Trans,  of  5 
pers:  Isabell  Neale,  Hen.  Shiply,  Jno. 
Cobb,  Martha  Homes.  Renewed  18 
Mar.  1662. 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


365 


THOMAS  HARRIS,  850  acs.  Surry 
Co.,  13  Feb.  1657,  p.  168,  (250).  On 
S.  side  of  James  Riv.  &  on  N.  W.  & 
S.  E.  sides  of  the  head  of  the  sunken 
marsh  above  &  below  the  mill,  Nly.  on 
the  rich  Neck  &  land  of  Robert  Webb 
&  Mr.  Edward's  lands,  Ely.  on  William 
Carter,  Sly.  on  Chipoaks  path  to  the 
mill  &  on  Mr.  Green's  land.  300  acs. 
granted  unto  Mr.  Jno.  Holmwood  26 
Oct.  1650  &  by  Homwood  assigned  to 
sd.  Harris  &  550  acs.  for  trans,  of  11 
pers.* 

ROBERT  CHOWNINGE,  200  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  8  Feb.  1657,  p.  168, 
(251).  Upon  W.  S.  W.  branch  of 
Sunderland  Cr.  alias  Burnham  Cr.,  beg. 
at  a  small  island  running  along  land 
patented  by  Henry  Nicholas,  Ely.  down 
Coplins  branch  &c.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
John  Connoland,  Gill  Hargessey,  Will 
Sawyer,  Math.  Parry. 

GILES  DRIVER,  200  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  12  Mar.  1657,  p.  169, 
(251).  Beg.  on  the  Cypress  Swamp, 
corner  to  750  acs.  belonging  to  Ambrose 
Bennett's  heyr.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Eliza- 
beth Williams,  Elizabeth  Renolds,  Jno. 
Goodale,  James  Crow. 

SAME.  100  acs.  Same  county,  date 
&  page,  (252).  Beg.  at  the  swamp 
which  parts  Christopher  Reynolls  & 
John  Reynolls  land.  Trans,  of  2  pers: 
Anne  Jones,  Thomas  Butcher.  This 
patent  joined  with  the  above  200  acs. 
renewed  in  his  name  13  Jan.  1661. 

CAPT.  AUGUSTINE  WARNER,  348 
acs.  Gloster  Co.,  11  Feb.  1657,  p.  170, 
(252).  200  acs.  at  the  head  of  a 
branch  issuing  out  of  Pyanketank  Riv., 
beg.  at  a  tree  dividing  this  and  another 
tract  belonging  to  him;  148  acs.  upon 
the  head  of  Seavern  in  Mockjack  Bay, 
E.  S.  E.  upon  land  of  sd.  Warner,  N. 
N.  W.  to  land  of  Col.  Barnard  &c.  by 
the  Indian  path.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  5 
Irish,  John  Watson,  James  Marrow. 
Renewed  29  Mar.   1662. 

LAWRENCE  SMITH,  119  acs.  Glos- 
ter Co.,  11  Feb.  1657,  p.  170,  (253). 
Upon  the  head  of  a  branch  issuing  into 
Ware  Riv.    in   Mockjack   Bay,   running 


along  trees  of  Lt.  Col.  Jno.  Walker  &c. 
Trans,  of  3  pers:  Geo.  Musick,  Rob. 
Cooper,  Roger  Greene. 

NICHOLAS  OWEN  &  THOMAS 
JOANES,  26  acs.  Northumberland  Co., 
20  Nov.  1657,  p.  170,  (254).  Beg.  in 
a  small  swamp  dividing  this  &  land  of 
Thomas  Wilford  &  running  to  corner 
tree  on  land  of  Edward  Henly.  Trans, 
of  1  pers.* 

THOMAS  HAWKINS,  621  acs.  on 
S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  on  upper 
side  of  land  of  John  Catlett  &  Ralph 
Rowzee,  bounding  on  land  of  Capt. 
Luich  (or  Linch),  &c.  20  Nov.  1657,  p. 

170,  (254).  600  acs.  granted  to  Tho- 
mas Lucas,  Sr.  7  Aug.  1650  &  pur- 
chased by  sd.  Hawkins,  &  21  acs.  for 
trans,  of  1  per.* 

HENRY  PEYTON,  400  acs.  West- 
moreland Co.,  1  Nov.  1657,  p.  170, 
(255).  On  S.  side  of  Petomeck  Riv. 
knowne  by  the  name  of  Sandy  or  Rag- 
gett point  opposite  to  the  Doegs  present 
plantation.  Granted  unto  Richard  Cods- 
ford  6  Sept.  1654  &  assigned  unto  sd. 
Peyton  &  due  by  new  rights  for  trans, 
of  8  pers.*  Assigned  unto  Timothy 
Greene  18  Mar.   1662. 

EDWIN  CONAWAY,  gent.,  2500 
acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  (no  date)  p.  171, 
(255).  On  the  S.  E.  side  &  nigh  the 
head  of  Corotoman  Riv.,  running  to 
corner  oake  standing  neare  a  run  to- 
wards Jno.  Merridow.  Renewal  of  2 
former  patents. 

PHILLIP  CARPENTER,  480  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  29  Aug.  1657,  p. 

171,  (256).  150  acs.  Nly.  upon  Metto- 
pony  Riv.,  &  330  acs.  adj.  land  of  John 
Chambers  &  N.  W.  by  Henry  Tappins 
land.  150  acs.  granted  unto  sd.  Cham- 
bers 10  Oct.  1652  &  by  George  Colt- 
clough,  his  any.,  assigned  unto  sd.  Car- 
penter. The  residue  for  trans,  of  7  pers: 
Wm.  Hall,  John  Harris,  Nicholas  Wal- 
ter, Georg.  Browne,  Moses  Turner, 
Prudence  Lowe,  Marmadick  Allen. 

VINCENT  STANFORD,  300  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  6  June  1657,  p.  172, 
(257).    On    N.    side    of    Pyanketanke 


366 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Riv.,  beg.  at  the  head  of  a  devdt.  of 
land  of  Col.  John  Mattrons  &c. 
Granted  unto  John  Ashly  &  Thomas 
Hamper  10  Mar.  1653,  by  them  as- 
signed, &  due  for  trans,  of  6  pers.* 

ROBERT  VAULX,  Mercht.,  2000 
acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  on  S.  side  of 
Petomeck  Riv.  16  Nov.  1657,  p.  172, 
(257).  Trans,  of  40  pers:  David 
Coard,  Clemt.  Spiller,  Hum.  Wheeler, 
Anne  Cullin,  Dan.  Smith,  Wm.  Price, 
Wm.  Tompson,  Fra.  Humphries,  Cuth. 
Mollineux,  Jno.  Win,  Eliz.  Howard, 
Jone  Greyhan,  Wm.  Steerman,  David 
Jones.,  Tho.  Howard. 

JOHN  BENNETT,  500  acs.  N.Ely, 
upon  Petomeck  Riv.  in  the  freshes  above 
Anacosta,  S.Ely,  upon  land  of  Mr.  Tho- 
mas Woodhouse  &  John  Wood.  15 
July  1657,  p.  173,  (258).  Trans,  of  10 
pers.* 

VINCENT  COCK  (Cocke),  500  acs. 
N.Ely,  upon  Petomeck  Riv  in  the  freshes 
above  Anacosta  S.Ely,  next  above  Jno. 
Wood  &  Mr.  Woodhouse.  15  July 
1657,  p.  173,  (258).  Trans,  of  10 
pers.* 

WILLIAM  KNOTT,  500  acs.  N.Ely, 
upon  Petomeck  Riv.  in  the  freshes  above 
Anacosta,  S.Ely,  upon  land  called  by 
him  Vincent  Cocks.  15  July  1657,  p. 
173,  (258).  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Ed- 
mond  Ayres  twice,  Nicholas  Megen, 
Peter  Orfle,  Wm.  Eubanke,  Jno.  Squire, 
Jno.  Corlis,  Darby  Stanlin,  Ann  Buckett, 
Ri.  Harman. 

ROBERT  CLERKE,  2000  acs.  upon  a 
creek  issuing  out  of  Petomeck  freshes 
above  the  narrowes  at  Puscatoway  which 
divides  this  from  a  tract  aperteining  to 
John  Wood,  Rob.  Smith  &  John  Ayres. 
15  July  1657,  p.  173,  (259).  Trans,  of 
40  pers.* 

LT.  COL.  ROBERT  ABRALL  & 
JOHN  PIGG,  1280  acs.  New  Kent  Co., 
10  July  1658,  p.  174,  (259).  On 
branches  of  Whorecock  Sw.,  beg.  by 
the  path  behind  Tattopecksick  feild. 
Trans,  of  26  pers:  Jno.  Larrat,  Randall 
Burne,  Jno.  Roberts,  Anne  Davenport, 
Edwd.  Hudson,  James  Scot,  James  Patte- 


son,  Rose  Allin,  Geo.  Reniston,  John 
Wenn,  Hen.  Ekine,  Edward  Byard,  Tho. 
Blancher,  Robt.  Joanes,  Mary  Andersin, 
Sarah  Williams,  Richd.  Branch,  Robt. 
Harmon,  Edwd.  Roberts,  Hen.  Brother- 
ton,  Tho.  Cockerell,  John  Barchard, 
Geo.  Lee,  Ro.  Pratt,  Nicholas  Moore, 
Wm.  Norcot. 

LT.   COL.   ROBERT  ABRALL,    550 

acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  10  July  1658,  p. 
174,  (259).  On  branches  of  Peanke- 
tanck  Swamp;  300  acs.  beg.  at  Capt. 
Claibornes  corner  by  the  swamp  &c. 
The  residue  beg.  by  an  Indian  Path  & 
running  to  sd.  Clayborne's  line  &c. 
Trans,  of  11  pers:  Fra.  Miller,  Richd. 
Preston,  John  Mottron,  Jane  Bolt,  John 
Mathew,  John  Patterson,  Hen.  Cope- 
land,  John  Base,  John  Sparke,  Esebius 
Willms.,  Daniell  Peirce. 

JAMES  BAUGHAN,  250  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  9  June  1658,  p.  174,  (260).  Adj. 
tract  surveyed  for  Samuell  Parry,  run- 
ning to  a  small  Indian  feild  &c.  Trans, 
of  5  pers.*    Renewed  18  Mar.  1662. 

THOMAS  NO  WELL,  700  acs.  War- 
wick Co.,  9  July  1658,  p.  175,  (260). 
Bounded  W.  with  James  Riv.,  S.  with 
Queens  Cr.,  Nly.  with  the  mouth  of 
Skiffs  Cr.  &  the  back  Cr.  &  Ely.  with 
Queene  hive  path  which  adj.  land  of 
Capt.  Hurd.  Trans,  of  14  pers:  Robert 
Kents,  Robert  Hudgson,  Wm.  Porter, 
Silvester  Tatman,  Tho.  Bromsall,  Georg. 
Hancock,  Peter  Adams,  Jno.  Spiltimber, 
Jone  Butler,  Mary  Lustle,  Wm.  John- 
son, Richard  Davis,  Wm.  Willie,  Jno. 
Holdinge. 

FRANCIS  BROWNE,  1100  acs.  Rap- 
pa.  Co.,  9  June  1658,  p.  175,  (261). 
Upon  S.  side  of  Puscaticon  alias  Coxes 
Cr.,  towards  the  head  thereof.  830  acs. 
by  patent  dated  10  May  1654  &  270 
acs.  for  trans,  of  6  pers.*  Renewed  18 
Mar.  1662. 

ALEXANDER  SHEAPARD,  600  acs. 
in  Chichohominy  Riv.  on  N.  side  of 
James  Riv.,  on  N.  E.  side  of  Chicho- 
hominy Riv.  called  Mettopony,  beg.  at 
lower  side  of  Richohock  Cr.  10  July 
1658,  p.  175,  (261).  Due  sd.  Sheapard 
as  marrying  the  daughter  &  heyr  of 
Francis  Barrett,  deed. 


Patent  Book  No. 


367 


HENRY  ROACH,  140  acs.  West- 
moreland Co.,  4  June  1658,  p.  176, 
(262).  Bounding  on  Matchotick  Riv., 
extending  from  his  own  to  land  of  Mr. 
Isaack  Allerton.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Wm. 
Beasly,  Jno.  Draper,  Eliz.  Russell. 

JOHN  BENNETT,  210  acs.  West- 
moreland Co.,  4  June  1658,  p.  176, 
(262).  Extending  up  a  small  creek 
dividing  this  &  land  of  Henry  Roach. 
Trans,  of  5  pers:  Stephen  Banbury, 
Sam.  Goslinge,  Robert  Warner,  & 
Mable 

WILLIAM  CORDEROY,  150  acs.  on 
W.  side  of  the  main  swamp  upon  the 
head  of  Crany  Cr.  on  S.  side  of  land  of 
Jeffry  Bew.  15  March  1658,  p.  176, 
(262).  Granted  unto  him  6  Mar.  1654 
&  renewed  by  new  rights  for  trans,  of 
3  pers.* 

JOHN  BISHOPP,  son  &  heir  of  John 
Bishop,  dec'd.,  300  acs.  James  City  Co., 
25  Mar.  1658;  p.  176,  (263).  Wly. 
upon  land  of  Thomas  Crouch,  Nly.  up- 
on land  of  George  Powell.  Granted  to 
his  father  4  July  1641,  deserted  &  now 
renewed  for  trans,  of  6  pers:  Wm. 
Marriott,  Georg  Duell,  Wm.  Roberts, 
Joane  Hill,  Thomas  Jarrell,  Abigail  Ad- 
cockes,  Martin  Johnson,  Margery  Long- 


S.  W.  side  &  towards  head  of  Lower 
Chotanck  Cr.  &  opposite  another  tract 
belonging  to  them.  Granted  to  them  4 
July  1653,  assigned  unto  Dunkin  Roy 
&  Michaell  Vanlondegon;  assigned  by 
sd.  Roy  unto  sd.  Vanlongdegon  who  as- 
signed unto  sd.  patentees  &  now  re- 
newed by  new  rights  for  trans,  of  9 
pers.* 

MAJOR    JAMES    GOODWIN,    650 

acs.  in  Petomeck  freshes  in  the  first  Cr. 
above  Col.  Speakes  point  at  a  tree  divid- 
ing this  &  land  of  John  Stoile  &  extend- 
ing W.  N.  W.  towards  land  of  William 
Davis.  4  June  1658,  p.  178,  (264). 
Trans,  of  13  pers:  James  Goodwin  4 
times,  Jno.  Waler,  Henry  Molson,  Nath. 
Smith,  Eliz.  May  (a  dash  appears  after 
this  name  which  may  indicate  the  same 
has  not  been  completely  given)  Eliz. 
Blackburne,  Henry  Edge,  Henry  Baxter, 
Peter  a  Negroe,  Eliz.  Adams. 

WILLIAM  SMITH,  300  acs.  being  a 
marsh  known  by  the  name  of  Ballase- 
Marsh,  Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  17  Mar. 
1657,  p.  178,  (265).  Beg.  at  the  mouth 
of  Hughes  Cr.  running  by  James  Riv., 
opposite  to  the  mouth  of  the  deepe 
swampe.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Jno.  Younge 
&  his  wife,  Alice  Jeakins,  Hannah 
White,  Benjamin  Pride,  Edward  Smith. 


GEORGE  MORRIS,  208  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  4  July  1658,  p.  177,  (263). 
On  S.  side  of  York  Riv.,  running  S.  to 
Mr.  Hoccadayes  Swamp.  108  acs.  by 
purchase  from  Thomas  Holmes  &  100 
for  trans,  of  2  Negroes.  Assigned  by 
Mr.  Thomas  Holmes. 

RICHARD  SEARLE  &  WILLIAM 
SPENCE,  60  acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  4 
June  1658,  p.  177,  (263).  Beg.  at  an 
oak  dividing  this  &  land  of  John  Ben- 
nett, N.  N.  W.  up  Nomeny  Riv.,  E. 
N.  E.  along  land  of  Rice  Maddock  & 
W.  along  land  of  sd.  Bennett.  Trans, 
of  2  pers:  Robert  Rawson,  Pearsie 
Wms.   (Williams) 

JAMES  MAGREGORY  &  HUGH 
FOUCH,  450  acs.  Northumberland  Co., 
11    June    1658,    p.    177,    (264).    Upon 


JOHN  LEWIS  &  ROBERT  JONES, 
Gent.,  2000  acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  28 
June  1658,  p.  178,  (265).  At  a  small 
run  on  S.  side  of  Chapawansick  Cr. 
almost  at  the  head.  Trans,  of  40  pers: 
Bernard  Halliwell,  John  Nellson,  Alice 
Mercer,  Henry  Hart,  Andrew  Stephen- 
son, Symon  Johnson,  Mary  Rosser,  Wm. 
Peynton,  Phillip  Bayly,  Jane  Hughes, 
Edmond  Price,  Thomas  Barker,  Wm. 
Treaton,  Phillip  Langham,  Katherine 
Barditt,  James  Heyware,  Roger  Hide, 
Tho.  Maye,  Eliz.  Morris,  Jone  Bennett, 
Wm.  Cooper,  Tho.  Coleman,  Step. 
White,  Mary  Ayres,  Walter  Ray,  Tho. 
Jenkins,  Rich.  North,  Marmaduk  Keib- 
ler,  Edward  Hall,  Roger  May,  Joseph 
West,  Richard  Grey,  Math.  Harrison, 
Peter  Sherwood,  Rebecca  Maior  (Major 
?),  Henry  Mason  Tho.  Joll,  Charles 
Morley,  Rich.  Lawrence,  Martha  Robin- 


368 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


JAMES  ALLEN,  450  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  25  Nov.  1657,  p.  179, 
(265).  Ely.  upon  little  Wicocomoco 
Riv.  or  Cr.,  Sly.  upon  a  branch  of  same 
dividing  this  &  land  of  Richard  Span 
&  Henry  Watts,  Nly.  upon  a  lyne  of 
marked  trees  parting  this  &  land  of 
John  Motly  &  running  "to  a  white  oake 
being  an  Mkt  corner  tree  knowne  to 
divers  besides  them  that  have  Land 
neare  adjacent."  Granted  sd.  Allen  20 
June  1651,  renewed  9  June  1653,  for 
300  acs;  &  150  acs.  for  trans,  of  3 
pers.* 

GILBERT  MEDCALFE,  Merchant, 
500  acs.  Gloster  Co.,  15  Mar.  1657,  p. 
179,  (266).  Bounded  on  N.  &  N.  E. 
with  Peanketanke  Riv.  &  a  great  marsh, 
E.  upon  land  of  Abraham  Moone  &  N. 
W.  upon  a  swamp  opposite  sd.  marsh. 
Granted  unto  John  Woodward,  dec'd., 
17  May  1655  &  by  Joseph  Woodward, 
brother  &  heir,  assigned  to  sd.  Med- 
calfe.  Trans,  of  10  pers.*  Deserted  & 
renewed  in  name  of  Major  David  Cant, 
25  Mar.  1664  for  trans,  of  10  pers:  9 
Negroes  &  Mary  Vaughan. 

EDWARD  PALMER,  400  acs.  in 
Petomeck  freshes,  lyeing  up  a  creek  be- 
tween land  of  Capt.  Brent  called  Pusca- 
toway  Neck  &  land  of  Henry  Vincent. 
4  June  1658,  p.  179,  (267).  Trans,  of 
8  pers:  Mary  Palmer,  Roger  Shackle- 
forth,  Tho.  Hall,  Thomas  Kibble,  Guy 
Knight,  Jane  Annis,  Richard  Palmer. 

JOHN  COX,  600  acs.  Rappa.  Co., 
12  Oct.  1657,  p.  180,  (267).  On  N. 
side  of  the  freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  N. 
N.  E.  by  the  upper  side  of  land  sur- 
veyed for  John  Weyre,  W.  N.  W.  on 
the  head  of  land  of  Richard  Coleman 
&c.  to  the  beg.  on  N.  E.  side  of  Warr 
Cr.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  28  Nov. 
1654,  due  by  new  rights  for  trans,  of 
12  pers.* 

ROBERT  YOUNGE,  710  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  being  upp  Puscaticon  alias  Coxes 
Cr.,  9  June  1658,  p.  180,  (267).  Adj. 
land  of  John  Kilman;  including  an 
Hand  lyeing  at  a  small  creek's  mouth 
called  Merry  Bayle.  450  acs.  granted 
to  Samuell  Parry,  7  Feb.  1652  &  as- 
signed unto  sd.  Younge  &  260  acs.  for 


trans,  of  6  pers:  James  Baggs,  Wm. 
Morley,  Thomas  Haines,  Anthony  Rone, 
Wm.  Syms,  Mary  Brockett. 

LT.  COL.  JOHN  WALKER,  100 
acs.,  11  June  1658,  p.  181,  (268).  Lye- 
ing in  a  branch  of  Milford  Haven,  beg. 
at  George  Billips  land.  Granted  unto 
John  Smith  6  Dec.  1652  &  relinquished. 
Now  due  for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Ellis 
Mackeneckhogah,  Sander  Mackonack. 
Assigned  to  George  Billips  &  renewed 
in  his  name  18  Mar.  1662. 

PHILLIP  HUNLY,  300  acs.  on  W. 
side  of  Budden  Cr.  in  Mockjack  Bay. 
11  June  1658,  p.  181,  (269).  Trans, 
of  6  pers:  Sanders  Blacke,  Sanders 
Mackdowell,  Wm.  MackLoyd,  Wm. 
Morrison,  Mackin  Mackloyd,  Andrew 
Trumbell. 

RICHARD  WILCHIN,  600  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  26  July  1658,  p.  181,  (269). 
On  N.  E.  side  of  Mettopony  Riv.,  adj. 
land  of  Ralph  Greene.  200  acs.  on 
Wwd.  side  of  the  maine  swamp  of 
Arsantano  Cr.  400  acs.  on  N.  W.  with 
land  of  Major  Lewis,  N.  E.  with  maine 
swamp  of  Arsantane  Cr.  alias  Tarsan- 
tyan  &  S.  W.  behind  land  of  Capt. 
Robert  Abrall.  Granted  by  two  patents 
unto  Major  Wm.  Lewis,  dated  25  May 
1654  &  8  June  1655  &  by  him  assigned 
unto  sd.  Wilchin.  Renewed  20  Oct. 
1662. 

JNO.  WILLIAMS  &  STEPHEN 
NORMAN,  1200  acs.  Westmoreland 
Co.,  24  Nov.  1657,  p.  182,  (270). 
800  acs.  S.  S.  W.  on  land  of  Nicholas 
Lambsdon  &  running  to  upper  head  of 
Machotix  Riv.  400  acs.  adj.  their  own. 
land.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  16  July 
1654.  Renewed  18  Mar.  1662  in  name 
of  Jno.  Williams  &  Edward  Prescott,  to 
whom  it  was  assigned  by  sd.  Norman. 

ANTHONY  HAYNES,  640  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  5  Oct.  1658,  p.  182,  (270). 
Beg.  on  S.  W.  side  of  Whorecock  Sw., 
running  W.  by  S.  by  William  Goffes 
land  &c.  Trans,  of  13  pers:  David 
Steed,  Fortune  Perkins,  Thomas  Coates, 
Richard  Lendy,  Batt  Ingerbanke. 

JOHN  PIGGE,  300  acs.  New  Kent 
Co,  10  July  1658,  p.  182,   (271).    On 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


369 


branches  of  Peanketanke,  beg.  at  cor. 
of  John  Axoll's  land.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
Roger  Denne  (?),  Jno.  Younge,  Wm. 
Bowyen,  Tho.  Hardicke,  James  Spritt, 
Rees  Hughes. 

GEORG  CHAPMAN,  1500  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  9  Aug.  1658,  p.  183,  (271). 
On  N.  side  of  Mattopany  Riv.,  beg.  on 
E.  side  of  Whorecock  Sw.  Trans,  of 
30  pers:  Georg  Morse,  David  Briggs, 
Richard  Button,  Andrew  Morgan,  Tho. 
Wasbrow,  Thomas  Doodinge,  Wm. 
Haines,  Wm.  Hutton,  Ro.  Stoute,  An- 
drewe  Stellson,  Jone  Forrest,  Mary 
Wasbrough  Edmond  Rutland,  James 
Harris,  Nicholas  Fishpoole,  Jno.  Wm. 
(William),  Dobson  Whittson,  Thomas 
Jones,  Peter  Redman,  Tho.  Parker,  Tho. 
Payton,  Ann  Gibbs,  Charles  Merredith, 
James  Martin,  Andrew  Rayne,  Wm. 
Cowdery,  Mary  Cooper,  Tho.  Cawlins, 
Tho.  Moody. 

JOHN  AXOLL  &  ANTHONY 
HEYNES  (Haines),  600  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  10  July,  1658,  p.  183,  (271). 
Beg.  in  a  valley  of  Peanketanke 
branches.  Trans,  of  12  pers:  James 
Vauner  (or  Vanner),  Tho.  Jones,  Sy- 
mon  Perry,  Bellinda  Hayes,  Edward 
Terrell,  Georg  Goddinge,  Eliz.  Panfack, 
Elizabeth  Streete,  Tho.  Hinde,  Rich. 
Hill,  Jno.  Rose,  Jno.  Lackham.  Re- 
newed in  name  of  John  Axoll,  18  Mar. 
1662,  sd.  Haines  having  assigned  to  him. 

NICHOLAS  GIBSON,  orphant  of 
Tho.  Gibson,  800  acs.  New  Kent  Co., 
13  Aug.  1658,  p.  183,  (272).  Adj.  his 
own  land.    Trans,  of  16  pers.* 

RALPH  LEFTWICH  (Leiftwick), 
300  acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  10  Aug.  1658, 
p.  184,  (272).  On  branches  of  Peanke- 
tanke, beg.  in  John  Pigges  line.  Trans, 
of  6  pers.*    Renewed  8  Oct.  1662. 

HENRY  CORBYN  (Corbin),  gent., 
700  acs.  on  N.  E.  side  of  Mattapany 
Riv.,  about  25  mi.  up  the  great  swamp. 
15  Sept.  1658,  p.  184,  (272).  Trans. 
of  14  pers:  Timothy  Donir,  Elizabeth 
Pickett,  Henry  James,  Owen  Davis, 
Richard  Frassall,  David  Watkins,  Jno. 
Henley,  Francis  Brooke,  John  Birke, 
Tho.  Brookes,  Jane  Hornshey,  Jno. 
Sleadman,  Jno.  Lewis,  Jno.  Hagg. 


JOHN  MADDISON,  300  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  28  Aug.  1658,  p.  184,  (273). 
On  N.  E.  side  of  Mattapany  Riv.  &  N. 
E.  side  of  Whorecock  Sw.  Trans,  of  6 
pers:  John  Estowe,  Jno.  Durham, 
Lewis  Montague,  Mathew  Nicholls, 
John  Felkes,  Tho.  Bishopp. 

COL.  SAMUEL  SMITH,  of  Wicco- 
comoco,  gent.,  350  acs.  Northumberland 
Co.,  28  Sept.  1658,  p.  185,  (273).  N. 
E.  upon  Patomeck  Riv.,  running  to  land 
of  Richard  Tompson,  N.  W.  upon  Hulls 
thickett,  S.Wly.  upon  land  of  Georg 
Coltclough.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  Eliza- 
beth Read,  Bryan  an  Irishman,  Tony  a 
Negro,  Besse  a  Negro,  Jone  Kitchen- 
man,  Mary  Hutton,  Ann  Lever. 

ANTHONY  HAYNES,  1000  acs. 
Rappa.  Co.,  5  Sept.  1658,  p.  185, 
(273).  On  branches  of  Pascatticon  Sw., 
beg.  by  an  Indian  path.  Trans,  of  20 
pers:  Mary  Willis,  Thomas  Boyes, 
Margery  Puttinge,  Hurstwell,  Tho.  Bell, 
Rich.  Damsies,  Rich.  Joy,  Mary  Joy, 
Jane  Irish  (Irish  person  ?),  Georg 
Devarr,  Georg  Poole,  Thomas  Porter, 
Wm.  Todd,  Lawrence  Yorke  sheire, 
Mathew  Pane,  Richard  Smith,  Richard 
Steel,  Asable  Tutmarsh,  Charles  Quarles. 

ANTHONY  HAINES,  500  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  Same  page  &  date,  (274). 
On  N.  side  of  Mattapany  Riv.  in  the 
forke  of  Whorecock  Sw.,  bounded  N. 
with  Martin  Palmer's  land.  Trans,  of 
10  pers.* 

PETER  FOARD  &  EDWARD 
RACLE,  640  acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  28 
Aug.  1658,  p.  186,  (274).  On  N.  side 
of  Mattapany  Riv.  Trans,  of  13  pers: 
Thomas  Baile,  Richard  Drewe,  Mary 
Willis,  Benjamin  Houlsworth,  Margarey 
Partwerthy,  Edward  Howe,  Jane  Heire, 
Wm.  Graves,  Ann  Graves,  Wm.  Tren- 
cher, Jno.  Gilles,  Tho.  Bannister,  & 
Elinor  Rohoske. 

GEORG  CHAPMAN,  1000  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  8  Aug.  1658,  p.  186,  (274). 
On  N.  side  of  Mattapany  Riv..  Trans, 
of  20  pers:  Walter  Price,  James  Kinge, 
Tho.  Talbott,  John  Fry,  Nich.  Richinge, 
Robert  Munday,  Marg.  Hawkins,  Alice 
Hobbs    John    Williams,    Wm.    Sidney, 


370 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


John  Padey,  Anth.  Moore,  John  Peace, 
Tho.  Hadway,  Joseph  Lucas,  Rich. 
Keyes,  Mary  Guny,  Tho.  Reekes,  Wm. 
Mills,  Tho.  Shore.  Renewed  18  Mar. 
1662. 

WM.  HAY,  gent.,  250  acs.  Yorke 
Co.,  1  Sept.  1658,  p.  186,  (275).  Wly. 
on  land  of  John  Hayward  &  the  south- 
ern bounds  running  by  a  slash  of  water 
which  parts  the  Co.  of  Yorke  &  the  Co. 
of  Denby.  Trans,  of  5  pers:  Thomas 
Stephens,  Wm.  Roberts,  Edward  Bray- 
brooke,  Charles  Perry,  Richard  Willson. 
Renewed  29  Oct.  1662. 

JOHN  PIGGE,  700  acs.  New  Kent 
Co.,  5  Sept.  1658,  p.  187,  (275).  On 
N.  side  of  Mattapony  Riv.  on  branches 
of  Winkepin  Sw.,  beg.  at  corner  trees 
in  Ralph  Leftwich's  line.  Trans,  of  14 
pers:  Ann  Berry,  Henry  Wills,  Mar- 
garett  Reynolds,  Wm.  Blease,  Wm. 
Harmar,  Robert  Florine,  Wm.  Old, 
Alexander  Gregory,  Alice  Potter,  Elias 
Parkamore,  James  Sanders,  Tho.  Meeres, 
Alexander  Baker,  Tho.  Dickson. 

THOMAS  JONES,  1000  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  5  Sept.  1658,  p.  187,  (275).  On 
branches  of  Pascatticon  Sw.  Trans,  of 
20  pers:  Thomas  Tipper,  Tho.  Redd- 
inge,  Katherine  Browne,  James  Clerke, 
Eliz.  Jones,  Thomas  Gill,  Wm.  Boulin 
(or  Bevlin)  Edwd.  Smith,  Robert  Abra- 
ham, Thomas  Joines,  Jno.  Morgan, 
Wm.  Corman. 

ROBERT  JONES,  500  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  14  Oct.  1658,  p.  187,  (276). 
On  N.  side  of  Mattapany  Riv.,  beg.  at 
land  of  John  Exoll  on  N.  side  of  a 
branch  of  Peanketanke  Sw.  Trans,  of 
10  pers:  Jno.  Clay,  Jno.  Norman,  Jo. 
Parker,  Wm.  Luck,  Robert  Goswaine  (or 
Gascoine),  Ann  Colchester,  Wm.  Florri- 
day,  David  Roberts,  Gregory  Nash,  James 
Rounds.  Assigned  to  Rowland  Williams, 
who  assigned  to  Edward  Gresham  in 
whose  name  it  was  renewed  18  Mar. 
1662. 

MR.  CUTHBERT  POTTER,  600  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
7  Oct.  1658,  "about  nine  of  the  Clock 
in  the  morneinge'',  p.  188,  (276).  On 
S.   E.   side   of   the   Southermost   branch 


of  Burnhams  Cr.  alias  Boswells  Cr.,  and 
backing  a  parcell  of  land  purchased  by 
sd.  Potter  of  one  Evan  Davis  &  towards 
Nimcock  Cr.  &  adj.  a  tract  formerly 
taken  up  by  sd.  Potter.  Trans,  of  12 
pers.* 

GEORG  CHAPMAN,  1500  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  1  Sept.  1658,  p.  188,  (277). 
On  N.  side  of  Mattepany  Riv.  &  on 
Ewd.  side  of  Horecock  Sw.,  beg.  at  his 
own  land.  Trans,  of  30  pers:  Mary 
Hewes,  Charles  Winterne,  Mary  Bate- 
man,  John  Bateman,  Mabell  Jones,  John 
Knight,  Wm.  Hanwell,  Robert  Wright, 
Miles  Grev,  Fran.  Acton,  Tho.  Winn, 
Thomas  Willett,  Richard  Pery,  Roger 
Stephens,  Robert  Wilson,  Tho.  Haw- 
kings,  Mary  Griggs,  James  Harcey, 
Rich.  Willmod,  Robert  Brome,  Tho. 
Franke,  Mary  Woodbridge,  Robert 
Sallitt,  John  Fisher,  Wm.  Norton,  Tho. 
Felton,  Wm.  Port,  Walter  Rigson,  Sy- 
mon  Heale,  Tho.  Edgcome. 

WILLIAM  WOODLAND  &  BEN- 
JAMIN HOWARD,  280  acs.  New  Kent 
Co.,  7  Oct.  1658,  p.  189,  (277).  Adj. 
land  of  Georg  Smith.  Trans,  of  6 
pers:  John  Friske,  Mary  Knollinge, 
Thomas  Sansom,  Henry  Wasborow,  Ed- 
ward Parke,  Eliz.  Darry. 

RICHARD  LEWIS,  500  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co.,  7  Oct.  1658  "about  eleaven  of 
the  Clock",  p.  189,  (278).  Upon  the 
head  of  Sunderland  Cr.  alias  Burnhams 
Cr.,  beg.  on  the  S.  branch  of  the  three 
runns,  W.  upon  land  of  Thomas  Paddi- 
son,  S.  W.  to  Mr.  Tho.  Wilby  &  Robert 
Midleton's  land.  Trans,  of  10  pers.* 
Note:  The  rights  of  this  patent  are  due 
by  a  former  patent  granted  to  John 
Sharpe,  by  him  assigned  to  sd.  Lewis  & 
by  him  relinquished.  Note:  The  rights 
of  this  patent  are  placed  to  another  of 
sd.  Lewis,  Mr.  Cuthbert  Potter  having 
a  former  grant  to  sd.  land.  16  Jan. 
1658. 

ROBERT  YOUNGE,  200  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  2  Dec.  1657,  p.  189,  (278). 
Towards  the  head  of  Coxes  Cr.,  beg.  at 
a  branch  dividing  this  &  another  tract 
of  sd.  Young's.  Granted  to  Oliver 
Segar,  last  of  Jan.  1653,  assigned  to 
Robert  Armstrong,  who  assigned  to  sd. 
Younge. 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


371 


MAJOR  JAMES  GOODWIN,  1000 
acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  on  S.  side  of 
Patomeck  Riv.,  &  upon  S.  &  N.  side  of 
Chapawansick  Cr.,  15  Mar.  1657,  p. 
190,  (279).  E.  upon  land  of  Col. 
Mathewes.  Granted  unto  Lt.  Col. 
Nathaniell  Pope,  6  Sept.  1654,  by  him 
deserted  &  due  for  trans,  of  20  pers: 
Eliz.  Turner,  Eliz.  Sparrow,  Daniell 
Ocathame,  Lem.  Augulliott,  Tho.  Vin- 
cent, Jno.  Faire,  Mary  Hudson,,  Jno. 
Bartley,  Jno.  Greene,  Jno.  Hewett, 
Dennis  Fother,  James  Shane,  Darby 
Hoccaday,  Heughes  ,  Teague  Grin- 
sin  (?),  Henry  Hamond,  Sarah  Rose, 
Jno.  Chesheire,  Tho.  Hardy,  Abigail 
Cherrey. 

REES  HUGHES,  860  acs.  New  Kent 
Co.,  1  Mar.  1657,  p.  190,  (279).  410 
acs.  on  S.  W.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.  From 
Georg  Smith's  N.  corner  tree,  N.  W. 
to  Mr.  Langstone's  line  &c.  410  acs. 
by  patent  dated  2  Dec.  1656  &  450  acs. 
for  trans,  of  9  pers:  Adam  Denny, 
Robert  Gray,  Jno.  Willins  (or  Willms.), 
David  Morgan,  Mary,  Morgan,  Mary, 
Martha,  Ann  Lerry  (?),  Robert  Kiggs, 
Wm.  Tiller. 

WILLIAM  JACOB,  660  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  25  Aug.  1656,  p.  191,  (280). 
400  acs.  lyeing  in  a  roade  or  bay  being 
the  second  bay  which  issues  into  Lin- 
haven  Riv.  &  adj.  land  of  George  Keth; 
260  acs.  in  Linnhaven  on  the  Eastern 
shore,  running  to  Kemps  line  Sec.  400 
acs.  by  patent  dated  19  Oct.  1643  & 
residue  for  trans,  of  6  pers:  Wm.  An- 
drewes,  Darby  Kelly,  Ann  Breakes, 
Christian  Christians,  Margarett  Sibill, 
Wm.  Hill. 

JOHN  CURTIS,  2000  acs.  in  the 
freshes  of  Patomeck  Riv.  above  Anno- 
costin,  3  Dec.  1657,  p.  191,  (281). 
Trans,  of  40  pers.* 

SAME,  1200  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  15 
Mar.  1657,  p.  192,  (281).  Upon  the 
head  of  Parrotts  Cr.  upon  the  S.  side  of 
Rappa.  Riv..    Trans,  of  24  pers.* 

JOHN  DRAYTON,  2000  acs.  West- 
moreland Co.,  26  Nov.  1657,  p.  192, 
(281).  On  S.  side  of  Patomeck  Riv., 
S.  E.  upon  a  branch  dividing  this  &  the 


Doages  Island,  N.  E.  upon  a  branch 
dividing  this  &  land  of  Mr.  Thomas 
Speake,  N.  W.  upon  land  of  Major 
Milles  Carey  &  S.  W.  upon  Ohaquinn 
Riv.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  25  Nov. 
1654. 

JOHN  GILLETT,  800  acs.  on  S.  side 
of  Rappa.  Riv.,  about  15  mi.  above 
Nanzemum  Towne,  opposite  to  land 
purchased  by  him  of  Richard  Coleman. 
Trans,  of  16  pers.*  28  Sept.  1657,  p. 
192,  (282).  The  rights  are  taken  out 
of  a  patent  of  1000  acs.  granted  to  sd. 
Gillett,  7  Sept.  1654  which  he  hath 
relinquished.  Renewed  18  Mar.  1662 
in  name  of  Mr.  Tho.  Button,  he  having 
married  the  relict  of  sd.  Gillett. 

JAMES  ALLEN,  450  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  25  Nov.  1657,  p.  193, 
(282).  Ely.  .upon  Wiccomoco  Riv. 
Cr.,  Sly.  upon  a  branch  of  same  divid- 
ing this  from  land  of  Richard  Spann  & 
Henry  Watts  &  Nly.  upon  a  line  of 
trees  dividing  this  &  land  of  John 
Motly.  300  acs.  by  patent,  20  June 
1657  &  residue  for  trans,  of  3  pers.* 

WILLIAM  STROUDER,  (Strowder), 
of  Nomeny,  Cooper,  500  acs.  Westmore- 
land Co.,  27  Apr.  1658,  p.  193,  (283). 
On  S.  side  of  Herring  Cr.  by  some 
called  Nominy  Riv.,  running  by  a  small 
branch  where  land  of  Mr.  Wm.  Peirce 
begins,  S.  by  W.  to  an  Indian  feild  &c. 
&  opposite  plantation  of  Mrs.  Yoell. 
450  acs.  granted  to  Gabriell  Odger  16 
Sept.  1657,  assigned  unto  sd.  Stroudar 
&  50  acs.  for  trans,  of  1  per.* 

LEUIT.    DAVID    PHILLIPPS,    350 

acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  25  Sept.  1657, 
p.  194,  (284).  250  acs.  SIv.  on  Hollis' 
Cr.,  Wly.  upon  land  of  John  Vaughan 
&  N.Ely,  towards  land  of  Wm.  Freake; 
100  acs.  S.Ely,  upon  sd.  land,  N.Ely. 
towards  land  of  Lt.  Col.  Pope.  200 
acs.  granted  to  Mathew  Tomlin  14  May 
1653,  assigned  unto  Gervase  Dodson  & 
by  him  assigned  unto  sd.  Phillipps,  & 
150  acs.  for  trans,  of  3  pers.* 

CHRISTOPHER        GARLINGTON, 

1050  acs.  Northumberland  Co.,  27  Apr. 
1658,  p.  194,  (284).  650  acs.  upon  S. 
side  of  Dennisses  Cr.  which  issues  upon 


372 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


S.  side  of  great  Wiccocomoco  Riv.,  ex- 
tending upon  marked  trees  of  Jno.  Gam- 
lin  &  Isaack  Weaver;  400  acs.  at  the 
head  of  the  aforesd.  tract,  S.Wly.  to 
land  of  Tho.  Brewer  &  N.Ely,  upon 
land  bought  of  Howett.  650  granted  to 
John  Howett  29  July  1652,  assigned  un- 
to sd.  Garlington  &  residue  for  trans, 
of  8  pers:  Thomas  Harris  twice,  Mary 
Harris,  Amy  Hoskins,  Mathew  Harris, 
Wm.  Allen,  Dorothy  Parke,  Hugh 
Wattson. 

GERVASE  DODSON,  2000  acs.  in 
Petomeck  freshes  above  Capt.  Brent; 
1500  acs.  N.Ely,  upon  land  of  Mrs. 
Burbage  or  Capt.  Streater  &  S.Wly.  up- 
on land  of  one  Codsford  &  others,  run- 
ning N.Wly.  betwixt  two  creeks  called 
Yosococomocoe  &  Nyopscoe;  500  acs. 
S.Ely,  upon  land  of  Mr.  Henry  Vincent. 
27  Aug.  1658,  p.  195,  (285).  Trans, 
of  40  pers:  Ann  Starr.  (No  other 
names).  Note:  This  patent  assigned  to 
Mr.  Henry  Corbyn  &  by  him  made  over 
to  his  daughter  Alice  Corbyn  as  by  deed 
dated  19  Oct.  1660. 

RICHARD  SEARLE,  550  acs.  West- 
moreland Co.,  25  Sept.  1657,  p.  195, 
(286).  On  N.  side  of  Armsbyes  Cr. 
Trans,  of  11  pers:  Wm.  Watts,  Hen. 
Martin,  Tho.  Harris,  Arthur  Shore,  Tho. 
Attenborow,  Rich.  Peace,  Mary  Clare, 
Susan  Browne,  Rich.  Searle  twice,  Jno. 
Barber. 

MR.  HENRY  VINCENT,  650  acs. 
in  Patomeck  freshes  opposite  (but  some- 
thing below)  Pascatoway  Cr.,  upon  the 
lower  side  of  a  small  cr.,  S.Ely,  upon 
sd.  river,  N.Ely,  upn  sd.  small  creek 
which  "wee  supposeth  divides  from  the 
land  of  Capt.  Brent  or  his  sonne  or 
sister"  &c.  16  Sept.  1657,  p.  196, 
(286).  Trans,  of  3  pers.*  Note:  This 
land  is  granted  to  Capt.  Peter  Jennings 
17  Oct.  1660. 

CAPT.  JOHN  ENGLISH,  1000  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  25  Sept.  1657,  p. 
196,  (286).  N.Ely,  upon  the  head  of 
Broad  Cr.  between  Yeocomoco  &  Matta- 
pany  Rivers,  N.Wly.  upon  land  of  An- 
thony Linton,  S.Ely,  upon  land  of  Law- 
rence Dameron  &  Shepard  &  S.  W. 
upon  a  branch  which  is  included  in  Mr. 


Sackford  Brewsters  land  &c.  300  acs. 
granted  unto  Mr.  Wm.  Bacon,  9  Oct. 
1653,  assigned  to  Mr.  Gervase  Dodson 
who  assigned  to  sd.  English  &  for  trans, 
of  14  pers:  Wm.  Harris,  Jno.  Greene, 
Michaell  Sparkes,  Mary  Hatton,  Barna- 
by  Sprigge,  Tho.  Spicer,  Robert  Watts, 
Oliver  Kinge,  Rice  Jones,  Jone  Thorp, 
Dan.  Wells,  Wm.  Alcock,  Ann  Hughes, 
Tabitha  Collins. 

WM.  LITTLE,  100  acs.  Northumber- 
land Co.,  4  June,  1655,  p.  196,  (287). 
On  S.  side  of  great  Wiccocomicoe  Riv., 
N.  W.  upon  land  of  Daniell  Crosby, 
E.S.E.  towards  land  of  Wm.  Thomas,  & 
S.S.W.  towards  Gervase  Dodson.  Trans, 
of  2  pers.*  (Granted  by  Edw.  Diggs, 
Govr.) 

WILLIAM  LITLE  to  JOHN  HUD- 
NALL  (Hudnell),  8  Dec.  1658  &  in- 
dorsed on  back  of  pattern  20  May  1658, 
p.  197,  (287).  Assignment  of  above 
patent.  Witnesses:  Edward  Cockshead 
&  Henry  Dawson.  Rich.  Felgat,  Clk. 
Northumberland  Co. 

By  Richard  Bennett,  Govr. 

DANIELL  CROSBY,  150  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  10  Sept.  1654,  p.  197, 
(288).  On  S.  side  of  great  Wiccoco- 
micoe Riv.,  N.  W.  upon  land  of  Mr. 
Nicholas  Morrice.  Trans,  of  3  pers;* 
Note:  Assigned  to  John  Hudnall,  20 
May  1657.  Witness:  John  Haynes, 
Rich.  Flinte,  Clk.  Assignment  to  Pall 
Bayley  of  150  acs.  in  same  county,  20 
June,  1656,  p.  197,  (288).  Witnesses: 
Clk.  Acknowledged  in  court  21  July 
1656. 

PALL  BAYLEY,  of  Isle  of  Wight 
Co.  to  John  Hudnall,  assignment  of  the 
above.  20  Nov.  1656,  p.  198,  (289). 
Witnesses:  Nicholas  Cobb  &  Rich. 
Flinte,  Clk.    Ack.  in  Ct.  20  May,  1657. 

EDWARD  COLES,  500  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  10  Oct.  1652,  p.  198, 
(289).  Upon  Southermost  side  of 
Wiccocomicoe  Riv.,  upon  the  head  of  a 
devdt.  of  Richard  Span,  running  to  land 
of  James  Allen  &  S.  W.  side  of  Chicka- 
cone  Path.    Trans,  of  10  pers.* 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


373 


Assignment  of  the  above  to  Richard 
Spanne,  20  Sept.  1653,  p.  198,  (290). 
Witnesses:  Gervas  Dodson  &  Charles 
Ashton.    Rich.   Flinte,    Clk. 

Assignment  of  the  above  to  Henry 
Watts,  20  Feb.  1655,  p.  198,  (290). 
Witness:  John  Motley.  Rich.  Flinte, 
Clk. 

By  Samuell  Mathewes,  Esq.  Govr. 

JERRARD  ERRINGTON,  500  acs. 
on  N.  W.  side  in  the  freshes  of  Rappa. 
Riv.,  about  12  mi.  above  Nansemond 
Towne,  beg.  opposite  to  land  of  John 
Weyre.  6  June  1657,  p.  199,  (291). 
Renewal  of  patent  dated  7  Sept.   1654. 

JOHN  HUDNALL,  250  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  24  Aug.  1658,  p.  199, 
(291).  On  S.  side  of  great  Wiccoco- 
mocoe  Riv.,  150  acs.  N.N.E.  upon  sd. 
river  near  a  place  called  the  Hand, 
W.N.W.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Nicholas 
Morris;  100  acs.  N.Ely,  upon  the  river, 
W.N.W.  upon  land  of  Daniell  Crosby, 
E.S.E.  towards  land  of  Wm.  Thomas  & 
S.S.W.  towards  land  of  Gervase  Dod- 
son. 150  acs.  granted  to  Daniell  Cros- 
by, 10  Sept.  1654,  assigned  to  Paul 
Bayly,  who  assigned  to  sd.  Hudnall  & 
100  acs.  to  William  Little,  4  June  1655 
&  assigned  to  sd.  Hudnall. 

HENRY  WATTS,  650  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  7  Sept.  1658,  p.  200, 
(292).  On  S.  side  of  great  Wiccoco- 
mocoe  Cr.,  Ely.  upon  land  of  Richard 
Spann,  Nly.  upon  land  of  James  Allen, 
Wly.  upon  land  of  John  Moteley  &  Sly. 
upon  land  of  Thomas  Dorrow  &  Chick- 
acone  path.  500  acs.  granted  to  Ed- 
ward Coles,  10  Oct.  1652,  assigned  unto 
Richard  Spann,  who  assigned  to  sd. 
Watts  &  150  acs.  for  trans,  of  3  pers: 
Henry  Watts,  Francis  Berkeley,  Rose 
Page.    Renewed   13   Jan.    1661. 

WM.  HALL,  Senr.,  200  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  10  Feb.  1657,  p.  200,  (293). 
On  the  N.  side  of  James  Riv.,  E.  on 
old  Knights  land,  S.  on  Mr.  Morgan, 
W.  on  Phillip  Charles,  Michaell  Good- 
ale  &  John  Merriman  &  N.  on  the  main 
branch  of  Warraney  Cr.  Trans,  of  4 
pers.* 


LT.  COL.  NATHANIELL  POPE,  1500 
acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  31  Aug.  1657, 
p.  201,  (293).  On  S.  side  of  Pato- 
meck  Riv.  1000  acs.  on  the  S.  &  N. 
side  of  Chapawansick  Cr.,  E.  &  N.  on 
land  of  Coll.  Mathewes  &c.  500  acs. 
on  N.  side  of  sd.  Cr.,  Wly.  towards 
land  of  Mr.  Walter  Broadhurst  &  Nly. 
on  land  of  Mr.  Robert  Huberd.  1000 
acs.  by  patent  dated  6  Sept.  1654  by 
him  surrendered  &  500  acs.  for  trans, 
of  10  pers:  James  Johnson,  Jno.  Ste- 
phens, Edward  Conn,  Abra.  Jenman, 
Robert  Jones,  Jno.  Browne,  Margaret 
Warren,  Hen.  Cleborne,  Patrick  Spence, 
Tho.  Butler. 

GERVASE  DODSON,  5200  acs. 
Westmoreland  Co.,  16  Sept.  1657,  p. 
201,  (294).  Near  the  head  of  upper 
Machoatick  Riv.,  Ely.  adj.  his  own  land 
&  land  of  Nathaniell  Jones  &  Xpher. 
Boyce,  deed.,  Nly.  upon  Mr.  Fowkes  at 
Chetanke  Cr.,  John  Walton,  Mr.  Nicho- 
las Merriwether  &  others  &  soe  running 
about  the  Indian  Towne  &  lands  of  Jno. 
Williams,  Stephen  Norman,  Nicholas 
Langsden,  &  Major  Thomas  Davis  of 
Walters  Cr;  part  of  this  land  known  by 
the  name  of  Upper  Machotick  Towne. 
Due  by  purchase  from  Major  Jno.  Smith 
of  Stanley  Hundred  as  followeth:  3000 
acs.  granted  sd.  Smith  &  Mr.  Francis 
Smith,  engeeneer,  (or  engeeners),  7 
Sept.  1654  by  whose  death  it  has 
fallen  wholely  to  sd  Major  Smith  & 
by  him  assigned  unto  sd.  Dodson;  & 
being  found  to  be  2200  acs.  more  on 
the  S.  &  W.  side  thereof,  sd.  Dodson 
hath  produced  rights  to  the  same  &  due 
for  trans,  of  44  pers:  Jno.  Bell,  Wm. 
Hoble,  Wm.  Buffett,  Alexander  Cooper, 
Wm.  Langle,  Jno.  Butler,  Daniell 
Dunn,  David  Norvey  (?)  Wm.  Tett, 
Walter  Blade,  Easter  Jury,  Mary  Bea- 
champe,  Roger  &c.  Tabitha,  Susan,  Tho. 
Prickett,  &  his  wife,  Tho.  Oliver, 
Wilkes  Mander  (?),  James  Willson, 
Antho.  Watts,  Nich.  Hewes,  Tho.  Was- 
dall,  Francis  Pretloe,  Robert  Rigga, 
John  Neale,  Wm.  Davis,  Alexander 
Arthur,  Jno.  Bird,  Wm.  Armfeild,  Wm. 
Ballard,  Thomas  Harris,  Tho.  (?)  Lid- 
gitt,  Jno.  Griffin,  Robert  West,  David 
Price,  Fra.  Stoakes,  Jno.  Mandergan, 
Mary  Baker,  Ann  Nohum  (?).  3 
Negroes,    Christopher    Marlowe,    Mary 


374 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Hix,  Peter  Ward  (or  Ware),  Eliz. 
Butteresse,  Nich.  Buttresse,  Nicho. 
Mason,  Martin  Wyatt,  John  Clarke, 
Jane  Deepe,  John  Bunkley,  Rolph  Bur- 
corck  (?),  Alex  Strahan,  Daniell  Ste- 
phens, Eliz.  Willoughby,  Rich.  Bignall, 
John  Darkeny,  Edward  Morkey, 

RAWLEIGH  TRAVERS,  300  acs.  on 
S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  about  2  mi.  from 
the  plantation  of  Mr.  James  Bagnall.  15 
Oct.  1657,  p.  202,  (295).  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  9  Mar.  1653.  The  follow- 
ing names  appear:  Samuell  Cole,  Tho. 
Goodry,  John  Granger,  Eliz.  Packing- 
ton,  Thomas  Arther,  Tho.  Tillett. 

VINCENT  STANFORD,  600  acs.,  1 
June  1657,  p.  202,  (296).  From  S.  E. 
side  of  land  of  Wm.  Clapham  now  in 
possession  of  Thomas  Carter  &  upon 
N.  E.  side  of  a  devdt.  of  Ephraditus 
Lawson,  deed.,  now  in  possession  of 
Wm.  Clapham,  Jr.    Trans,  of  12  pers.* 

JOHN  NICHOLLS,  of  Corrotoman 
Riv.,  900  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  1  May 
1657,  p.  203,  (296).  450  acs.  N.  W. 
on  sd.  Riv.,  N.Ely,  on  land  of  Mr.  Ed- 
win Connaway,  S.  W.  upon  Nicholas 
George  &  Andrew  Boyer;  S.  E.  along 
sd.  Connaway  &  Georg  Boyer;  450  acs. 
N.Wly.  upon  the  head  of  sd.  tract, 
S.Wly.  upon  Andrew  Boyer  &  Georg 
Goldsmith,  S.Ely,  upon  Mr.  Kinsey  & 
Ed.  Edmonds,  dee'd.  400  acs.  granted 
unto  Capt.  Thomas  Hackett  29  Nov. 
1652,  assigned  unto  sd.  Nicholls;  50 
acs.  to  sd.  Nicholls  19  Oct.  1653  &  the 
residue  for  trans,  of  9  pers.* 

LT.  COL.  MILES  CAREY,  344  acs. 
Warwick  Co.,  13  Mar.  1657,  p.  204, 
(298).  250  acs.  beg.  at  a  corner  of  Mr. 
Cripps  land,  running  parallel  to  Edward 
Wills  land,  N.  W.  to  land  of  the  Lady 
Harvey;  44  acs.  beg.  at  uttermost 
bounds  of  Mr.  Thomas  Taylor  &c.  & 
adj.  land  of  Col.  Samuel  Mathews  &c 
to  beg.  at  the  head  of  Pottash  Cr.  250 
acs.  by  patent  to  Thomas  Taylor,  28 
Oct.  1643  &  bequeathed  to  sd.  Carey 
by  will  &  94  acs.  by  patent  to  sd.  Carey, 
30  Mar.  1655. 

MR.  JOHN  EDWARDS,  118  acs. 
Lancaster   Co.,    30   May   1657,    p.    205, 


(299).  Between  Rappa.  &  Corotoman 
Rivers  &  running  to  marked  trees  of 
Capt.  Hackett.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  John 
Edwards,  Mary  Edwards,  Leonard  Cac- 
cott  (?).  Deserted  by  sd.  Edwards  & 
granted  14  Oct.  1665  in  name  of  Mr. 
David  Fox.  Note:  The  3  names  fol- 
lowing appear  on  the  margin  of  this 
record  &  no  doubt  represent  the  head- 
rights  of  sd.  Fox.  Symon  Commick, 
Jno.  Brooks,  Wm.  Cassell. 

VINCENT  STANFORD,  1000  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  1  June  1657,  p.  205, 
(300).  Upon  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
running  by  devdt.  surveyed  for  Capt. 
Daniell  Gookins,  &  on  a  N.  W.  branch 
of  Corrotoman  Riv.  400  acs.  granted 
unto  John  Phillipps  13  July  1653  &  by 
Col.  Fontleroy,  Adm'r.,  assigned  to  sd. 
Stanford  &  600  acs.  for  trans,  of  12 
pers:  Robert  Cornelius,  Tho.  Mims, 
Roger  Smith,  Tho.  Hubbard,  2  Negroes. 
Renewed    18  Mar.   1662. 

GEORGE  FRIZZELL,  600  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  10  Oct.  1657,  p. 
206,  (300).  At  Magaty  Bay;  350  acs. 
butting  upon  land  of  John  Ascum  & 
250  acs.  beg.  on  N.  side  of  land  former- 
ly belonging  to  John  Neale,  Nly.  to- 
wards land  of  Edmond  Scarbroueh. 
350  acs.  granted  unto  James  Berry  22 
Aug.  1637  &  250  acs.  by  patent  to  him 
dated  10  Oct.  1640,  assigned  to  Capt. 
Francis  Pott  &  by  him  assigned  unto  sd. 
Frizzell.    Renewed  10  Mar.  1663. 

JOHN  CORKER,  1150  acs.  Surry 
Co.,  20  Mar.  1657,  p.  206,  (301).  On 
S.  side  of  James  Riv.  &  S.  side  of  the 
head  of  Grayes  Cr.  called  the  Wayer 
necke;  beg.  on  the  N.  side  of  the  Cr. 
opposite  to  the  mill,  over  the  swamp 
to  Mr.  Rolfes  line  &c.  to  the  cart  path 
&  the  path  leading  from  Mr.  Corkers  to 
Spilltimbers  &c.  500  acs.  purchased  of 
John  Kempe  24  Oct.  1639  &  650  acs. 
to  sd.  Corker  by  patent  2  Dec.  1640. 

MR.  DAVID  LINDSEY,  236  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.  upon  Perries  Cr., 
23  Mar.  1657,  p.  207,  (302).  Beg.  on 
sd.  Cr.,  running  to  head  of  the  branch 
parting  this  from  land  in  possession  of 
Richard  White,  Carpenter.  210  acs. 
granted  unto  Thomas  Willford  10  Nov. 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


375 


1651,  assigned  to  Edward  Henly,  reas- 
signed to  sd.  Wilsford,  who  assigned  to 
sd.  Lindsey;  26  acs.  granted  Thomas 
Wilsford  1  Aug.  1653  &  assigned  as 
above  noted.  Trans,  of  1  pers.*  Re- 
newed 18  Mar.  1662. 

JOHN  STEPHENS,  1000  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  13  Mar.  1657,  p.  208,  (303).  Op- 
posite land  of  Col.  Henry  Fleete,  S.Ely, 
upon  Manakin  Cr.  Trans,  of  20  pers: 
Mary  Comings,  John  Mabett,  John 
Hallwell,  Mary  Arnold,  John  Weston, 
Roger  Burdett,  Jane  Raye,  Roger  Hey- 
ward,  Marg.  Robison,  Jo.  Browne,  John 
Coleman,  Tho.  Mercer,  Wm.  Benson, 
Tho.  Farrell,  Wm.  Longe,  Robert 
Kirky,  Wm.  Sale,  Roger  Kenler  (or 
Kenter),  Wm.   O  Kery,  James  Fiskell. 

MR.  WILLIAM  THOMAS,  500  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  23  Mar.  1657,  p. 
208,  (303).  On  N.  side  of  great  Wic- 
cocomocoe  Riv.,  250  acs.  W.N.W.  upon 
Saffalls  Cr.  &  E.  N.E.  upon  Island  Cr., 
&  250  acs.  adj.  sd.  tract,  N.W.  upon 
land  of  Roger  Walters,  N.  E.  upon  the 
path  that  goes  to  Chickacone  &  divides 
this  from  land  of  Henry  Watts  &  Tho- 
mas Darrell,  S.E.  upon  land  of  Henry 
Smith,  Orphant  &  land  of  William  Nutt. 
250  acs.  by  patent  dated  16  July  1654 
&  residue  for  trans,  of  5  pers:  3 
Negroes;  and  Elizabeth  Johnson,  James 
Gaylord. 

JOHN  CHAPMAN,  250  acs.  Gloces- 
ter  Co.,  in  Kingstone  Parish,  15  Mar. 
1657,  p.  209,  (304).  Upon  S.  side  of 
Peanketanke  Riv.,  beg.  on  the  back  of 
Mr.  William  Armsteads  land,  running 
N.  by  E.  to  Col.  Gwinns  marked  trees. 
Granted  to  Col.  Humphrey  Higginson, 
20  Sept.  1654  &  deserted.  Trans,  of  5 
pers.* 

THOMAS  WOODHOUSE  &  JOHN 
WOOD,  6000  acs.  N.Ely,  upon  Pato- 
meck  Riv.  above  another  seate  of  land 
of  sd.  Wood  above  land  of  Mr.  Wm. 
Presly.  Trans,  of  120  pers:  Phillip 
Harwood,  Robt.  Salter,  Mararee  Long, 
Tho.  Warham,  John  Spone,  Wm.  Gay- 
ter,  Roger  Plumer,  Edwd.  Plaice,  Jervis 
Wilkinson,  Wm.  Lancaster,  Tho.  Fockn- 
ham,  Tho.  Giles,  Tho.  Panton,  Edward 
Bourne,    Phillip    Ashby,    James    Beare, 


Symon  Salter,  Henry  Sterne,  Roger  Sy- 
mons,  Jno.  Wray,  Jo.  Coates,  Tho. 
Preston,  Abra.  Jnoson  (Johnson), 
Edwd.  Jnoson,  Jo.  Philpott,  Jo.  Tyler, 
Morgan  Lewis,  Math.  Hughes,  James 
Roberts,  Roger  Clayton,  Tho.  Kniteley, 
Robt.  Heme,  Wm.  Strood,  Symon  Allen, 
Jeremy  Ware,  Richard  Core,  Richard 
Smith,  Sam.  Warren,  Ja.  Bird,  Tho. 
Davies,  Edwd.  Sneath,  Wm.  Tanner, 
Robt.  Wheeler,  Henry  Weston,  Isaack 
Scott,  John  Atkins,  Jno.  Sheffeild,  Nich. 
Wilson,  Ralph  Sharpe,  Wm.  Batesman, 
Mich.  Wills,  Alex  Mont,  Marke  Alester, 
Georg  Rayman,  Sam  Burton,  Cath. 
Fletcher,  Ferd.  Downies,  Wm.  Ed- 
monds, Joshua  Gibson,  Robt.  Read, 
Hen.  Harp  (?),  Tho.  Duninge,  Tho. 
Beale,  John  Marston,  Roger  Gray, 
Henry  Talbott,  Mich.  Orton,  James 
Neale,  Tho.  Murry,  Luke  Bayly,  Tho. 
Beale.  29  May  1658,  p.  209,  (305). 
(Note:)  Marginal  notations:  "The  last 
4  made  use  of  Merrewether  assigned 
them  to  Brady" ;  "Mr.  Merewether  hath 
Certificate  for  the  first  halfe  of  these 
Rights" ;  "White  hath  made  use  of  4  of 
the  other  halfe'' ;  "5  more  made  use  of" ; 
"4  more  made  use  of." 

MR.  RICHARD  WRIGHT,  2200  acs. 
Westmoreland  Co.,  7  Oct.  1658,  p.  210, 
(305).  On  S.  W.  side  of  Patomeck 
Riv.,  bounded  from  Sandy  Point  at  the 
mouth  of  Armsbies  Cr.  unto  Mattrons 
point,  W.  N.  W.  upon  Nominy  Bay, 
thence  to  Wright  Virgin  Cr.  &c.  963 
acs.  granted  unto  Col.  John  Mottrom, 
13  Aug.  1650  &  due  sd.  Wright  as 
marrieinge  Ann  the  daughter  of  sd. 
Mottrom;  500  acs.  granted  to  Thomas 
Wilkinson  10  Oct.  1650,  afterwards 
granted  to  Thomas  Brereton  8  June 
1658  &  assigned  to  sd.  Wright.  &  737 
Acs.  for  trans,  of  15  pers:  John  Bate- 
man,  Edward  Sanders,  Jno.  Knight, 
Richard  Cox,  Symon  Carpenter,  Joseph 
Hary,  Rich.  Wright,  James  &  Patience, 
Negroes,  Charles  Winterne,  Nich. 
Smith,  Tho.  Hansford,  Wm.  Churme, 
Margarett  Donnell,  Jno.  Case. 

MR.  CHRISTOPHER  HARRIS,  2000 
acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  7  Oct.  1658,  p. 
210,  (306).  On  the  S.  side  of  Poto- 
meck  on  S.  W.  side  of  Yosockcocomo- 
coe  Cr.    Trans,  of  40  pers:    Jno.  Snell- 


376 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


inge,  Nath.  Pinion,  Georg  Covell,  James 
Mahue,  Wm.  West,  Edward  Bromfeild, 
John  Abbott,  Jane  Dawson,  Theo.  Cle- 
mente,  Nath.  Crosby,  Wm.  Symson, 
Ann  Delue,  Mary  James,  Hugh  Thomas, 
Ja.  Hollirosse  (?),  Wm.  Feild,  John 
Mutton,  Robert  Hollaway,  Wm.  New- 
come,  Joseph  Fairepointe,  James  Male, 
Jno.  Williams,  Jno.  Cranfeild,  Roger 
Sloe,  Wm.  Nicholls,  Henry  Coniers,  Ed- 
mond  Lucas,  Jno.  Trevett,  Charles 
Davison,  Georg  Harper,  Mathew  Batts, 
Sarah  Mashy,  Margarett  Munday,  Sy- 
mon  Hall,  John  Markhamm,  Nath. 
Ruferd.  (Note:  In  this  list  appears 
the  following:  "Assigned  by  Mr.  Jno. 
Snellinge."  ) 

JOHN  SHAWE,  400  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  17  June  1658,  p.  211, 
(307).  On  S.  side  of  great  Wiccoco- 
mocoe  Riv.  at  the  head  of  a  creek  which 
divides  the  land  of  Mr.  Thomas  Sals- 
bury  &  Henry  HufTes;  300  acs.  betwixt 
the  main  branches  of  sd.  cr.,  E.  S.  E. 
on  land  of  Thomas  Kidby;  1000  acs. 
adj.  sd.  tract,  N.  E.  upon  land  of  Tho- 
mas Bayles,  S.  S.  W.  upon  land  which 
was  John  Fawsetts,  Freeman  Conna- 
waies  &c.  &  W.  N.  W.  upon  land  of 
Mr.  Isaack  Foxcroft.  300  acs.  granted 
to  him  1  July  1654  &  100  acs.  for  trans, 
of  2  pers:  John  Robinson,  Elizabeth 
Revells. 

JOHN  SMART,  1400  acs.  on  N.  side 
of  Rappa.  Riv.  next  above  the  land  of 
Silvester  Thatcher  &  Thomas  Whitelock, 
running  along  a  little  creek  dividing 
their  land.  15  Mar.  1657,  p.  211, 
(307).  Granted  unto  Robert  Bird  29 
July   1650  &  assigned  unto  sd.   Smart. 

THOMAS  PECK,  gent.,  1000  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  8  June  1658,  p.  212, 
(308).  On  N.  side  of  Mattapany  Riv., 
behind  land  of  Major  Wm.  Taylor  & 
Mr.  Edward  Diggs,  beg.  at  a  creek 
dividing  the  land  of  the  above  named 
gentlemen.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  6 
Apr.  1655  &  due  for  trans,  of  20  pers.* 

GARRETT  PIGGE  (Pigg),  350  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  12  June  1658,  p.  212, 
(308).  On  N.  side  of  James  Riv.  &  E. 
side  of  Rickahock  Path,  beg.  at  War- 
rany  Path.  Granted  to  Wm.  Hall  6 
Oct.   &  by  him   assigned. 


MR.  CHARLES  ASHTON,  400  acs. 
Westmoreland  Co.,  12  June  1658,  p. 
212,  (309).  Bounded  on  S.E.  with  land 
of  Edward  Parker,  N.N.E.  upon  the 
head  of  a  creek  dividing  this  &  land  of 
Mr.  Valentine  Payton.  Granted  unto 
Richard  Codsford,  20  Aug.  1655,  as- 
signed unto  sd.  Ashton  &  due  for  trans, 
of  8  pers:  John  Whaley,  Edward 
Wakeley,  John  Browne,  Tho.  Rogers, 
Edmond  Macknee,  Rice  Jones,  Tho. 
Morgan,  Rich.  Snead. 

MR.  HENRY  RANDOLPH,  500  acs. 
in  Patomeck  freshes  above  the  first  creek 
above  Pascattaway,  from  the  side  of  a 
swamp  dividing  this  &  land  of  Thomas 
Broughton  &  N.N.E.  to  land  of  Francis 
Carpenter.  7  June  1658,  p.  213,  (309). 
Trans,  of  10  pers.* 

CAPT.  WILLIAM  CLAIBORNE, 
1000  acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  12  June  1658, 
p.  213.  On  S.  side  Peanketanke  great 
swamp  near  the  head  thereof.  12  June 
1658,  p.  213,  (309).  Trans,  of  20 
pers.*    (Duplicate  page.) 

MR.  CHARLES  ASHTON,  100  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  in  Cherry  pointe 
necke,  12  June  1658,  p.  213,  (309). 
Wly.  adj.  his  own  &  land  of  Thomas 
Addams,  Sly.  upon  Edward  Henly  & 
Francis  Simons,  Ely.  upon  land  of 
Henry  Mosely  &  Nly.  upon  land  of 
William  Warder,  Thomas  Orly  &  Wm. 
Medcalfe.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  John 
Jenny,  Wm.  Longman.  (Duplicate 
page.) 

MAJOR  WILLIAM  HOCCADAY, 
1280  acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  12  June  1658, 
p.  214,  (310).  On  S.  side  of  Yorke 
Riv.  640  acs.  on  S.E.  side  of  Warrany 
main  branch,  running  to  the  head  of  the 
southermost  branch  thereof  &  includ- 
ing all  the  Indian  feilds  on  the  S.  W. 
side  of  the  head  of  Warrany;  640  acs. 
adj.  the  devdt.  he  is  now  seated  on,  beg. 
at  sd.  Cr.,  S.E.  to  the  Indian  feild  path 
&  adj.  sd.  tract.  Renewal  of  2  patents 
dated  1  Aug.  1655  &  2  Nov.  1656  for 
640  acs.  each. 

JOHN  HOPSWOOD,  25  acs.  Lease 
for  term  of  21  years.  Last  of  July  1658, 
p.  214,  (311).   (County  not  mentioned.) 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


377 


GEORG  AUSTIN,  950  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  8  June  1658,  p.  215,  (311). 
400  acs.  beg.  at  a  N.W.  branch  of 
Poropotanke  maine  swamp;  550  acs. 
neere  the  fork  of  sd.  swamp,  adj.  a 
tract  surveyed  for  Thomas  Cox.  Granted 
to  Arthur  Nash  &  sd.  Austin,  6  Dec. 
1654  &  by  sd.  Nash  wholly  assigned  to 
sd.  Austin. 

CAPT.  PETER  ASHTON,  2000  acs. 
Westmoreland  Co.,  20  Aug.  1658,  p. 
215,  (312).  Nly.  upon  land  sd.  Ash- 
ton  bought  of  Wm.  Parry,  lieing  neer 
Patomeck  Towne,  Ely.  towards  land  of 
Mr.  Meriweather  &  Henry  Eggerton. 
Trans,  of  40  pers.* 

RALPH  GREENE,  1000  acs.  Gloces 
ter  Co.,  last  day  of  Aug.  1658,  p.  216 
(312).  Upon  N.  side  of  Yorke  Riv. 
from  Jones  Cr.  to  a  Cr.  dividing  this  & 
land  of  Col.  Richard  Lee,  W.  N.  W 
upon  sd.  Cr.  &  land  of  Wm.  Thorne 
400  acs.  granted  him  16  Feb.  1653.  700 
acs.  due  for  trans,  of  14  pers:  Wm 
Turner,  Henry  Jones,  John  Haies,  Ed 
ward  Pinton,  Geo.  Foster,  Jane  Young 
Rober.  Bellfinn,  Roger  Collins,  John 
Logg,  Andrew  Pight,  Rich.  Foster, 
James  Greene,  Wm.  Stiplee  (?). 

RICHARD  FLINTE,  394  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  7  Sept.  1658,  p.  216, 
(313).  N.E.  upon  Patomeck  Riv.,  S.  by 
W.  upon  little  Wiccocomocoe  Cr.  &  a 
branch  of  same  dividing  this  &  land  of 
Richard  Tompson,  W.  by  N.  &  E.  by 
S.  upon  land  belonging  to  Mr.  Samuell 
Smith.  Granted  unto  John  Hany,  6 
Sept.  1654  &  by  him  assigned  unto  sd. 
Flinte. 

JOHN  CHAPMAN,  400  acs.  Gloces- 
ter  Co.,  15  Sept.  1658,  p.  217,  (314). 
On  S.  side  of  Peanketanke  Riv.  Trans, 
of  8  pers.* 

HENRY  FORREST,  700  acs.  Gloces- 
ter  Co.,  15  Sept.  1658,  p.  217,  (314). 
Upon  Milford  Haven  Cr.,  N.E.  upon 
land  of  John  Lylly,  down  Garden  Cr. 
to  land  of  Mr.  Edward  Cheeseman.  150 
acs.  granted  unto  Abraham  Moone,  as- 
signed to  Thomas  Borne,  who  assigned 
to  Georg  Billipps  &  by  him  assigned 
to  sd.  Forrest.  550  acs.  for  trans,  of 
11      pers:    Alexander      Hall,      Richard 


Batchelor,  John  Butcher,  John  Cavelery, 
Edward  Forrest,  Rice  Aldock,  Henry 
Forrest,  &  his   wife,   Elizabeth  Forrest. 

THOMAS  WILLIS  &  JOHN  MIDLE- 
TON,  600  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  15  Sept. 
1658,  p.  217,  (314).  Beg.  on  head  of 
Sanderland  Cr.,  N.W.  upon  Thomas 
Paddison  &  S.W.  upon  the  great 
swampe,  Trans,  of  12  pers.*  Note: 
Sd.  Midleton  assigned  his  share  unto  sd. 
Willis  &  patent  renewed  16  Feb.  1663. 

MR.  MARTIN  PALMER,  1300  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  9  Aug.  1658,  p.  218, 
(315).  On  N.  side  of  Mattapony  Riv. 
&  both  sides  of  Whorecock  Swamp. 
Trans,  of  26  pers:  Jno.  Thomas,  Wm. 
Hollman,  Fran.  Powlett,  Ed.  Hopkins, 
Jno.  Mitchell,  Thomas  Ware  (or 
Ward),  Jno.  Burton,  Henry  Foard, 
Martin  Wild,  Mary  Saveinge,  Martin 
Walker,  Wm.  Browne,  Ro.  Bartlett,  Jno. 
Clarke,  Fran.  Whitehead,  Rich.  Thomas, 
Robert  Wagge,  Timo.  Wagge,  Robert 
Carter,  Tho.  Adams,  Robert  Hilliard, 
Symon  Farmer,  Rich.  Hickocke,  Tho. 
Jones,   Wm.   Richards,   Fran.   Faulkner. 

MATHEW  HUBERD,  gent.,  590  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,  on  S.W.  side  of  Yorke  Riv., 
6  Oct.  1658,  p.  218,  (315).  Beg.  in 
Thomas  Smith's  line  to  bounds  of  Wm. 
Gantlett,  running  to  a  spring  or  run  on 
the  main  swampe  of  Skiminoe,  Wly.  by 
land  of  Phillipp  Cheslie  &  Daniel 
Wilds.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  18 
Aug.  1655  &  due  for  trans,  of  10  pers.* 

THOMAS  KIRKE,  110  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  6  Oct.  1658,  p.  219,  (316). 
Bet.  branches  of  Pohatan,  extending  N. 
by  E.  along  land  of  Sir  William  Berke- 
ley, S.S.E.  along  land  of  Mr.  Richard 
Ford,  S.S.W.  by  land  of  Richard 
Vardy  &  finally  along  land  of  sd.  Kirke 
&  Henry  Bradshawe  (lately  purchased 
of  Mr.  Nicholas  Meriweather  &  Jno. 
Leech).  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Thomas 
Kirke,  Thomas  Herman,  Ellinor  Wood- 
stock. 

WM.  HEABERD  &  JOHN  HEA- 
BEARD,  300  acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  4 
Oct.  1658,  p.  219,  (316).  Bet.  2 
branches  of  Paspetanzey  Cr.,  one  ex- 
tending S.S.E. ,  dividing  this  &  land  of 


378 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Mr.  Gerrard  Fowke;  the  other  branch 
dividing  this  &  land  of  Sir  Thomas 
Lunsford.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Ann 
Browne,  Edward  Browne,  Rachell  Wil- 
lis, Thomas  Jones,  Lafaland  Foland, 
Jno.  Haies. 

JOHN  LINGE,  300  acs.  James  City 
Co.,  6  Oct.  1658,  p.  219,  (316).  On 
N.  side  of  Chickahominy  Riv.,  beg.  at 
the  head  of  a  branch  of  Tyascond  neere 
the  great  Indian  feild  nigh  land  of 
Margarett  Barrett.  Renewal  of  patent 
dated  1  Apr.  1655  &  due  for  trans,  of 
6  pers.*  Renewed  7  Feb.  1662  &  70 
acs.  added. 

WILLIAM  BUCHER  (Butcher),  300 
acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  5  Mar.  1658,  p.  220, 
(317).  On  the  head  of  Peanketanke 
Riv.  Beg.  by  the  great  swamp  side  near 
a  place  known  by  the  name  of  the  deep 
Landing,  running  to  land  of  Abraham 
Moone  &  S.  E.  near  land  of  Mrs.  Elinor 
Brocas  alias  John  Jackson's.  150  acs. 
granted  to  Charles  Hill  6  Mar.  1655  & 
assigned  unto  Thomas  Harwood,  who 
assigned  to  sd.  Bucher  &  residue  for 
trans,  of  3  pers:  Ann  Forrest,  Eliza- 
beth Forrest,  Jno.  Forrest.  Renewed  29 
Oct.  1662. 

JOHN  WORTHAM,  400  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  5  Mar.  1658,  p.  220,  (318). 
Beg.  at  tree  of  Mr.  Abraham  Moone  & 
running  to  the  great  swamp.  300  acs. 
granted  unto  Dennis  Coniers,  assigned 
unto  Charles  Hill,  who  assigned  to  Tho- 
mas Harwood,  &  by  him  assigned  unto 
sd.  Wortham  &  100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2 
pers:  Alexander  Hall,  Jno.  Caveley. 
Renewed  18  Mar.  1662. 

RICHARD  WELLS,  100  acs.  West- 
moreland Co.,  8  Oct.  1658,  p.  220, 
(318).  Beg.  at  an  oake  dividing  this 
&  land  of  sd.  Wells  &  running  Wly. 
along  land  of  Richard  Searle.  Trans,  of 
2  pers.* 

GEORG  BERRY,  500  acs.  in  Pato- 
meck  freshes  above  Pascataway,  4  Oct. 
1658,  p.  221,  (319).  Beg.  at  a  small 
swamp  &  extending  S.  along  the  river. 
Due  by  purchase  of  patent  to  Edward 
Williams  dated  15  July  1657,  who  with 
Temperance,  his  wife,  assigned  to  sd. 
Berry,    17  July   1658. 


SAME.  600  acs.  Same  location, 
page,  &  date.  Granted  unto  Robert 
Bradshawe  &  James  Claughton,  15  July 
1657  &  by  them  &  their  wives  assigned 
unto  Edward  Williams,  14  Nov.  1657 
&  due  sd.  Berry  as  above. 

JOHN  TINGEY,  67  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  4  Oct.  1658,  p.  221,  (320). 
Beg.  at  the  head  of  a  creek  &  line  of 
John  Moseley,  extending  N.W.  along 
land  of  Wm.  Medcalfe,  S.S.W.  to  land 
of  Henry  Moseley  &c.  Trans,  of  pers: 
Sarah  Jackson,  Dorathy  Russell.  Re- 
newed 18  Mar.  1662. 

THOMAS  WILKINSON,  6000  acs. 
above  the  head  of  Patomeck  Cr.,  beg. 
at  westermost  corner  of  land  of  Mr. 
Merriweather  now  in  the  tenure  of 
Nicholas  Russell.  10  June  1658,  p. 
222,  (320).  Trans,  of  120  pers: 
Robert  Dennett,  Thomas  Lyne,  Susan 
Symson,  Richard  Jones,  Sam.  Jones, 
Jeffery  Steele,  Hum.  London,  Retrun 
Garrett,  Sara  Hanker  (or  Hauker), 
Easter  Hauker  (?),  Prudence  Moone, 
Frances  Moone,  10  Negroes  from  Mr. 
Bennett,  6  Negroes  in  the  Roe  Bucke, 
Henrick  Denton,  James  Roe,  Joane  Roe, 
Wm.  Roe,  Damascene  Roe,  Guy  White, 
Peter  Gambore,  Henry  Parson,  Wm. 
Willblood,  John  Duffie,  Wm.  Collman 
(or  Coleman),  Mr.  Geo  Miniefie,  Mrs. 
Mary  Minifie,  Mrs.  Eliza.  Miniiie,  Mrs. 
Eliza  Booker,  Mrs.  Eliz.  Dolivell,  Mr. 
John  James,  Nicholas  Martiaw,  Capt. 
Henry  Perry,  Silvester  Stokes,  Wm. 
Smith,  Mich.  Waller,  Sam.  Banier  (?) 
Ann  Taylor,  John  Williams,  David 
Goodaile,  Robert  Breswell,  Sara 
Mackore,  John  Madory,  Ann  Roe,  Jno. 
Motis,  Lucy  White,  Mary  White,  Jno. 
Muckully,  Wm.  Plumtree,  Michaell 
Batts,  Tho.  Hindes,  Terin.  Hely,  Jno. 
Davenant  (?),  Robt.  Wegans,  Wm. 
Frost,  Thomas  Page,  Henry  Roult,  Wm. 
Eyres,  John  Murton,  Rich.  White,  John 
Lee,  Jno.  Poison,  Richd.  Plaine,  Richard 
Vennalls,  John  Williams,  Sam.  Hock- 
steed,  John  Osman,  Sarah  Dowdin,  Jno. 
Lewis,  Ralph  Blessinge,  Basill  Alcocke, 
Tho.  Wilkinson,  Mary  Willson,  John 
Rolph,  Wm.  Horsley,  John  Sparrowe, 
Daniell  Herriman,  Francis  Wheler,  11 
times,  Huntington  Ayres,  Henry  Boul- 
ton,    Richard   Dolle,   John    Scott,    John 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


379 


Carter,  John  Gault,  Andrewes  Smith, 
John  Turke,  Robt.  Haynott,  Rich. 
Shepard,  Bernard  Tynns  (?),  Stephen 
Hall,  Robt.  Sanders,  Wm.  Morris.  Re- 
newed  18  Mar.    1662. 

JAMES  BRENETT,  200  acs.  upon  S. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  upon  a  branch 
near  land  of  William  Clapham.  6  Oct. 
1658,  p.  223,  (320).  Granted  unto 
John  Ayres  24  Oct.  1655,  assigned  unto 
sd.  Brennett  &  Peter  Johnson  &  now- 
renewed  for  trans,  of  4  pers.* 

MR.  GREY  SKIPWITH,  900  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  11  Oct.  1658,  p.  223, 
(321).  On  N.  side  of  Mattapany  Riv., 
running  down  same  to  marked  trees  of 
Mr.  Digges.  Granted  unto  Thomas 
Dale,  4  Jan.  1653,  by  him  deserted  & 
now  due  for  trans,  of  18  pers.* 

JOHN  LEWIS  &  JAMES  TURNER, 

1000  acs.  of  suncken  land  &  marsh 
called  Lewis  Hand,  New  Kent  Co.,  8 
Nov.  1658,  p.  223,  (321).  Bounded 
by  the  river  &  on  S.  with  Pouncies  Cr., 
divding  same  from  land  of  Jno.  Pouncey. 
Trans,  of  20  pers.*  Renewed  18  Mar. 
1662. 

THOMAS  HICKMAN,  1000  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  6  Oct.  1658,  p.  224, 
(322).  On  S.  E.  side  of  Mattappany 
Riv.,  beg.  at  the  head  of  Mr.  Wm. 
Wyatts  lower  devdt.  Granted  to  Mr. 
Thomas  Ballard  16  July  1655,  by  him 
deserted  &  now  due  for  trans,  of  20 
pers.*  Rights  for  640  acs.  granted  to 
Mr.  Wm.  Lewis,  25  May  1654  &  as- 
signed to  sd.  Hickman  which  patent  & 
the  land  therein  conteyned  is  relin- 
quished. 

CAPT.  RICHARD  BUDD,  200  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  6  Oct.  1658,  p. 
224,  (322).  S.E.  upon  the  head  of 
great  Wiccocomocoe  Riv.  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  9  Mar.  1653,  due  for  trans, 
of  4  pers.*  Assigned  to  &  renewed  in 
name  of  Richard  Lansdell  29  Jan.  1662. 

JOHN  TINGEY,  50  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  4  Oct.  1658,  p.  224,  (322). 
Extending  along  the  head  line  of  Henry 
Moseley,  W.N.W.  on  Charles  Ashton, 
W.  by  S.  on  Mr.  Thomas  Wilsford  & 


S.S.E.  on  Francis  Symons.  Trans,  of  1 
pers:  Maudlin  Vanpuck.  Renewed  30 
Oct.  1662. 

JOHN  LOWNES,  100  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  6  Oct.  1658,  p.  225,  (323). 
In  Eastern  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  bounded 
on  E.  with  William  Nicholls  line  of 
marked  trees  &  on  W.  with  Mr.  Tho- 
mas Sawyers  trees.  Granted  unto  John 
Marshall  20  Mar.  1655,  by  him  assigned 
unto  Walter  Costine  who  assigned  unto 
sd.  Lownes.    Trans,  of  2  pers.* 

MR.  THOMAS  HAMPTON,  Clerke, 
700  acs.  on  E.  side  of  Chickahominy 
Riv.  upon  a  branch  of  Warrany  Cr. 
commonly  called  Tyascun  Branch;  550 
acs.  from  the  timber  swamp  towards  sd. 
branch  &c.  150  acs.  from  sd.  swamp, 
adj.  his  own  land  &  thence  towards  land 
of  Mr.  Grimes.  11  Oct.  1658,  p.  225, 
(323).  550  acs.  by  patent  6  Apr.  1653 
&  150  acs.  for  trans,  of  3  pers:  Dor- 
man  Kygan,  Cornelius  Nelsen  (or 
Nehen),  Wm.  Dolly. 

HENRY  ROACH,  1700  acs.  West- 
moreland Co.,  10  Oct.  1658,  p.  226, 
(324).  S.Ely,  upon  lower  Machoatick 
Riv.,  E.N.E.  towards  land  of  Mr.  Isaack 
Allerton  &  on  backe  of  land  of  John 
Bennett.  850  acs.  by  patent  dated  13 
Sept.  1654  &  850  acs.  for  trans,  of  17 
pers.* 

JOHN  VAUGHAN,  1400  acs.  8  Oct. 
1658,  p.  226,  (324).  1200  acs.  on 
Eastermost  side  of  Ceder  Hand  Cr.,  beg. 
at  the  mouth  thereof,  running  S.E. 
parallel  to  Patomeck  Riv.  &c.  200  acs. 
on  S.E.  side  of  Mr.  Pope's  Cr.,  N.  E. 
upon  land  formerly  patented  by  him  & 
S.  W.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Tirrell.  1200 
acs.  by  patent  dated  19  Jan.  1649  &  200 
acs.  by  patent  dated  16  July  1654.  Re- 
newed 18  Mar.  1662. 

JOHN  EARLE,  1100  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  7  Oct.  1658,  p.  227,  (325). 
1000  acs.  S.W.  &  N.W.  upon  severall 
lands  of  one  Bloyce,  a  Cooper,  on  N.W. 
side  of  Yocomocoe  Riv.,  &  towards 
land  of  Georg  Knott;  the  residue  N.Ely, 
upon  a  creek  issuing  out  of  sd.  river, 
S.Ely,  upon  his  own  land  &c.  1000  acs. 
by  patent   dated    13    Oct.    1653   &    100 


380 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


acs.  by  patent,  24  Oct.  1655.  Trans,  of 
2  pers:  Mary  Pitt,  Roger  Walker.  Re- 
newed in  name  of  John  Earle,  his  son 
&  heir,  12  Feb.  1662. 

ROBERT  GRAY,  50  acs.  Eliz.  City 
Co.,  7  Oct.  1658,  p.  227,  (325).  S.E. 
from  the  Otterdams  neere  the  Back 
river  to  a  swamp  called  the  Divilh 
Woodyard,  E.N.E.  on  the  head  of  John 
Robins  &  to  land  of  Major  Wm.  Wor- 
leich.    Trans,  of  John  Farrast. 

MORGAN  HAYNES,  400  acs.  upon 
S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  extending  E.  & 
W.  between  a  head  branch  of  Parratts 
Cr.  &  a  marsh  proceeding  from  a  head 
branch  of  Burnhams  Cr.  8  Oct.  1658, 
p.  227,   (326).    Trans,  of  8  pers.* 

WILLIAM  BROOKE,  350  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  7  Oct.  1658,  p.  228,  (326). 
In  Linn  haven  Parish  beyond  Roede, 
bounded  on  N.E.  with  Wm.  Basnetts 
land.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  Antho.  Bell, 
Richd.  Williams,  Nicho.  Williams, 
Sarah  Edicke,  Wm.  Brooke,  his  wife  & 
1   child. 

THEOPHILIS  HOANE  (Hone), 
gent.,  720  acs.  on  N.  side  of  Rappa. 
Riv.,  beg.  at  Ewd.  side  of  a  swamp  or 
branch  running  out  of  the  head  of  Cor- 
rotoman  Riv.  6  Oct.  1658,  p.  228, 
(326).  Renewal  of  patent  dated  5  Oct. 
1655. 

WILLIAM  GOFFE,  1000  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  7  Oct.  1658,  p.  229,  (327). 
Upon  N.E.  side  of  Mattopany  Riv.  & 
S.W.  side  of  Whorecock  Swamp,  Trans, 
of  20  pers.* 

JOHN  KINGE,  450  acs.  New  Kent 
Co.,  28  Oct.  1658,  p.  229,  (327).  Upon 
N.W.  side  of  Poropotanke  Cr.,  upon 
N.E.  &  towards  head  of  Bennetts  Cr. 
200  acs.  extending  E.N.E.  upon  a 
swamp  leading  along  land  of  Tho. 
Leechman  &  John  Bennett  &c.  250  acs. 
adj.  land  patented  by  sd.  Kinge  10  Oct. 
1651.  Trans,  of  5  pers.*  Renewed  in 
name  of  Richard  King,  his  son  &  heir, 
18  Mar.   1662. 

WILLIAM  RADULPHUS,  300  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  10  Oct.  1658,  p.  230, 


(328).  Nly.  on  marked  trees  of  James 
Price,  Wly.  on  Benjamin  Mathewes, 
Sly.  to  line  of  James  Jones  &  Ely.  to- 
wards Ockahanock  Path.  Trans,  of  6 
pers:  Anthony  Longoe,  Wm.  Smith, 
Hannah  Longoe,  Nicholas  Moyles, 
Phillis  Ward,  James  Jackson. 

NATHANIELL  BRADFORD,  400 
acs.  Northampton  Co.,  10  Oct.  1658,  p. 
230,  (328).  Between  Ockahanock  Cr.  & 
Naswattocks  Cr.  on  the  Bay  side,  Nly. 
on  land  of  Henry  Edwards.  Trans,  of 
8  pers:  James  Browne,  Mary  Chandler, 
Lidia  Easterfeild,  Roady  Patriarke, 
Robert  Hopkins,  Mary  Earle,  Rich. 
Perry,  Wm.  Trennis. 

DANIELL  LISTON,  400  acs.  West- 
moreland Co.,  10  Oct.  1658,  p.  231, 
(329).  200  acs.  on  S.  side  of  Patomeck 
Riv.,  beg.  at  a  white  oak  dividing  this 
&  land  of  Capt.  Thomas  Baldridge  & 
Mr.  James  Baldridge,  S.E.  to  a  creek 
dividing  this  &  land  of  Henry  Brookes 
&c.  200  acs.  upon  the  head  of  another 
seate  of  land  of  sd.  Liston  purchased 
from  Hercules  Bridges  &  N.Wly.  upon 
land  of  Major  Baldridge,  dec'd.  200 
acs.  granted  unto  Hercules  Bridges  3 
Sept.  1651  &  assigned  to  sd.  Liston,  & 
200  acs.  granted  to  David  Phillips,  by 
him  deserted  &  now  due  by  order  of 
Govr.  etc.  12  Dec.  1656  and  for  trans, 
of  4  pers:  Martha  Jackson,  Sarah  South- 
erne,   Judith   Southerne,   Paul   Simpson. 

ROBERT  WOOLLERTON,  128  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  3  Nov.  1658,  p.  231, 
(329).  In  Rappa  Riv.,  beg.  on  E.  side 
of  Barbacue  Cr.,  extending  E.S.E.  to 
land  of  Henry  Chichley,  Knight,  W.  to 
land  of  Edward  Webb  &c.  Trans,  of 
3  pers:  Wm.  Robinson,  Henry  Brookes, 
Ellinor  Davis. 

MICHAELL  GRAFTON,  200  acs. 
Gloster  Co.,  2  Nov.  1658,  p.  232, 
(330).  On  the  N.  side  of  Yorke  Riv. 
&  E.  side  of  Poropotanke  Cr.,  bounding 
Wly.  upon  land  granted  to  Mr.  Jernew, 
Sly.  upon  Wm.  Ginseys  land  &  Nly. 
upon  land  of  Mr.  Pate  (or  Pace.) 

MR.  THOMAS  BALLARD,  1300  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  6  Oct.  1658,  p.  232, 
(330).    Upon    N.    side    of    Mattapany 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


381 


Riv.  &  branches  of  Whorecock  Swamp. 
Trans,  of  26  pers:  Wm.  Reynolls, 
Hannah  Reynolds,  Abygoll  Reynolls, 
Jno.  Reynolls,  James  Glover,  Cuthbert 
Jackson,  James  Smith,  Hannah  Reynolls, 
Deborah  Reynolls,  James  Cooke,  Robt. 
Fisher,  Tho.  Pratt,  James  Cooper,  Sarah 
Talbott,  Tho.  Crumpe,  Wm.  Jnoson 
(Johnson),  Wm.  Cunningham,  Eliz. 
Masterson,  Toby.  Forrester,  Wm.  Smith, 
Grace  Farloe,  Tho.  Pritchard,  Grace 
Fisher,  Anna  Sympson,  Richard  Proby, 
Francis  Croper. 

LT.  COL.  JOHN  WALKER,  1200 
acs.  on  Ewd.  side  of  a  runn  falling  into 
Ware  Riv.,  beg.  at  marked  tree  of  Mr. 
Mordecoy  Cooke  &  Nly.  by  land  of 
Zachery  Cripps.  9  Oct.  1658,  p.  232, 
(331).  Renewal  of  patent  dated  14 
July  1655  &  due  for  trans,  of  24  pers.* 
Renewed  14  Oct.  1663. 

JOHN  SANDEVER  &  RICHARD 
ADDAMS,  200  acs.  at  the  new  Poquo- 
son, Yorke  Co.,  5  Oct.  1658,  p.  233, 
(331).  Beg.  Nly.  on  land  of  John  Hay- 
ward  &  adj.  land  of  William  Hay. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  Henry  Furr,  Tho. 
Lucas,  John  Stevens. 

RICHARD  WHITE,  Cooper,  EVAN 
DAVIS  &  SAMUEL  MANN,  1000  acs. 
in  the  freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv.  Beg.  at 
a  run  of  a  creek  on  the  upper  side  of 
land  of  Abraham  Moone  &  nigh  head 
of  the  land  of  sd.  White  &  Jno.  Gillett. 
6  Oct.  1658,  p.  233,  (332).  Trans,  of 
20  pers:  Wm.  Tompson,  Magdalin 
Robison,  Isaack  Stannopp,  Mary  Browne, 
Eliz.  Bartlett,  Tho.  Warrwick,  Robert  Jad- 
win,  Sisly  Jadwinn,  Rob.  Jadwinn,  Senr., 
Jno.  Jadwinn,  Jonathan  Jadwinn,  Jeremy 
Jadwinn,  Eliz.  Sanders,  Mary  Thomas, 
Cornelius  Abreman,  Thomas  Eldridge, 
Rich.  Sawer,  Wm.  Egres  (Eyres),  Jno. 
Pew,  Rich.  White. 

JAMES  KINNYGAM  &  JAMES 
FULLERTON,  458  acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  on 
S.  side  of  Puscattecond  Cr.,  Rappa.  Co., 
24  Nov.  1658,  p.  234,  (332).  Adj. 
Francis  Browne  &  by  line  of  trees  divid- 
ing this  &  land  of  Thomas  Harper, 
thence  by  land  of  Samuell  Parry.  Trans, 
of  9  pers:  Thomas  Parsons,  Henry 
Jenings,  Nich.  Andrewes,  James  Bridg- 


man,  Ann  Worth,  Peter  Holden,  Henry 
Benson,  Rich.  Wallis,  Mary  Hansin. 

JOHN  COSSENS  &  THOMAS 
STEED,  600  acs.  Northumberland  Co., 
24  Nov.  1658,  p.  234,  (333).  Ely.  up- 
on the  Glade  above  Wiccocomocoe  In- 
dian Towne.  Trans,  of  12  pers:  Robert 
Davis,  Miles  Allen,  Wm.  Greene,  Henry 
Clerke,  John  Allen,  Tho.  Dunn,  Antho. 
Jones,     Percy     Evans,     Arthur     Longe, 

Francis  Lee,  Thomas Anthony  Roe. 

Renewed   14  Oct.   1662. 

MR.  THOMAS  LULLAMAN,  400 
acs.  in  Patomeck  freshes,  upon  a  creek 
by  some  called  Yosococoemocoe  being 
a  faire  navigable  creek  &  the  second 
Cr.  above  Chapawansick  the  next  Cr. 
above  Quanticotte,  Sly.  upon  a  seate 
surveyed  for  John  Wood,  being  a  mile 
above  land  of  one  Codsford  &  N.Wly. 
upon  land  of  Gervase  Dodson.  24  Nov. 
1658,  p.  235,  (333).  Trans,  of  8  pers: 
Wm.  Leprack,  Jno.  Parkes,  Wm.  Richer 
(or  Rider),  Nicho.  Parr,  Mary  Atkins, 
Symon  Shelton,  Tho.  Barker,  Fran. 
Harrington. 

THOMAS  ELLIOTT  &  ROBERT 
ELLIOTT,  sons  of  Col.  Anthony  Elliott, 
2000  acs.  in  the  freshes  of  Rappa.  Co., 
beg.  on  the  S.  side  of  the  river  about 
4  mi.  above  Nanzemum  Towne.  25 
Nov.  1658,  p.  235,  (334).  Granted 
unto  Thomas  Purifoy  10  Mar.  1655,  as- 
signed unto  sd.  Thomas  &  Robert  Elliott 
&  due  for  trans,  of  40  pers.* 

ROBERT  BOURNE  &  DANIELL 
PARKE,  gent.,  580  acs.  Yorke  Co.,  on 
S.W.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.,  25  Nov.  1658, 
p.  236,  (334).  Beg.  on  S.W.  side  of 
old  mill  swamp  in  the  line  of  Tho. 
Smith,  to  Richard  Fords  line,  bv  War- 
rany  path,  along  Hottwater  path  &  on 
Rickahock  Path.  Renewal  of  patent 
dated  8  Oct.  1655  &  due  for  trans,  of 
12  pers.* 

MR.  NATHANIELL  BACON,  300 
acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  9  June  1658,  p. 
237,  (335).  On  N.E.  side  of  Matta- 
pony  Riv.,  bounded  from  Southermost 
corner  of  Thomas  Sanders  land,  unto 
Arrakiacoe  Swampe.  Granted  to  John 
Hudson  &  John  Garrett,  6  June  1655, 


382 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


assigned  by  Hudson  unto  John  Bull  & 
by  sd.  Bull  &  Garrett  assigned  unto  sd. 
Bacon.    Trans,  of  6  pers.* 

JOHN  HULL,  694  acs.  Northumber- 
land Co.,  7  Aug.  1658,  p.  237,  (236). 
300  acs.  beg.  N.  upon  Patomeck  Riv. 
from  Sandy  point  at  Chetanks  Cr.  mouth 
&c.  394  acs.  Nly.  upon  sd.  river,  Wly. 
upon  sd.  tract  &  Ely.  upon  Cupitts  Cr. 
300  acs.  granted  to  James  Magregory  & 
Hugh  Fouch  24  July  1650  &  394  acs. 
granted  to  the  same  5  Apr.  1653,  both 
of  which  tracts  assigned  unto  sd.  Hull. 

GERVASE  DODSON,  500  acs.  near 
the  head  of  Chesticond  or  Corrotoman 
Cr.  which  issues  out  of  Fleets  Bay,  S. 
Ely.  upon  his  own  land  &  land  of  John 
Taylor,  deed.  29  Nov.  1658,  p.  238, 
(337).  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Mary  Par- 
rott,  Jno.  Mason,  Eliz.  Attkeson,  Ed- 
ward Harris,  Barnaby  Lowe,  Ann  Evans, 
Leonard  Singlton,  James  Garrett,  Tho- 
mas Morris,  Peter  Hughes. 

SAME.  600  acs.  Westmoreland  Co., 
same  date  &  Page.  N.Ely.  upon 
Machoatick  Riv.,  S.E.  upon  land  of  Mrs. 
Barnett  &  N.Wly.  upon  land  of  Capt. 
Thomas  Davis.  300  acs.  granted  unto 
Peter  Pheepound  16  July  1654  &  as- 
signed unto  sd.  Dodson.  300  acs.  for 
trans,  of  6  pers:  Symon  Pratt,  Edward 
Merriman,  Francis  Wheeler,  Elinor 
Wheeler,  Jno.  Mocoy,  Francis  Hall. 
Renewed  28  Jan.  1662  in  name  of  An- 
drew Pettigrew,  who  married  the 
widow  of  sd.  Dodson. 

THOMAS  KEDBY,  200  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  29  Nov.  1658,  p.  238, 
(338).  Betwixt  two  branches  of  Scotts 
Cr.  &  the  land  James  Magregory  now 
lives  on  &  the  land  he  sold  to  a  dutch- 
man,  Wly.  &  Sly.  upon  land  of  Col. 
Claiborne  betwixt  land  of  Mr.  Jno. 
Hany,  Jno.  Hughlett  &  sd.  Hughlett  & 
sd.  Dutchman.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Robert 
Tomkins,  Jno.  Martin,  Jno.  Srevin  (?), 
Wm.  Surtur.  Renewed  9  Dec.  1662  in 
name  of  Moore  Price,  to  whom  it  was 
assigned  by  Wm.  Presly,  Atty.  of  sd. 
Kedby. 

MR.  JOHN  ELLIS,  1400  acs.  West- 
moreland Co.,   29  Nov.    1658,   p.   239, 


(338).  Near  the  head  of  Appamattucks 
Cr.  called  Hollis  Cr.,  Sly.  upon  land  of 
Col.  Nathaniell  Pope,  Ely.  towards  land 
of  Mr.  Georg  Seaton  formerly  Thomas 
Frizers  land.  Trans,  of  28  pers:  Jno. 
Ellis,  Henry  Cooke,  James  Hill,  Aron 
Hughes  Charles  Loyder,  Everad  Roberts, 
Jno.  Roberts,  Robert  Greene,  Wm.  Leeke, 
Mary  Thompson,  Ann  Jones,  Katherins 
Wms.  (Williams),  Maudlin  Evans, 
Ursula  Clarke,  Mary  Willis,  Alex.  Ell- 
cock,  Jane  Harris,  Jno.  Moore,  Tho. 
Atkins,  Wm.  Waters,  Daniell  Cole, 
Xpher.  Granger,  Rich.  Kilbourne,  Jno. 
Darsay,  Wm.  Charlton,  Robt.  Harwell, 
Walter  Stoake,  Hugh  Lee. 

JOHN  EVANS,  1650  acs.  Westmore- 
land Co.,  29  Nov.  1658,  p.  239,  (338). 
Among  branches  of  Rosier  Cr.  above 
Apamattucks,  Sly.  towards  land  of  Mr. 
John  Ellis.  Trans,  of  33  pers:  Jno. 
Evans,  Jno.  Evans,  Jr.,  Timothy  Hill, 
Robt.  Lowe,  Mary  Evans,  Step.  Allen, 
Tho.  Thorpe,  Abigail  Parker,  James 
Allen,  Barnaby  Little,  Rice  Jones,  Peter 
Lowe,  Tho.  Alstone,  James  Morrison, 
Leonard  Stronge,  John  Batt,  Edward 
Hill,  John  Moyses,  John  Clerke,  Henry 
Kinge,  Charles  Hill,  John  Stoile,  Arthur 
Shoare,  Mary  Lord,  John  Thorpe,  Eliz. 
Lord,  Sarah  Vaus,  Tabitha  Hare,  Ann 
Thompson,  Ann  Dakinn,  Elinor  Thomp- 
son, Edward  Person,  Rich.  Allen. 

COL.  JOHN  TRUSSELL  &  GER- 
VASE DODSON,  1000  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  29  Nov.  1658,  p.  240, 
(339).  On  E.  side  of  Chickacone  Riv., 
N.Wly.  upon  land  of  Jacob  Contancean 
&  Col.  Mattrom,  dee'd.,  running  by  Mr. 
Chandlers  land  &  N.Ely,  upon  a  line 
dividing  it  from  land  of  Doctr.  Russell. 
Trans,  of  20  pers:  Tho.  Williams, 
Henry  Jones,  Wm.  Ashwell,  Jno.  Lay- 
ton,  Nath.  Coggin,  Mary  Greene,  Tho. 
Hollis,  Peter  Neale,  Ann  Merriman, 
James  Ashwell,  Bartholomew  How, 
Tho.  Merriman,  Peter  Crosse,  Wm. 
Chesley,  Mary  Goyse,  Charles  Smart, 
David  Persan,  Tho.  Hall,  Sarah  Ash- 
well, Mary  Horton. 

MR.  ROBERT  COLLINS,  1000  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  29  Nov.  1658,  p. 
240,  (339).  N.Wly.  upon  land  of  Mr. 
John    Chandler,    deed.,    at   branches    of 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


383 


greate  Wiccocomocoe  towards  Corroto- 
man  &  Moratticoe.  The  following 
names  appear  under  this  record:  Robert 
Collins,  twice,  Ann  Collins,  Robert  Col- 
lins, Jr.,  Mary  Collins,  Rebecca  Collins, 
Tho.  Dunn,  Ralph  Lowe,  Edward  Hales, 
Francis  Parker,  Susan  Parker,  Sarah 
Holdin,  Wm.  Stone,  Sam.  Morris,  Wm. 
Molton,  Edward  Davis,  Mary  Davis, 
Hugh  Coates,  Wm.  Barrett,  Ann  Barrett. 

THOMAS  DODSON,  1200  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  29  Nov.  1658,  p. 

241,  (340).  Ely.  upon  the  head  of 
lands  of  Col.  Lee,  John  Hull,  Thomas 
&  others,  Sly.  upon  land  of  Jno.  Cos- 
sens  &  Tho.  Steede,  &  Nly.  upon  land 
of  Christopher  Garlington.  Trans,  of 
24  pers:  Tho.  Dodson,  Jno.  Palmer, 
David  Jenkin,  Mary  Linton,  Thomas 
Henly,  Edward  Dennis,  Rich.  Person, 
Abigail  How,  Wm.  Gosnell,  Tho. 
Arthur,  Abreall  Harvey,  Ann  Parker, 
Rice  Jones,  Richard  Nealmes,  Susan 
Roe,  Tho.  Addams,  Richard  Golbourne, 
Jno.  Farmer,  Wm.  Weekes,  Luke  Mor- 
ris, Mathew  Morris,  Tabitha  Hart,  Jno. 
Addams,    Bridgett    Freman. 

MR.  PETER  MONTAGUE,  200  acs. 
adj.  Oliver  Segar,  on  S.  side  of  Rappa. 
Riv.  at  the  mouth  of  Sandy  pointe  Cr., 
running  to  land  of  Mr.  Georg  Ludlowe 
now  in  possession  of  sd.  Montague.  16 
Jan.  1658,  p.  241,  (340).  Trans,  of  4 
pers:  Peter  Smith,  Wm.  Worrell,  Jno. 
Sewell,  Ann  Bryan.  Note:  This  patent 
hath  a  mistake  in  the  recordinge  which 
is  rectified  &  recorded  againe  in  folio 
249.    Tho.  Brereton,  C.  Ct. 

MR.  JOHN  JADWIN,  650  acs.  on 
S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  upon  the  head  of 
Sharpes  Cr.  500  acs.  beg.  behind  land 
of  Jno.  Sharpe  &  150  acs.  neare  land 
granted  sd.  Sharpe  &  lately  in  possession 
of  Wm.  Thompson.    23  Nov.   1658,  p. 

242,  (340).  500  acs.  granted  to  Ran- 
dolph Chamlett  22  Nov.  1654  &  by 
him  sold  to  sd.  Jadwin.  150  acs. 
granted  to  sd.  Sharpe,  by  him  assigned 
to  Wm.  Tompson,  who  assigned  to  sd. 
Jadwin. 

MATOR  JAMES  GOODWIN,  400 
acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  24  Dec.  1658, 
p.    242,    (341).    Upon    the   head    of   a 


creek  falling  into  Patomeck  Cr.  &  upon 
land  of  John  Withers.  Trans,  of  8 
pers.* 

WM.  WITHERS,  400  acs.  West- 
moreland Co.,  18  Dec.  1658,  p.  243, 
(342).  At  the  head  of  a  small  creek 
extending  from  land  of  Major  James 
Goodwin  W.N.W.  &c.  Trans,  of  8 
pers:  Jno.  Davis,  Rich.  Symons,  Wm. 
Harris,  Mary  Cooke,  Doraty  Harmer, 
Wm.  Rideinge,  Jno.  Jnoson  (Johnson), 
Robert  Jones. 

JOHN  WITHERS,  320  acs.  West- 
moreland Co.,  18  Dec.  1658,  p.  243, 
(342).  Beg.  on  land  of  Mr.  Thomas 
Fowke  at  the  head  of  a  small  creek 
falling  into  Patomeck  Riv.  Trans,  of 
6  pers:  James  Martinge,  Wm.  Fisher, 
Robert  Dennis,  John  Roberts,  Mary 
Wms.  (Williams),  Eliz.  Gorting.  Re- 
newed 20  July   1662. 

COL.    MANNERINGE    HAMOND, 

600  acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  11  Nov.  1658, 
p.  243,  (342).  On  S.  side  of  Yorke 
Riv.  bet.  Col.  Hamonds  lower  Cr.  & 
Pouncyes  Cr.    Trans,  of  12  pers.* 

MR.  JOHN  HANSFORD,  850  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,  13  Dec.  1658,  p.  244, 
(343).  75  acs.  upon  a  branch  of  Capt. 
Wests  Cr.,  Wly.  on  N.  side  of  land  of 
the  widow  Downe,  &  on  S.  side  with 
land  of  Thomas  Weston,  Marriner.  650 
acs.  Ely.  upon  sd.  Cr.  &  Nly.  upon 
Sergeant  Waines  land.  125  acs.  adj. 
said  tracts,  land  of  Capt.  Harrwood, 
dec'd.  (now  Capt.  Hurd's)  725  acs. 
granted  10  June  1652  &  the  residue  for 
trans,  of  3  pers:  Rowland  Thomas, 
Charles   Dunne,  Tho.   Symmons. 

JOHN  WOODINGTON,  27  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  15  Jan.  1658,  p.  244, 
(343).  S.Ely,  upon  the  mouth  of  Corro- 
toman  Riv.,  S.Wly.  &  N.Wly.  upon 
Hand  Neck  Cr.  &  N.Ely,  upon  land  of 
Edward  Grimes,  dec'd.  Granted  to  Wm. 
Rawton,  15  June  1655  &  assigned  unto 
sd.  Woodington.  Renewed  18  Mar. 
1662  in  name  of  Domingue  (or  Don- 
ninge)  Thurriot  to  whom  it  was  as- 
signed by  Wm.  Wranton  (or  Wrauton), 
assignee  of  sd.  Woodington. 


384 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


MR.  WM.  UNDERWOOD,  882  acs. 
Rappa.  Co.,  10  Sept.  1658,  p.  245, 
(344).  Bet.  some  of  the  head  branches 
of  Pepetick  Cr.  &  Mr.  Popes  Cr.,  beg. 
near  Rappa.  path,  extending  to  the  head 
of  lands  of  Silvester  Thatcher  &  Thomas 
Whitlocke  &  adj.  land  of  Thomas 
Wright.  Trans,  of  18  pers:  Wm. 
Adage,  Wm.  Gooch,  Vavastin  Gould- 
ing,  Henry  Jarman,  James  Whitebone, 
Wm.  Wignall,  Robert  Sheffeild,  Mar- 
garet Johnson,  Nicho.  Glassian,  Mathew 
Carrack,  Sam.  Vaughan,  John  Butt, 
Grace  Tomkins,  Georg  Rooknee,  Tho. 
Johnson,  Marg.  Hughes,  Wm.  Carter, 
Paul  Wood. 

SAME.  2784  acs.  Same  county,  date 
&  page.  Parallel  to  land  of  Thomas 
Whitlock,  &  Richard  Coleman,  by  path 
leading  to  Nansatticoe.  1400  acs. 
granted  to  Wm.  Smart  15  Mar.  1657, 
assigned  to  Wm.  Clapham,  Jr.,  who  as- 
signed to  sd.  Underwood;  the  residue 
for  trans,  of  28  pers:  Peter  Leonard, 
Mary  Hawkes,  Maudlin  Thomas,  Jno. 
Roberts,  Robert  Smith,  Fran.  Settle,  Jno. 
GofTell,  Dan.  Hunter,  Jno.  Stray,  Math. 
Whaite,  Hen.  Carpenter,  Tho.  Stephen- 
son, Alice  a  maide,  Jno.  Hull,  Robert 
Hull,  Xpher.  Browninge,  Ja.  Wmson 
(Williamson),  Ann  Lemon,  Wm. 
Goffell,  Tho.  Chettwood  3  times,  Nicho. 
Redferne,  Rich.  Walker,  Step.  Goffell, 
Zakery  Efface,  Mich.  Filliott,  Jeremy 
Hobert.  Renewed  13  May  1679  in  the 
name  of  Wm.  Underwood,  son  of  sd. 
Underwood. 

ROBERT  ARMSTRONGE,  650  acs. 
Rappa.  Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 

of   1658,    p.    246,    (345). 

About  3  mi.  from  the  riverside  &  adj. 
land  of  Sir  Henry  Chichley,  running  to- 
wards a  branch  which  runs  into  the 
eastermost  maine  branch  of  Ralphs  Cr. 
running  into  Puscattecon.  Trans,  of  13 
pers.*  Jno.  Prichard,  Wm.  Dixon,  Wm. 
Bridges. 

ROBERT  LINNEE,  200  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  1658  (date  blank),  p.  246,  (346). 
About  3  mi.  distant  from  the  riverside 
adj.  land  of  Robert  Armstronge.  Trans. 
of  4  pers:    Antho  Stephens  4  times. 

MR.  THOMAS  ROLFE,  50  acs.  in 
Chickahomyny  Riv.   on   the  N.E.   side, 


N.E.  on  Richard  Newe  &  N.W.  on  his 
own  land.  16  Sept.  1658,  p.  247, 
(346).    Trans,  of  1  per.* 

ALEXANDER  FLEMINGE,  250  acs. 
being  part  of  a  marsh  called  Parretts 
Marsh,  on  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
bounded  on  S.E.  with  a  Cr.  opposite 
Pages    land    &    N.E.    with    Colemans 

Thickett.  of  1658,   p.   247, 

(347).  Trans,  of  5  pers:  Jno.  Wright, 
Margarett  Edderman,  Finniell  Danah 
(?),  Jno.  Mill,  Phillip  Pascall. 

MR.  GEORGE  WHALE,  300  acs. 
neere  the  Glade  above  Wiccocomocoe 
Indian  Towne,  adj.  S.  side  of  land  of 
John  Cossens  &  Thomas  Steed  & 
parallel  to  tract  assigned  sd.  Whale  by 
Gervase  Dodson.  29  Nov.  1658,  p. 
247,  (347).  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Mary 
Baxter,  Ann  Wetherrell,  John  Dodd, 
Mary  Nicholls,  Roger  Gain,  Jno.  Jack- 
son. 

JOHN  GORE,  150  acs.  Lancaster  Co., 
16  Jan.  1658,  p.  248,  (348).  On  N. 
side  of  Peanketanke  Riv.,  S.E.  upon  land 
of  Augustine  Moore.  Trans,  of  3  pers: 
Sir  Henry  Chichley,  Rich.  Chamley, 
Jno.  Layward.  Assigned  by  Mr.  Potter 
to  Mr.  Curtis,  who  assigned  to  sd.  Gore. 
Renewed  in  his  name  24  May  1662. 

ROBERT  MIDLETON,  250  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  16  Jan.  1658,  p.  248,  (348). 
On  the  head  of  Mr.  Burnhams  Cr.  alias 
Sanderland  Cr.,  beg.  at  his  own  line 
running  to  corner  of  Tho.  Pattison  & 
Robert  Chowninge  &c.  Trans,  of  5 
pers:*  Note:  The  rights  due  by  a  cer- 
tificate from  Lancaster  Ct.,  6  Aug.  1653 
granted  to  Wm.  Newsam  &  assigned  to 
sd.  Midleton  in  which  the  names  are 
omitted.  Renewed  15  Dec.  1663  in 
name  of  Tho.  Kidd. 

RICHARD  LEWIS,  500  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co.,  16  Jan.  1658,  p.  248,  (349). 
Running  up  branch  of  Copelands  Cr.  to 
land  of  Robert  Kemp  &  Minord  Minson. 
Trans,  of  10  pers.*  Note:  The  rights 
are  due  by  a  former  patent  granted  him 
for  500  acs.  for  which  Mr.  Potter  had 
a  former  grant. 

SAME.  200  acs.  Same  countv  & 
date,  page  249,  (349).    On  the  head  of 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


385 


Sanderland  Cr.,  beg.  at  white  oak  of 
Mr.  Cuthbert  Potter,  running  to  land  of 
Thomas  Willis  &  Robt.  Midleton. 
Trans,  of  4  perS:  Adry  White,  Tho. 
White,  Tho.  Surfleete,  Jno.  Castle.  Re- 
newed in  his  name  11  Jan.  1663. 

MR.  PETER  MONTAGUE,  200  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  16  Jan.  1658,  p.  249, 
(350).  On  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  adj. 
land  of  Randall  Chamley  &  Oliver 
Seager.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Peter  Smith, 
Wm.  Worrall,  Jno.  Sewell,  Ann  Bryan. 

LAMBATH  MOORE  &  BARTHO- 
LOMEW LINTON,  412  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  17  Feb.  1658,  p.  249,  (350).  On 
N.  side  of  Peanketanke  Riv.  about  a  mi. 
from  same.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  Tho. 
Okelly,  Henry  Tollock,  John  Cramer, 
Sam.  Deluke,  Jno.  Savary,   2  Negroes. 

MR.  EDWARD  LOCKEY,  1600  acs. 
New  Kent.  Co.,  on  N.  side  of  Mattap- 
pany  Riv.,  25  Jan.  1658,  p.  250,  (350). 
Adj.  Ahorecock  branch,  Swdly.  upon 
land  of  Lt.  Col.  Abrall,  crossing  the 
swamp  &  along  land  of  Richard  Evans. 
Trans,  of  32  pers:  John  Emerson, 
Rich.  Cleaton,  John  Cole,  Tho.  Evans, 
Wm.  Campion,  Edmond  Richeson,  Wm. 
Lawrence,  Wm.  Shepard,  Abraham  Can- 
by,  Edward  West,  Tho.  Feverstone,  Richd. 
Bennett,  Jno.  Sobderme,  Jno.  White, 
Abra.  Preston,  Wm.  Hall,  Jno.  Walker, 
Thomas  Hill,  Jno.  Townsend,  Edmond 
Gosse,  Clemolius  Smith,  James  Morfrey, 
Georg  Fendall,  Peter  Fisher,  Richard 
Lucke,  Richard  Lendall,  Xpher.  Edy, 
Robt.  Montgomery,  Richard  Jones, 
Menery  Mells,  Wm.  James,  John 
Cliford. 

CAPT.     RICHARD     BARNHOUSE, 

900  acs.  James  City  Co.,  7  Feb.  1658, 
p.  250,  (351).  On  W.  side  of  Burchen 
Sw.  380  acs.  by  patent  28  Oct.  1656  & 
residue  for  trans,  of  11  pers:  Wm. 
Halliard,  Mary  Wild,  Fran.  Fulker, 
Rich.  Adams,  Tho.  Warder,  Tho.  Jones, 
Edward  Richards,  Mary  Surlinge,  Mar- 
tin White,  Rog.  Walker,  Wm.  Clarke. 
Renewed  26  Feb.   1665. 

MR.  JOHN  VOSCOMBE,  961 
acs.  Nansamond  Co.,  5  Oct.  1658,  p. 
251,  (352).    829  acs.  beg.  at  miles  end 


of  land  of  Michill  Wilcoxe,  running 
E.  &  adj.  land  of  Georg  White,  N.  to  a 
place  called  Newgate,  S.  through  a 
great  pecoson  to  Langleys  Cr.  belonging 
to  Western  branch  of  Elizabeth  Riv. 
102  acs.  beg.  at  Newgate  in  the  lower 
parish  of  Nansamond,  beg.  at  Thomas 
Burbage's  line,  running  by  Georg 
White's  &  his  own  land.  829  acs. 
granted  to  John  Ashcombe  7  Oct.  1646 
&  assigned  to  sd.  Voscombe,  &  132  acs. 
for  trans,  of  3  pers:  Hugh  Bibion, 
David  a  Welchman,  Wm.  an  Irishman. 
Assigned  him  by  Mr.  Wm.  Deynes. 
Note:  The  word  John  put  out  &  Wil- 
liam put  in  by  order  Genii.  Ct.  Apr.  19, 
1687.    By  Wm.  Edwards,  Clk.  Gen.  Ct. 

JOHN  CURTIS,  1300  acs.  Westmore- 
land Co.,  2  Dec.  1657,  p.  251,  (353). 
Nly.  upon  Patomeck  Riv.  &  Ely.  upon 
land  of  John  Walton.  Granted  unto 
Nicholas  Meriweather  1  June  1654  & 
assigned  unto  sd.  Curtis,  who  assigned 
same  to  Edwa.  Roe  in  whose  name  it 
was  renewed  10  June  1664. 

CAPT.  AUGUSTINE  WARNER. 
3000  acs.  Northumberland  or  Lancaster 
Co.,  7  Feb.  1658,  p.  252,  (353).  Being 
in  the  borders  of  both,  the  destination 
being  not  yet  made  betwixt  the  counties. 
Bet.  branches  of  Corrotoman  &  other 
branches  of  great  Wiccocomocoe,  butt- 
ing upon  land  of  Robert  Collins,  to- 
wards land  of  Mr.  John  Chandler,  to- 
wards land  that  was  sometime  patented 
for  Tho.  Coggin  &  upon  some  branches 
of  Rappa.  &  Morratticoe.  Trans,  of  60 
pers:  John  Haward,  Mary  Grey,  Robert 
Bonnes,  Tho.  Ralph,  Rich.  Cockes,  Wm. 
Smith,  Jno.  Seaton,  Tho.  Thompson, 
Robert  Porter,  Wm.  Harfinch,  Henry 
Tood,  Sarah  Moore,  Tho.  Alkenhead, 
James  Baker,  Peter  Stoakes,  Mary 
Hamilton,  Mr.  James  Cant  twice,  Wm. 
Horsman,  Wm.  Travis,  Jno.  Watson, 
James  Musson,  Geo.  Mussard,  Robert 
Cooper,  Roger  Greene,  Sam.  Holland, 
Tho.  Stare,  Ardor  Moucrony  (?),  Tohn 
Coldrin,  John  Marley,  Tho.  Gilbert, 
Francisco  Martin,  Wm.  Downinge, 
Eliza.  Jones,  Mr.  David  Cant  6  voyages, 
Thomas  Bashes,  John  Willis,  5  Irish 
servants,  John  Warner,  John  Robins, 
Dorothy  Pope,  David  a  Negroe,  An- 
drew Stephens,  John  White,  Wm.  Smith, 


386 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Thomas  Tlye,  Tho.  Chrightoane,  Ed- 
mond  Warren,  John  Lurensoe,  Peter 
Jones,  Homer  Fitz-Symons. 

JOHN  DORRANT,  150  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  26  Feb.  1658,  p.  253,  (354). 
On  N.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.  &  N.W. 
side  of  a  branch  of  Montassup  Sw. 
Trans,  of  3  pers:  John  Hollman,  Wm. 
Thomas,  Henry  Foard. 

THOMAS  BELL,  500  acs.  New  Kent 
Co.,  6  Mar.  1658,  p.  253,  (354).  On 
N.  E.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.  behind  land 
of  Ashwell  Batton.  Trans,  of  10  pers.* 
The  rights  due  to  this  patent  are  as- 
signed to  sd.  Bell  by  Francis  Morgan  to 
whom  they  were  due  by  patent  dated 
1652,  which  he  relinquished. 

MARKE  FOSTER,  500  acs.  upon 
Ewd.  side  of  Pudden  Cr.  in  the  eastern- 
most river  in  Mockjack  Bay,  running  by 
marked  trees  of  Goodman  Halliard.  6 
Mar.  1658,  p.  253,  (355).  Trans,  of 
10  pers:    Grace  Farrwell,  Eliz.  Sternell, 

Robert  Read,  Jno.  Correld,  Robert , 

Silvester  Wells,  Jno.  Mackdaniell,  Geo. 
Burt  (or  Bart),  John  Ham,  Wm.  Ableck. 
Note:  Renewed  in  name  of  Marke 
Foster  his  son,  13  Feb.  1661. 

THOMAS  MERRIDITH,  450  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  25  Feb.  1658,  p.  254, 
(355).  On  both  sides  of  Rickahock 
path,  beg.  by  Burchen  Sw.,  to  land  of 
Mr.  Richard  Barnhouse  &c.  Trans,  of 
9  pers:  Jone  Nicholls,  Rich.  Charl- 
wood,  Robert  Peacocke,  Wm.  Pott- 
powler,  Nich.  Hedge,  Joane  Rayman, 
Ann  Cloomer,  Joseph  Morris,  Wm. 
Newman.    Assigned  by  Jno.  Davis. 

JOHN  FLEMINGE,  250  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  28  Feb.  1658,  p.  254,  (355). 
On  S.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.  behind  land 
of  Reese  Hughes  &  running  to  land  of 
Wm.  Pullam.    Trans,  of  5  pers.* 

CHARLES  EDMONDS,  132  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  28  Feb.  1658,  p.  254, 
(356).  On  S.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.,  adj. 
the  devdt.  he  lives  upon.  Trans,  of  3 
pers:  Adam  Walker,  Peter  Mackerell, 
Margarett  Ibsam  (or  Ilsam).  Assigned 
by  Jno.  Davis. 


SAME.  2750  acs.  Same  county  & 
date,  p.  255,  (356).  Beg.  on  N.  side 
of  Diascunn  Sw.  &  running  by  Chicka- 
homyny  Sw.  Trans,  of  55  pers:  Tho. 
Holliday,  Joseph  Peese,  Jno.  Smith, 
Henry  Bennett,  Robt.  Watts,  Thomas 
Tilsby,  Abigail  Willis,  Isaack  Franklin, 
Fran.  Faulkner,  Tho.  Parson,  Fran. 
Warren,  Tho.  Blacke,  Rich.  Joy,  Jude 
Rollett,  Jones  Howes,  Edward  Terrell, 
Mary  Wilson,  Eliz.  Panton,  Geo.  Wood, 
Eliz.  Peake,  Villy  Volly  Howell,  Peter 
Gill,  Mary  Gill,  Phillip  Gill,  Eliz.  Ro- 
hoke,  Wm.  Richards,  Ann  Parker,  Jno. 
Jenings,  Wm.  Walker,  Coner  Cowe, 
Tho.  TufTes — assigned  by  Jno.  Davis. 
Jno.  Leaper,  Mary  Bachelor,  Georg 
Carter,  Jno.  Blosse,  John  Parke,  Tho. 
Townell,  Mary  Coalter,  (or  Coulter), 
Richard  Bayley,  Jude  Bryatt,  Rockell 
Norman,  Francis  Grigges  &  4  Negroes 
— assigned  by  Wm.  Hughes  to  Jno.  Davis 
&  by  him  to  Edmonds;  Rich.  Terrell, 
Jno.  Wms.  (Williams),  Jane  Bradman, 
Mary  Snell  (or  Suell),  assigned  by 
Walter  Dickenson  to  Jno.  Woodington 
&  by  him  to  Edmonds. 

COL.  THO.  SWANN,  900  acs.  Surry 
Co.,  5  Mar.  1658,  p.  255,  (357).  On 
S.  side  of  James  Riv.  &  E.  side  of  the 
blackwater  about  3  mi.  Wly.  from  John 
Bradyes,  N.W.  upon  land  of  Capt.  Jor- 
dan &  Sly.  into  the  Pidgeon  Sw.  Re- 
newal of  patent  to  him  dated  7  Feb. 
1655. 

THOMAS  HARRIS,  1000  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  2  Mar.  1658,  p.  256,  (357). 
Upon  a  swamp  running  into  the  W. 
branch  of  Nansamond  Riv.,  including  2 
Indian  feilds.  Trans,  of  20  pers:  Jno. 
Hardy,  Alexander  Vaughan,  Ann  Lees, 
Wm.  Todd,  Eliz.  Jones,  Mary  Wood, 
Jno.  Davis,  Jno.  Griffin,  Fran.  Ander- 
son, Jno.  Pew,  Ann  Greene,  Eliz.  En- 
some  (or  Eusome),  Weltin  Harris, 
Anth.  Arnold,  Sam.  Trobury,  Alexan- 
der Canill.    Renewed  18  Mar.  1662. 

MR.  JOHN  BROMFEILD,  1000  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  5  Mar.  1658,  p.  256, 
(358).  On  S.  W.  side  of  Chickahominy 
Riv.,  beg.  at  the  mouth  of  Mattahuncks 
neck,  over  same  to  Webbs  run,  to 
Nickadewans  path,  along  Toorihams 
branch  to  back  of  Mr.  Ham's  land,  to 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


387 


head  of  Wickwas  run,  including  a  small 
Indian  feild  in  the  bottom  of  Musconte. 
650  acs.  granted  last  of  Mar.  1656  & 
350  acs.  granted  John  Linge  1  Nov. 
1655  &  assigned  to  sd.  Bromfeild.  Re- 
newed 11  Feb.  1663  in  name  of  Tho. 
Towner. 

PHILLIP  CHARLES,  1690  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  17  Mar.  1658,  p.  257,  (358). 
1550  acs.  in  Chickahominy  Riv.,  beg. 
next  to  land  of  William  Taylor  &  run- 
ning to  a  neck  of  land  belonging  to 
Richard  Price;  140  acs.  upon  Souther- 
most  branch  of  Warrany  Cr.  on  E.  side 
of  sd.  river,  from  corner  tree  of  land 
of  Wm.  Stronge,  along  trees  of  Mr. 
Soanes  &c.  1550  acs,  by  patent  to 
Georg  Lobb,  Thomas  Peirce  &  Tho. 
Warne  &  by  sd.  Lobb  assigned  to  sd. 
Charles  &  140  acs.  by  patent  to  sd. 
Charles  dated  8  Apr.  1656,  surrendered 
&  joyned  in  one  patent. 

NICHOLAS  SEABRELL,  150  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  1  Mar.  1658,  p.  257, 
(359) .  On  N.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.  &  N. 
side  of  a  branch  of  Montesup  Sw. 
Trans,  of  3  pers:  Andrew  Pelch,  John 
Bennett,  Ralph  Gandee. 

JOHN  PETEETE,  500  acs.  New  Kent 
Co.,  5  Mar.  1658,  p.  258,  (360).  Upon 
N.  side  of  Mattapany  Riv.,  upon  As- 
sanamayuscock  Br.  of  sd.  river,  about 
3  mi.  from  sd.  river,  running  alongst 
land  supposed  to  be  surveyed  for  Georg 
Chapman.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Sarah 
Richeson,  Richard  Halliway,  James  Col- 
lins, Jeremiah  Lerer  (or  Levar),  Jane 
Cole,  Owin  Macar,  Phillip  Prosser,  John 
Gouteer,  Elianor  Richeson,  1  Negroe. 
Renewed  10  May  1668. 

ROBERT  TOMLIN,  400  acs.  on  N. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  7  Mar.  1658,  p. 
258,  (360).  Beg.  at  the  head  of  a 
small  creek  dividing  this  &  lands  of 
Samuell  Nicholls  &  Thomas  &  William 
Mosse,  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Robert  Foote, 
Jeremy  Sparrow,  Wm.  Home,  Wm. 
Fiddewent,  Robert  Aeon,  Tho.  Maulin, 
Jno.  Cainn  (?),  An  Coulton.  Renewed 
11  Feb.  1663. 

THOMAS  CARTER,  220  acs.  Nansa- 
mond  Co.,  4  Mar.  1658,  p.  259,  (361). 


At  the  head  of  land  of  Edward  Carter, 
running  E.  by  line  of  Wm.  Tinse,  Tho- 
mas Addison  &  Richard  Russell.  Trans, 
of  5  pers:  Thomas  Carter  twice,  Wm. 
Read,  Wm.  Smith. 

EDWARD  WINGATE,  200  acs.  at 
the  head  of  the  Western  branch  of  Eliz. 
Riv.  4  Mar.  1658,  p.  259,  (361).  Adj. 
lands  of  Thomas  Cottell,  to  land  of 
John  Golleffe.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Fran- 
cis Hynes,  Math.  Smith,  Katherine  Dob- 
day,  Crane  Collins. 

THOMAS  DYER,  300  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  4  Mar.  1658,  p.  259,  (361). 
At  a  place  called  Beech  ridge,  beg.  at 
the  head  of  Robert  Capps  land.  Trans, 
of  6  pers:  Ann  Sedger,  Wm.  Shreive, 
Rich.  Skegs,  Rich.  Reynolds,  Wm. 
Merriday,    Ann   Craford. 

EDWARD  VAUGHAN,  p.  260.  No 
record.  Space  left  blank.  Not  recorded 
in  new  Book  4. 

THOMAS  ROBBISON,  FRANCIS 
GOWER,  ROBERT  SISSON  &  JOHN 
DE  YONGE,  174  acs.  in  Rappa.  Co.  on 
N.  side  of  sd.  river,  11  Mar.  1658,  p. 
260,  (362).  Faceing  the  river  &  ex- 
tending along  line  of  trees  dividing  this 
&  land  of  the  abovementioned,  near  the 
mouth  of  Wellinge  alias  Totoskin  Cr. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  John  Fisher,  Tho. 
Gray,  John  Ackuson,  Mary  Johnson. 

MR.  WM.  BLACKEY,  1400  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  7  Mar.  1658,  p.  261, 
(362).  1000  acs.  on  E.  side  of  Little 
Queens  Cr.,  beg.  by  the  swamp,  running 
by  land  patented  by  Mr.  Tho.  Vause  to 
land  of  William  Cox  &  400  acs.  beg. 
by  sd.  main  swamp,  Wly.  along  land  of 
Tho.  Gibson,  S.Wly.  by  Georg  Gills 
land  &  to  sd.  1000  acs.  including  certain 
Indian  feilds.  1000  acs.  by  patent  dated 
28  Nov.  1656  &  400  acs.  for  trans,  of 
8  pers:  Symon  Butler,  Jno.  Coocke, 
Jone  Wheeler,  James  Carter,  Jno. 
Lousell  (or  Lonsell),  Jno.  Rigbee,  Jone 
Goldfinch,  James  Harvey.  Assigned  to 
John  Dibdall,  deed.,  who  gave  same  to 
Joane  Dibdall,  his  wife,  by  will,  &  re- 
newed in  her  name  15  Feb.  1663. 

MR.  THOMAS  HAMPTON,  400 
acs.  James   City  Co.,   8   Mar.    1658,   p. 


388 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


261,  (363).  On  N.  side  of  a  branch 
of  Tyoscun,  bounded  Ely.  on  Mr.  Hurds 
land,  Sly.  on  his  own,  Wly.  towards 
Tyascunn  &  land  of  Robert  Grimes. 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  Eliz.  Sanders,  Eliza- 
beth Dallinge,  Tho.  Gibson,  Mary 
Loyd,  Susan  Duffell,  John  Rastin,  Wm. 
Skame,  Jane  Cooke. 

THO.  BOSWELL,  500  acs.  in  Pato- 
meck  Riv.  in  the  freshes  above  Anacosta 
Island,  9  Mar.  1658,  p.  262,  (363). 
S.Ely,  upon  a  tract  of  10,000  acs.  be- 
longing to  Jno.  Wood.  Trans,  of  10 
pers:  Wm.  Sanders,  John  Angell,  Sarah 
Johnson,  Ellinor  Fishbrooke,  John  Perry, 
John  Wotton,  Georg  Ball,  Tho.  Dauncy, 
Wm.  Wilson,  Georg  Grey. 

ANTHONY  STEPHENS,  650  acs.  on 
N.  side  of  Mattapany  Riv.,  a  mile  from 
same  &  backing  part  of  a  devdt.  of  land 
of  Edward  Digges,  Esq.  11  Mar.  1658, 
p.  262,  (364).  Extending  along  line  of 
trees  dividing  this  &  land  of  Wm.  Goffe. 
Trans.  13  pers:  John  Bright,  Nicho. 
Jackson,  John  Wells,  Wm.  Symes,  Wm. 
Woodward,  Abra.  Wood,  Antho. 
Brookes,  Mary  Lewis,  John  Parmyter, 
Wm.  Trevers,  Ann  Osborne,  James 
Kiddington,  Maudlin  Thomas. 

JOHN  WILLIAMS,  1800  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  on  N.  side  sd.  Riv.,  towards  head 
of  Farnham  Cr.,  11  Mar.  1658,  p.  263, 
(364).  1000  acs.  beg.  on  a  point  in  a 
forke  of  the  N.E.  &  N.W.  branches 
of  sd.  Cr.  &  800  acs.  beg.  at  Norther- 
most  tree  of  sd.  tract.  Trans,  of  36 
pers:  Joseph  Brooke,  Tho.  Wentworth, 
Bridgett  Slaughter,  Wm.  Lucy,  Edmond 
Tuke,  Rich.  Bladwell,  Wm.  Mynors, 
Tho.  Perry,  Jno.  Loyd,  James  Freeman, 
James  Bridgman,  Wm.  Curtis,  Robert 
Smith,  Martha  Cox,  Mathew  Price, 
Henry  Jenings,  Peter  Ward,  Tho.  Tar- 
ner,  Jno.  Higdon,  Mathew  Fowler,  Tho. 
Hill,  Rolph  Cartwright,  Tho.  Winter, 
Ann  Beare,  Katherine  Mosse,  Eliz. 
Eaton,  Elder  Eldridge,  Barbara  Ma- 
thewes,  Ann  Smith,  Judith  Gascott, 
Wm.  Jache,  Mary  Cunny,  Morgan 
Mackland,  Judith  Gassett,  Margett  O 
Shulivan. 

MR.  HENRY  CORBYN  &  MR. 
GERRARD     FOWKE,     3000     acs.     in 


Patomeck  freshes  between  the  two  main 
branches,  15  Mar.  1658,  p.  264,  (365). 
Extending  towards  Heme  Island.  Trans, 
of  60  pers:  Andrew  Bellarke,  Wm. 
Allen,  Jno.  Powell,  Bridgett  Gardner, 
Rich.  Hushly,  Patrick  Burser,  Shadrack 
Wallinns  (?),  Rich.  Lowe,  Wm.  Allen, 
Tho.  Tompson,  Andrew  Blarte,  Wm. 
Baily,  Rich.  Price,  Rich.  Page,  Elinor 
Abbott,  Jno.  Cahowne,  Alex.  Nicholson, 
Jno.  Makinney,  Wm.  Bourne,  Wm. 
Corman,  Dunkin  Makeny,  Alex.  Mac- 
kenny,  Tho.  Jollity,  Daniell  Mackane, 
Fran.  Lyelle,  Susan  Michell,  Samuell 
Alexander,  Margarett  Rookesby,  Chris- 
tian Dennis,  Geo.  Day,  Jno.  Moses, 
Robert  Reyman,  Dorcas  Jones,  Mr. 
Horsmandine,  twice,  Susanna  Horsman- 
dine,  Jno.  Slich  (?),  Jane  Sumer,  Wm. 
Jane  Thomas  (Wm.  &  Jane  Thomas?), 
Rich.  Curd,  Nich.  Jenkins,  Jno.  Tarner, 
Ro.  Brisly,  Christian  Anne  (Anne  Chris- 
tian ?),  Hen.  Wenne,  Clemt.  Mallin, 
Jno.  Codier,  Robt.  Jones,  Jno.  Lock, 
Margt.  Raymond,  Mary  Rolfe,  Mary 
Bingley,  Eliz.  Hayes,  Ann  Jenkins,  Geo. 
Walker. 

RICHARD  HAMLETT,  497  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  10  Mar.  1658,  p.  264, 
(366).  On  N.E.  side  of  Chickahominy 
Riv.  on  E.  side  of  Warrany  Cr.  alias 
Tyascunn,  bounding  Sly.  on  the  long- 
necke  run  &  opposite  to  Robert  Sorrell 
&  Nly.  on  land  of  Mr.  Hampton.  Re 
newal  of  patent  in  his  name  dated  9 
Mar.  1655.    Renewed  21  Oct.  1662. 

FRANCIS  SPIGHT,  300  acs.  Nansa- 
mond  Co.,  21  Mar.  1658,  p.  265,  (366). 
Renewal  of  patent  dated  17  Mar.  1654. 
Renewed  3  Apr.  1662. 

WILLIAM  HARRIS,  sonne  of  Wm. 
Harris  of  James  City  late  deceased,  1/2 
acre,  Jas.  City,  1  Oct.  1658,  p.  265, 
(366).  Beg.  a  little  above  the  dwelling 
house  of  sd.  Harris  &  running  into  the 
Island.  Yearly  rent:  1  Capon  on  feast 
of  St.  Thomas  the  Apostle. 

MR.  RICHARD  MAIOR  (Major), 
Senr.,  350  acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  29  Apr. 
1659,  p.  266,  (367).  On  N.  side  of 
Yorke  Riv.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  Jone 
Cooke,  John  Wheler,  Jno.  Drumon, 
Mary  Rigby,  Mary  Butler,  Tho.  Gold- 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


389 


smith,  Mary  Harris.  Renewed  9  Feb. 
1663. 

AUGUSTINE         BLITHENBERGE, 

(Blitheberd)  375  acs.  &  25  perches  on 
S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  bet.  lands  of  Mr. 
Brice  &  Mr.  Richard  Lawson.  7  Mar. 
1658,  p.  266,  (367).  350  acs.  granted  to 
Robert  Tomlinn  9  Mar.  1655  &  assigned 
unto  sd.  Blithenbirge  &  25  acs.  for  trans, 
of  James  Jones.  Renewed  20  Feb.  1662 
in  name  of  Thomas  Mosse,  to  whom  it 
was  assigned. 

WILLIAM  SMITH,  400  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  6  Apr.  1659,  p.  267,  (368). 
On  E.  side  of  Chickahominy  Riv.,  S.Ely. 
on  Maj.  Holts  land,  Nly.  on  Mathewe 
Williams,  E.  &  Nly.  on  Wm.  Knights 
land,  Wly.  on  branch  of  Morgans  Cr. 
&  Sly.  on  Mr.  Manings  land.  200  acs. 
by  patent  dated  8  Aug.  1654  &  residue 
for  trans,  of  4  pers:  his  wife,  Wm. 
Holliday. 

JAMES  STRETTLE,  200  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  on  W.  side  of  Pohetan  Swamp, 
14  Apr.  1659,  p.  267,  (368).  From  the 
iron  mine  hill  meadow  to  line  of  Sir 
William  Berkeley.  Trans,  of  4  pers.* 
Renewed  10  Jan.  1661. 

GEORG  BROWNE,  200  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  29  Apr.  1659,  p.  268,  (369). 
On  N.  side  of  the  head  of  Ware  Cr.,  S. 
on  William  Gillman  &  Mr.  Overman  & 
S.E.  on  a  branch  parting  it  from  Robert 
Harrison.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  John 
Heynes,  Sr.,  Evan  Johannes,  John 
Haines,  Senr.,  Robert  Scottell. 

JOHN  ADKESON,  74  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  28  Feb.  1658,  p.  268,  (369). 
On  E.  side  of  Rickahock  path  &  E.  & 
W.  side  of  Mr.  Bakers  path,  bounded 
Nly.  on  a  swamp  issuing  out  of  Ware 
Cr.  Trans.  of  2  pers:  Margarett 
Mathers,  Margaret  Aprickett  (?) 

JOHN  MADDISON,  300  acs.  West- 
moreland Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Patomeck 
Riv.,  5  Mar.  1658,  p.  268,  (369). 
Bounded  on  S.E.  with  another  tract  in 
occupation  of  the  sd.  John  Hollowes, 
N.E.  upon  sd.  river,  N.W.  upon  the 
Clifts  &  S.W.  into  the  woods.  Granted 
unto  John   Hollowes   6  Sept.    1654,   by 


him  deserted  &  due  by  order  of  Govr. 
etc.  for  trans,  of  6  pers:  Symon  Bow- 
man, Sarah  Bowman,  Grace  Bowman  3 
times,  James  Bowman. 

MR.  PETER  KNIGHT,  925  acs.  in 
Patomeck  river  adj.  Chapawansicke  Cr., 
7  Mar.  1658,  p.  269,  (370).  Being  the 
moiety  of  a  patent  granted  to  sd.  Knight 
&  Capt.  Baker  Cutts,  13  Oct.  1653,  re- 
newed by  order  of  court  &  for  trans,  of 
19  pers.*    Renewed  15  Mar.  1663. 

CHARLES  HILL,  150  acs.  (no 
county),  15  Mar.  1658,  p.  269,  (370). 
Lieing  between  Garden  Cr.  &  the  easter- 
nmost river.  Granted  unto  John  Hamp- 
ton 14  July  1655,  by  him  deserted  & 
now  granted  for  trans,  of  3  pers:  Roger 
Smith,  Tho.  Allen,  Wm.  Jordan. 

SAME.  150  acs.  Same  location  & 
date,  p.  270,  (370).  Granted  unto 
Edward  Lucas,  14  July  1655,  by  him 
deserted  &  now  due  for  trans,  of  3  pers: 
James  Hill,  Wm.  Rogers,  Mary  Jones. 

COL.  THOMAS  PETTUS,  1000  acs. 
Westmoreland  Co.,  15  Mar.  1658,  p. 
270,  (371).  Nly.  upon  Patomeck  Cr., 
Ely.  upon  land  of  Sir  Thomas  Lunsford. 
Granted  10  Feb.  1652  &  renewed  for 
trans,  of  20  pers:  Jeninge  Clauson, 
John  Wyatt,  John  Harrwell,  Nicholas 
Bond,  Elizabeth  Willett,  Marg.  Denby, 
Georg  Huttons,  Joseph  Castle,  James 
Clerke,  John  Doe,  John  Ponder,  John 
Moodall,  James  Moore,  Wm.  Lenox, 
Andrew  Marshall,  Wm.  Read,  Robert 
Duckett,  David  Suddon,  John  Consider, 
Jellian  Crone  (or  Crons). 

COL.  GEORG  READ,  2000  acs. 
Westmoreland  Co.,  3  Mar.  1657,  p.  271, 
(371).  On  S.  side  of  Patomeck  Riv., 
S.  upon  a  creek  dividing  this  &  land  of 
Col.  Sam.  Mathewes,  E.  upon  sd.  Riv. 
&  N.  upon  Quantecot  Cr.  Granted  to 
Capt.  Nicholas  Marteau  25  Oct.  1654, 
deserted  for  want  of  seateing  &  now 
granted  by  order  of  court  for  trans,  of 
40  pers:  Charles  Bryant,  Edward  Creeke, 
Kath.  Burrowes,  Jno.  Lewis,  Mr.  Tho. 
Bowler,  4  times,  John  Johnson,  Anth. 
Loueseta  (or  Loneseta)  Nich.  Martin, 
Richard  Ludlowe,  Basill  Alcox,  Ralph 
Blessinge    (or    Blettinge),    Wm.    Carr, 


390 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


John  Freare,  Ann  Godgrave,  Edward 
Pollinge,  Henry  Jones,  Richard  Hay- 
tree,  Bryan  Ellis,  Jone  Dukes,  John 
Ladbrooke,  Wm.  Bradley,  Tho.  Hatton, 
John  Wilkinson,  Wm.  Woodward, 
Richard  Grindson,  James  Goslinge,  Wm. 
Chartry  (or  Clartry),  Tho.  Perriman, 
Wm.  Chatton,  Ann  Peteete,  Wm.  Con- 
stable, John  Hust  (or  Hurst),  Elizabeth 
Shellington,  Joseph  Oldfeild,  John 
Burgis,  Thomas  Iken  (?),  Grace  a 
Negroe. 

COL.  WILLIAM  BERNARD,  800 
acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  8  Oct.  1657,  p.  271, 
(372).  N.E.  upon  the  divideing  Cr., 
E.  &  S.E.  upon  the  Bay,  S.W.  upon  a 
Cr.  on  the  S.  sideof  the  BlufTe  point 
necke,  W.  upon  a  white  marsh  &  N.W. 
upon  land  of  Col.  Richard  Lee.  Trans. 
of  16  pers.* 

COL.  RICHARD  LEE,  2000  acs.  upon 
S.  side  of  Patomeck  Riv.,  beg.  at  the 
mouth  of  a  Cr.  issuing  out  of  Matchoa- 
tick  Riv.,  dividing  this  from  land  of 
Mr.  Lewis  Burwell.  5  June  1658,  p. 
272,  (372).  Trans,  of  40  pers:  John 
Slatter,  Jno.  Formor,  Jno.  Gibbinne, 
Robert  Higgison,  Rich.  Kent,  Timothy 
Gunter,  Daniell  Guygoll,  Rich.  Wat- 
ton,  Wm.  Boughton,  Tho.  Dollings, 
Jone  Palmer,  Mary  ,  Sarah  Hick- 
man, Eliza.  Persey,  Eliz.  Holladay, 
Susanna  Roberts,  Jno.  Pashe,  Peter 
Walker,  Tho.  Cooke,  Peter  Wade,  Tho. 
Wade,  Tho.  Man  (or  Maw)  Wm. 
Angell,  Robert  Norton,  Edward  Barnett, 
Rich.  Dobbins,  Abraham  Patemaster, 
Kathe.  Silverton,  Rich.  Albert,  Robert 
Girringe,  Wm.  Bingly,  Hen.  Billany, 
Andrew  Felton,  Tho.  Minstrell,  Jno. 
Edgcombe,  Waller  Rich,  Elias  Port, 
Hugh  Gouch,  Samson  Heale,  Waller 
(or  Walter)   Rickson. 

MR.  FRANCIS  BURNELL,  900  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  15  Aug.  1659,  p.  272, 
(373).  Beg.  at  Southermost  cor.  of  his 
former  devdt.,  S.E.  to  land  sold  to  John 
Johnson,  to  path  that  goes  to  old  War- 
rany,  to  Mr.  Hurds  upermost  line  of 
trees,  to  land  of  Mr.  Thomas  Hampton 
&c.  Trans,  of  18  pers:  Marg.  Boaten, 
Robert  Crust,  Jno.  Needham,  Robert 
Allen,  Tho.  Copinn,  Eliz.  Baileinge, 
Jno.  Darken,  Robert  Miller,  James  Tan- 


ner, Rich.  Smith,  2  Negroes,  James 
Johnson,  Robert  Jinkins,  Wm.  Hazard, 
Mary  Barnes,  Geo.  West,  Jno.  Clarkey. 

SIR    WILLIAM    BERKELEY,    5062 

acs.  James  City  Co.,  day  of  Mar. 

1658,  p.  273,  (373).  Betwixt  the  heads 
of  Pohetan  Sw.  &  Jones  Cr.  Trans,  of 
102  pers.* 

JOHN  BARROW,  200  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  7  Mar.  1658,  p.  273,  (374).  Beg. 
at  land  of  Wm.  Yarrett,  running  E., 
thence  S.  by  E.  to  Cobbin  Pointe. 
Granted  to  Richard  Coleman,  deserted 
&  now  due  for  trans,  of  4  pers:  Tho. 
Southerne,  Daniell  Usuliman  (O'Sulivan 
?),  Teny  (or  Tony)  Long,  Derrick 
Arseson.  Assigned  to  &  renewed  11 
Feb.  1663  in  name  of  John  Paine. 

SAME.  450  acs.  upon  Pepetticke  Cr., 
47  acs.  beg.  upon  the  creek  side  & 
bounding  upon  land  of  Jno.  Paine.  The 
residue  neere  unto  the  head  of  sd.  Cr., 
beg.  where  the  Cr.  divides  itself  by 
which  is  made  a  swamp,  dividing  this 
&  land  of  Tho.  Hawkins.  6  Oct.  1658, 
p.  274,  (374).  347  acs.  granted  to  Lt. 
Col.  Henry  Fleete,  deserted,  &  the 
whole  450  acs.  due  for  trans,  of  9  pers: 
Geo.  Johnson,  Wm.  Smithson,  Wm. 
Wilson,  Cornelius  Clinton,  Eliz.  Tarry, 
Derrick  Aryson,  Alex.  Conte  (or 
Coute),  Derman  Usulavan  (?). 

COL.  RICHARD  LEE,  Secretary  of 
State,  800  acs.  Northumberland  Co.,  21 
May,  1657,  p.  274,  (375).  Upon  S. 
side  of  Divideing  Cr.,  S.E.  upon  a  cr. 
issuing  out  of  sd.  Cr.  dividing  this  from 
land  of  Mr.  Tho.  Wilson,  Marriner,  & 
N.W.  upon  a  cr.  dividng  this  &  his 
own  land.  Trans.  of  16  pers.* 
(Granted  by  Sir  William  Berkeley.) 

JAMES  POPE,  512  acs.  Northumber- 
land Co.,  24  Sept.  1659,  p.  275,  (376). 
On  S.  side  of  great  Wiccocomocoe  Riv., 
opposite  lands  of  Rich.  Nealmes  & 
William  Downinge,  Wly.  upon  a  creek 
diving  this  from  land  of  Mr.  Peter 
Knight  (formerly  called  Mr.  Flints 
land)  E.S.E.  upon  land  of  Edward  Cock- 
head,  S.S.W.  to  land  of  David  Kiffinn, 
includeing  a  small  peninsula  upon  the 
river    called    the    Hand.    Granted    unto 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


391 


Nicholas  Morris  1  June  1654,  deserted 
&  now  due  for  trans,  of  11  pers:  Ed- 
mond  Taylour,  Wm.  Partlett,  Robert 
Midleton,  Eliz.  Clemens,  Georg  Watson, 
Wm.  Maninge,  &  5  Negroes  assigned 
by  Sir  William  Berkeley. 

SAME.  700  acs.  in  same  county,  date 
&  page.  Among  certain  branches  of  a 
great  swamp  belonging  to  the  head  of 
great  Wiccomocoe  Riv.  above  lands  of 
Mr.  Peter  Knight  &  Capt.  Bud.  Trans, 
of  14  pers:  9  Negroes;  Tho.  Loveday, 
Tho.  Williams,  Mary  Withall,  Hamond 
Franklin,  Sarah  Wikell.  By  assignment. 
Renewed  28  Jan.  1662. 

MR.  RICHARD  DUDLEY,  639  acs. 
Glocester  Co.,  24  Sept.  1659,  p.  276, 
(377).  On  the  Ewd.  side  of  the  North 
river  in  Mockiack  Bay,  beg.  at  a  small 
creeks  mouth  within  Blackwaters  Cr. 
called  Pine  Poynt  Cr.,  along  marked 
trees  parting  this  &  land  of  Mr.  Peter 
Ranson  &c.  140  acs.  granted  to  Major 
Thomas  Curtis  in  1642  &  by  him  as- 
signed unto  sd.  Dudley;  200  acs. 
granted  to  sd.  Dudley  3  July  1652  & 
299  acs.  for  trans,  of  6  pers:  John 
Everilla  (or  Emerilla),  Tho.  Kinge, 
John  Bolton,  John  Cooper,  Tho.  Rey- 
land,  Edward  Smith.  Renewed  18  Mar. 
1662. 

THOMAS  WOODWARD,  100  acs. 
Low.  parish  of  Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  24 
Sept.  1659,  p.  276,  (377).  Adj.  to 
E.S.E.  parts  of  land  of  Thomas  Jones 
&  lately  purchased  by  sd.  Woodward. 
Bounded  with  lands  patented  by  Capt. 
John  Upton,  Capt.  John  Moone  &  sd. 
Jones.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Jane  Price, 
Mary  Grimes. 

RICE  JONES  &  ANTHONY  JACK- 
MAN,  1040  acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  on  S.  side 
of  Rappa.  Riv.,  17  May  1658,  p.  277, 
(378).  Beg.  nigh  the  edge  of  the  great 
swampe  or  main  pacoson,  part  of  same 
bounded  with  marked  trees  belonging  to 
Mr.  Miles  Dixon,  nigh  Mattapany  path, 
near  head  of  Dedmans  Cr.  &c.  Trans, 
of  21  pers:  Edward  Howgrave,  John 
Anderton,  James  Payne,  Christian 
Gorein,  James  Fossett,  Tho.  Bowman, 
Prescilla  Hollaway,  Alice  Kinge,  Mary 
Floyd,  Mary ,  Eliz.  Farme,  Edward 


Allen,  Tho.  Gill,  Robert  Doore,  John 
Cox,  Fra.  Overton,  Susanna  Nurse,  Wm. 
Mathewes,  Fran.  Morgans,  Doris  (?) 
Williams,  Adam  Higgison.  Renewed 
13  Jan.  1661. 

MR.  CUTHBERT  POTTER,  5380 
acs.  on  the  N.  &  S.  sides  of  the  great 
swampe  or  Pacoson  which  divides  the 
counteys  of  Lancaster  &  Glocester  about 
2  mi.  above  the  horse  path.  1300  acs. 
beg.  on  the  N.  side  of  sd.  swamp  by 
or  nigh  Mattapany  path  that  goeth  from 
the  plantation  of  Jno.  Curtis  &  adj.  trees 
supposed  to  belong  to  Mr.  Charles 
Grymes;  400  acs.  on  the  S.  side  of  the 
great  swamp  &c.  20  June  1659,  p.  278, 
(379).    Trans,  of  108  pers.* 

By  Francis  Moryson,  Esqr.,  Governor  &c. 

GEORGE  MORRIS  &  WM.  LANE, 
2500  acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  20  July  1662,  p. 
278,  (380).  On  N.  side  of  the  river 
on  a  great  branch  of  Rappa  Cr.,  opposite 
land  of  Thomas  D.  (blank)  some  4  mi. 
behind  land  of  Capt.  Weir  &  Charles 
Snead  &  3  mi.  from  Papaticke  Cr. 
branches.  Trans,  of  50  pers:  Wm. 
Young,  John  Marsh,  Edmond  Turner, 
John  Carty,  John  (a)  Negro,  Wm. 
Marie,  Fra.  Freke,  Fra.  Hart,  Edw. 
Mur:,  Jno.  Scot,  John  Hallis  (or 
Wallis),  Edw.  Marie,  Jos.  Stratton, 
Wm.  Wigg,  Tho.  Coniers,  Ed.  Martew, 
Mary  Jackson,  Wm.  Sacom  (?),  Tho. 
Young,  Wm.  Flar,  Wm.  Joyner,  Tho. 
Cooly,  Tho.  Wart,  Jaco  Jones,  Wm. 
Mar,  John  Tooke,  Edw.  Ditty,  Wm. 
Earle,  Noah  Turner,  Nath.  Haddon, 
Wm.  Marter,  Jno.  Shaw,  Tho.  Fuell 
(?),  Wm.  Harvy,  Tom  Negro,  Frank 
Negro,  Jno.  Bagby,  Wm.  Swann,  Edw. 
Much,  Tho.  Tarvy,  Wm.  Fluell,  Josiah 
Jackson,  Mary  Luell  (?),  Tho.  Painer 
(?),  Edw.  Luell  (or  Linell),  Fra.  Car- 
ter, Emll.  Negro,  Cha.  Collings,  Cha. 
Macy,  Tho.  Blare,  Edw.  Williamson. 

ABRAHAM  WEEKS,450  acs,  on  N. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  bounded  on  the  S. 
with  a  Cr.  dividing  this  &  land  of  Mr. 
Rowland  Burnham,  on  N.W.  with  the 
Wading  Cr.  dividing  this  &  land  of 
Richard  Perrott.  3  Apr.  1662,  p.  279, 
(380).  300  acs.  by  assignment  of 
patent   from   Mr.    David   Fox,    dated    1 


392 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Nov.  1650  &  the  residue,  added  to  the 
above,  being  renewal  of  patent  to  sd. 
Weeks  dated  22  Nov.  1653. 

HENRY  CORBIN,  Esqr.,  4000  acs. 
Rappa.  Co.,  5  Aug.  1662,  p.  279,  (381). 
1500  acs.  upon  branches  of  Totoskey  on 
N.  side  of  sd.  river,  beg.  at  marked  oak 
of  Mr.  Samuell  Griffin  in  Machoticks 
path;  2500  acs.  at  the  head  of  Totoskey, 
running  W.  from  his  own  land  &c. 
Trans,   of  fourescore  persons.* 

ELIZABETH  KEMP,  900  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  20  Nov.  1661,  p.  280,  (381). 
On  N.  side  of  Mattaponie  Riv.,  running 
down  the  River  S.  to  Mr.  Digges  land. 
Granted  to  Thomas  Dale  4  Jan.  1653, 
by  him  deserted  &  granted  to  Mr.  Grey 
Skipwith  11  Oct.  1658  &  by  him  as- 
signed to  sd.  Elizabeth  Kemp. 

COL.  ROBT.  SMITH,  1299  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  26  Feb.  1661,  p.  280,  (382). 
412  acs.  on  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  & 
887  acs.  beg.  on  the  W.  side  of  a 
swamp  &  run  that  issues  into  Pyanka- 
tanck  Riv.  412  acs.  granted  to  Lambert 
Moore  &  Barthol.  Linton  17  Feb.  1658. 
Sd.  Moore  assigned  his  share  to  sd. 
Linton  who  assigned  to  sd.  Smith,  & 
the  residue  for  trans,  of  18  pers:  Peter 
Jennings,  Jno.  Riggs,  Eliz.  Ellmore,  Jno. 
Green,  Wm.  Wood,  Wm.  Bann,  An 
Raignett,  Eliz.  Ellis,  Wm.  Covenant, 
Mathew  Morris,  Abella  Glover  (Abell 
a  Glover  ?),  Alex.  Davis,  Jno.  Hawk- 
shead,  Jno.  Palmer,  Jno.  Hawkenett, 
Eliz.  Turner,  David  Roch  (or  Rock), 
Ralph   Parr. 

MAJOR  JOHN  DODMAN  (or  Ded- 

man),  350  acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  1 
Apr.  1662,  p.  281,  (383).  E.  upon 
Patomack  Riv.,  Sly.  upon  land  of  Gervas 
Bell  &  Nly.  upon  land  of  Richard 
Browne.  200  acs.  part  of  patent  to 
Gervas  Dodson  dated  1  Feb.  1650,  by 
him  sold  to  John  Jenkins,  who  assigned 
to  sd.  Dodman,  &  150  acs.  to  Gervas 
Bell  &  sd.  Jenkins,  by  them  deserted  & 
granted  to  sd.  Dodman  by  order  of  court 
dated  29  Nov.  1659.    Trans,  of  2  pers.* 

CAPT.  JNO.  UNDERWOOD,  1200 
acs.  James  City  Co.,  25  Nov.  1661,  p. 
281,   (384).    On  the  Ely.  side  of  Tyas- 


con,  Ely.  on  Capt.  Barnes  &  Thomas 
Meeredeth,  Nly.  on  Rockahock  path  & 
Richard  Terrell,  N.W.  on  Charles  Ed- 
monds &  Pullam,  Wly.  on  a  branch  of 
Tyascum  &  Sly.  on  Wm.  Hitchman  &  a 
branch  of  the  head  of  Burchen  Sw. 
Trans,  of  24  pers:  Tho.  Barnhouse, 
Eliz.  Bacons,  Robt.  Hill,  Rich.  Barns, 
Tho.   Agnes    (?),    Tho.    Graggs,    Vaux 

,  Jno.  Dawe   (?),  Fortune  Perrin, 

An  Dawe  (?),  Negro,  Wm.  Hill,  James 
Johnson.  390  acs.  the  remainder  being 
soe  much  relinquished  of  a  pattern  dated 
7  Feb.  1658,  the  land  being  formerly 
taken  up  by  another. 

SERGEANT  MAJOR  LEWIS  BUR- 
WELL,  3200  acs.  upon  N.  side  of 
Yorke  Riv.  &  S.E.  side  of  Rosewell  Cr., 
26  Apr.  1654,  p.  282,  (384).  Beg.  50 
pole  S.  of  Bacon  poynt  &c.  by  a  marsh  or 
pocoson  &c.  to  the  Ewd.  side  of  Chis- 
cake  path,  S.W.  along  land  of  Wm. 
Smoot,  by  land  of  Mr.  Mynyfie.  2350 
acs.  granted  sd.  Burwell  12  Jan.  1648 
&  750  acs.  to  the  S.E.  of  sd.  tract  to- 
gether with  100  acs.  additional,  &  due 
for  trans,  of  17  pers.*  (By  Sir  Wm. 
Berkeley). 

LEONARD  JONES,  200  acs.  in 
Rappa.  Co.,  on  Wwd.  side  of  Totoskey 
Cr.  about  3  mi.  up  the  same.  19  July 
1662,  p.  282,  (385).  Beg.  on  a  poynt 
by  sd.  Cr.  side  called  Onachymoyes  (?) 
quarter  &c.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Wm. 
Jones,  Ann  Jones,  2  Negroes:  Maria  & 
Tony. 

WM.  KILLMAN,  164  acs.  on  Ewd. 
side  of  Puscaticon  Cr.  in  Rappa.  Co., 
15  June  1661,  p.  283,  (386).  Adj. 
uppermost  cor.  of  land  of  Jno.  Capell  & 
corner  to  Jno.  &  George  Killman. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  Mary  Phillips,  Wm. 
Wright,  James  Young,  Wm.  Long. 

ANDREW  GILSON,  1277  acs.  of 
wood  &  marsh  land,  20  July  1661,  p. 
283,  (386).  600  acs.  beg.  at  a  poynt 
on  the  N.  side  of  Tigners  Cr.  &c.  and 
600  acs.  upon  the  S.E.  side  of  the  lower- 
most course  of  land  granted  to  Tho. 
Godwin  &  Rich.  Axam  &  lying  below 
the  plantation  of  sd.  Gilson;  &  adj.  the 
above  &  77  acs.  adj.  600  acs.  by  patent 
dated  12  May  1650  &  677  for  trans,  of 
14  Negroes. 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


393 


EDWARD  VAHANE,  250  acs.  in 
the  Southerne  branch  of  Nancimond 
Riv.,  9  Apr.  1662,  p.  284,  (387).  200 
acs.  on  the  Eastern  side  of  the  sd.  branch 
a  corner  of  Thomas  Harwoods  land  & 
by  William  Wrights  land.  50  acs.  at 
the  Ewd.  side  of  the  river  beg.  at  the 
marsh  side  of  Hemlock  Cr.,  running  by 
Thomas  Adkinson  &  sd.  Harwoods  line 
&c.  Trans,  of  5  pers:  Ann  James, 
Mary  Stephens,  Wm.  Shinte  (?),  Peter 
Mills,  Stephen  Norman. 

EDMUND  MACHEN  (Machan), 
1000  acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  20  July  1662, 
p.  284,  (388).  On  S.  the  Narrows  of 
Pomunkey  Riv.  above  &  adj.  land  of 
Capt.  Anthony  Langston,  beg.  at  the  S. 
of  Tattapottomoyes.  Trans,  of  20  pers: 
Marginal  Note:  This  land  was  sold  to 
one  Bompas  &  upon  resurvey  found  to 
contain  but  280  acs.  &  the  rest  of  the 
rights  trans,  to  Mr.  Tho.  Clayborne. 
Note:  The  following  names  appear: 
Susan  Alcock,  Samll.  Hoocks,  Fran. 
Glover,  Dorathy  Glover,  Rich.  Bullock, 
Thomas  Man,  Edwd.  Evans,  Robt.  Evans, 
Tho.  Poore,  Joseph  Hill,  Edwd.  Luckett 
(or  Suckett),  Wm.  Clarke,  Tho.  Hye, 
James  White,  Jno.  Giltoe,  Tho.  Hayly, 
Tho.  Wood,  Wm.  Wood,  Edwd.  Morris, 
Wm.  Salmon,  Edwd.  Young,  Wm.  Hay, 
Tho.  Maples. 

WM.  BODY,  550  acs.  Isle  of  Wight 
Co.,  upon  Cypresse  Swamp,  20  Oct. 
1661,  p.  284,  (89).  Beg.  on  the  N. 
side  of  sd.  Swamp,  running  N.E.  &c. 
Trans,  of  11  pers:  Wm.  Young,  Jno. 
Sharpe.  Mary  Stephens,  Edward  Wise, 
Edw.  Marlow,  Tho.  Cawsey,  James  Hall, 
Tho.  Turner,  Ben.  Jones,  Tho.  Smart, 
Alice  Parr. 

NICHOLAS  BUSH,  317  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  21  Oct.  1662,  p.  285,  (389). 
On  the  N.  side  of  James  Riv.  &  E.  side 
of  Chikahomony  Riv.,  beg.  on  W.  side 
of  Joanes  his  swamp  &  along  the  head 
of  same  until  it  meets  with  Old  Knights 
lyne,  over  the  swamp  to  John  Merry- 
mans  marked  trees  &c.  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  6  Apr.  1655. 

JAMES  WILSON,  700  acs.  New  Kent 
Co.,  29  Jan  1661,  p.  285,  (390).  On 
the  head  of  Ware  Cr.  on  the  E.  side, 


beg.  at  Mr.  Stanawayes  corner,  S.W.  on 
Mount  Holly  path,  W.  N.  W.  to  a 
branch  of  Cowpen  swamp,  down  same 
to  Robert  Harris  lyne,  &c.  S.W.  to  the 
Reedy  Swamp,  to  Gillmans  land  &c. 
Trans,  of  14  pers:  Wm.  Lewis,  Thomas 
Wood,  Eliz.  Wood,  Lyddy  How,  Wm. 
Badger,  Jno.  Guffer,  Danll.  Merick,  Jno. 
Jones,  Edward  Luc  (?),  Mary  Wms. 
(Williams),  Edward  Webb,  Abell  Jason 
Wm.  Richardson,  Ann  Robbinson. 

EDMOND  PETERS,  442  acs.  Gloces- 
ter  Co.,  22  Mar.  1659,  p.  286,  (391). 
At  the  head  of  Timber  Necke  Cr.,  342 
acs.  beg.  at  Capt.  Peryes  land,  adj.  100 
acs.  of  his  own  land  &c.  running  to 
Wm.  Alsopps  land.  100  acs.  beg.  on 
a  branch  of  sd.  creek,  extending  near 
land  of  Mr.  Lewis  Burrwell,  deed.  &c. 
192  acs.  part  of  400  acs.  granted  to 
William  Smoote  24  Feb.  1642  &  as- 
signed to  sd.  Peters  &  250  acs.  for  trans. 
of  5  pers:  Wm.  Peane,  Henry  Wattons, 
Henry  Fuller,  John  Robison,  Nicholas 
Chashey    (or  Chasley). 

By  Sir  Wm.  Berkeley 

LITTLETON  SCARBURGH,  JOHN 
ALEXANDER  &  TABITHA  SMART, 
1500  acs.  Northampton  Co.,  24  Mar. 
1659,  p.  287,  (392).  On  the  N.  &  S. 
sides  of  little  Matomkin  Cr.  includeinge 
Wattchepreag  on  the  S.  &  Little  Matom- 
kin Towne  on  the  N.  &  including  all 
the  necks  &  branches  of  sd.  Cr.  Trans,  of 
30  pers:  John  Watts,  Jeffery  Coote, 
Edmd.  Cantwell,  Tho.  Stany,  Hugh 
Bowin,  Sarah  Huitt,  Susan  Fletcher, 
Jane  Gardner,  Mary  Hues,  Sarah  Gard- 
ner, Alice  Roberts,  Joseph  Huitt, 
Nicholas  Letchey,  John  Hapworth, 
Morris  Savatt  (?),  Jane  Gethinge,  Tho. 
Davis,  Darby  Enns  (?),  John  Davis, 
Edward  Banbury,  Robert  Fookes,  Jane 
Rogers,  Ann  Leitch,  Tho.  Warren, 
Henry  Robins,  James  Hayes,  Timothy 
Jones,  Charles  Mackworth,  Mary  Wil- 
liams, Tho.  Morris. 

JOHN  BARROW,  737  acs.  &  145 
perches  in  the  freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv. 
on  S.  side  of  Occapason  Cr.,  beg.  at 
lower  end  of  land  of  Wm.  Hall,  S.  neer 
land  of  Mr.  Moseleye,  nigh  land  of  Mr. 
Augustine  Brethenbird  &  nigh  miles  end 


394 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


of  Lawsons  Island.  500  acs.  by  patent, 
13  Oct.  1657  &  renewed  by  new  rights 
&  the  residue  for  trans,  of  15  pers: 
Alexander  Coote,  Dorman  Ussulevan, 
Derrick  Arleson,  Daniell  Usulevan, 
Teage  Longoe  (or  Longee).  Rites  for 
500  acs.  assigned  by  Robert,  Tho.  & 
Wm.  Mosse.  24  Mar.  1660,  p.  287, 
(392). 

WM.  HALL,  573  acs.  &  122  perches, 
in  the  freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv.  on  S.  side 
of  Occapason  Cr.  &  nigh  land  of  John 
Barrow.  23  Mar.  1660,  p.  288,  (393). 
300  acs.  by  purchase  from  Richard  Law- 
son  &  residue  for  trans,  of  6  pers:  The 
rites  being  for  6  pers.  assigned  by  Tho., 
Robert  &  Wm.  Mosse.  Due  upon  a 
patent  renewed  by  new  rites. 

ROBERT,  THOMAS  &  WM.  MOSSE, 
800  acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  24  Mar.  1660,  p. 
288,  (393).  On  the  S.  side  of  the 
freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  on  N.W. 
side  of  a  creek  dividing  this  &  land  of 
John  Weire.  Granted  them  by  patent 
dated  12  Apr.  1657,  renewed  &  due  for 
trans,  of  16  pers:  Georg  Johnson, 
Wm.  Smithson,  Wm.  Wilson,  Cornelius 
Clynton,  Elizabeth  Turrey,  Derrick 
Arrison.  Note:  500  acs.  assigned  to 
John  Barrow  being  due  on  a  patent  of 
500  acs.  renewed  by  new  rites. 

CAPT.  MARTIN  PALMER,  400  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  7  July  1660,  p.  289, 
(394).  Behind  land  of  Thomas  Hick- 
man, running  to  E.  side  of  Assotiams 
Sw.  &c.  to  his  own  land.  Trans,  of  8 
pers:  Jno.  Tucker,  Margaret  Jones,  Ed- 
ward Cooke,  Daniell  Parker,  Tho.  Scafe, 
Henry  Pott,  Tho.  Luty  (or  Lucy)  Jno. 
Sympson. 

RICHARD  DAVIS,  660  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  25  June  1660,  p.  289,  (394). 
On  the  N.  side  of  Matapany  Riv.,  upon 
Diggs  Cr.  Trans,  of  14  pers:  Tho. 
Johnson,  Mary  Davis,  Wm.  Rider, 
James  Jones,  Rich.  Smith,  Wm.  Hickes, 
Roger  Marley,  Ed.  Tressum,  Wm.  Jones, 
Tho.  Rosser,  Jenkin  Jones,  Ed.  Tyler, 
Tho.  Jonley  (or  Jouley),  Mary  Brookes. 

MR.  THO.  HOLMES,  1100  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  6  July  1660,  p.  289, 
(395).    On     S.     side     of     Pyanketanke 


Sw.,  beg.  by  an  Indian  path.  Trans, 
of  22  pers:  James  Morris,  Wm.  Robins, 
Edward  Creeke,  Jane  Harris,  Robert 
Rice,  Rich.  Hardy,  Mary  Wms. 
(Williams),  Edward  Cooke,  Jone  San- 
ders, Rebecca  Garrett,  Nich.  Hutton, 
Jno.  Fishpond,  Edward  Hickes,  2 
Negroes,  Edward  Rose,  Tho.  Davis, 
Mary  Bell,  Jno.  Ball,  James  Austin, 
Maurice  Jones,  Wm.  Harrington. 

Page  290  is  blank. 

By  Francis  Moryson,  Gov't. 

MR.  THOMAS  HOLMES,  1024  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  13  Jan.  1661,  p.  291, 
(395).  Upon  N.  side  of  Mattapony 
Riv.,  S.  side  of  Peancketanck  Sw.,  N.E. 
side  of  Cheescake  path  some  4  mi.  into 
the  woods  behind  land  formerly  Mr. 
Henry  Soane.  Renewal  of  patent  to  him 
dated  6  July  1660. 

THOMAS  MARSTON,  1640  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  31  Oct.  1662,  p.  291, 
(396).  On  N.  side  the  head  of  Chicka- 
hominy  Riv.,  640  acres  beg.  at  Gerrard 
Johnson's  corner  upon  the  main  swamp 
of  sd.  river,  running  N.E.  &  N.  to  his 
own  1000  acs.,  thence  S.W.  by  S.  &c, 
and  1000  acs.  on  E.  &  W.  side  of  a 
branch  about  V/z  mi.  from  Mr.  Wiggs 
quarter  &c.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  8 
June  1660. 

NICHOLAS  MERYWETHER,  80  acs. 
James  City  Island,  6  Nov.  1661,  p.  292, 
(397).  Sly.  on  Kings  Mill  Cr.,  Ely.  on 
the  main  river,  Nly.  on  the  back  Cr.,  & 
Nly.  on  a  small  cr.  &  Mr.  James  land. 
Formerly  planted  &  seated  by  Richard 
Kingsmill,  dec'd.,  who  was  an  ancinet 
planter  in  this  country,  &  by  Nathanaell 
Bacon,  Esqr.  &  Elizabeth,  his  wife,  only 
daughter  &  heire  of  sd.  Kingsmill,  as- 
signed to  sd.  Merywether  with  rights 
for  the  same  &  for  trans,  of  2  pers: 
Thomas  Dorr,  Richard  Ellis. 

DR.  RICHARD  HALL,  150  acs.  on 
Deep  Cr.,  bounding  on  land  of  George 
Cooksey.  13  Jan.  1661,  p.  292,  (398). 
Renewal  of  patent  dated  13  Jan.  1652. 

PETER  KNIGHT,  2700  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  26  Nov.   1661,  p.  292, 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


395 


(398).  1200  acs.  on  S.  side  great  Wic- 
cocomico  Riv.,  E.S.E.  upon  land  of  Tho- 
mas Scoggin;  1500  acs.  on  S.  side  of  sd. 
Riv.,  700  acs.  of  which  being  N.N.E. 
upon  sd.  Riv.,  E.  S.  E.  upon  a  Cr. 
dividing  same  &  land  of  Mr.  Nich. 
Morrice  &  W.N.W.  upon  Scoggins  Cr. 
800  acs.  N.N.E.  upon  sd.  land  &  S.E. 
upon  land  of  Thomas  Read  &  David 
Kiffin,  part  of  which  next  to  land  of  sd. 
Read  formerly  called  Palmers  land.  Re- 
newal of  patent  dated  3  June  1657. 

JAMES  ALLEN,  450  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  26  Sept.  1661,  p.  293, 
(399).  Ely.  upon  little  Wiccocomico 
Riv.  or  Cr.,  Sly.  upon  a  branch  of  same 
dividing  this  &  land  of  Richard  Span  & 
Henry  Watts,  S.W.  from  near  the  head 
of  a  branch  &  N.  upon  a  line  of  trees 
parting  this  &  land  of  Jno.  Motly,  &c. 
300  acs.  by  patent  20  June  1651,  re- 
newed 9  June  1653  &  residue  for  trans, 
of  3  pers:  Xtopher  Wright,  Nich. 
Spencer,  Jno.  Motrom. 

MR.  WM.  THOMAS,  300  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  4  Mar.  1661,  p. 
293,  (400).  Wly.  upon  land  of  Danll. 
Neale,  Sly.  upon  James  Hawley,  Ely.  on 
Jno.  Motley  &  Col.  Wm.  Clayborne  & 
Nly.  on  Edward  Coale.  Trans,  of  6 
pers:  Phill.  Harwood,  Jno.  Wray, 
Roger  Pinner,  Robt.  Salter,  Thomas 
Panton,  Edw.  Plaice. 

SYMON  RICHARDSON,  400  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  20  Sept.  1662,  p. 
293,  (400).  Beg.  on  back  lines  of  Bales 
&  Richardson,  S.  W.  to  Cupids  Cr.,  S.E. 
by  S.  to  Hering  Cr.  &c.  Trans,  of  8 
pers:  5  Negroes,  Jno.  Bateman,  Symon 
Carpenter,  Charges  Wintell   (?). 

JOHN  MOTELY  (Motly),  of  Wic- 
comico,  Carpenter,  600  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  13  Jan.  1661,  p.  294, 
(400).  On  S.  side  of  Wiccomico  Cr. 
S.  E.  upon  land  of  James  Allen,  up  the 
horse  path  &  S.Wly.  upon  land  of  Roger 
Walters  &c.  Renewal  of  patent  dated 
4  June  1655. 

JOHN  HUGHLETT  &  THOMAS 
SALISBURY,  400  acs.  Northumberland 
Co.,  18  Aug.  1661,  p.  294,  (401).  Upon 
the  head  of  great  Wiccomico  Riv.,  Sly. 


upon  Wickers  branch.  Trans,  of  8 
pers:  Edward  Sanders,  Robert  Wright, 
Joseph  Hary,  Myles  Cray,  Nich.  Smith, 
Jno.  Knight,  Wm.  Henrill  (?),  Francis 
Acton. 

WM.  BALLINGALL,  400  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  30  July  1661,  p.  294, 
(401).  Beg.  at  Herring  Cr.  which 
divides  this  &  land  of  John  Bales  & 
Symon  Richardson,  S.W.  on  the  side  of 
a  glade  which  divides  this  &  land  of 
James  Magregory  &  Hugh  Fouch. 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  Thomas  Winn,  Tho- 
mas Gay,  Jno.  Moore,  Wm.  Peters, 
Robt.  Burley,  Jno.  Arshwin,  Robert 
Hampton,  Henry  Mayne. 

JAMES  MAGREGOR  &  HUGH 
FOUCH,  1280  acs.  Northumberland 
Co.,  10  July  1661,  p.  295,  (402).  Beg. 
up  Chetanck  Cr.,  extending  along  a  line 
of  trees  dividing  this  &  land  of  Jno. 
Hull  to  Cupids  Cr.,  thence  S.  &c.  800 
acs.  granted  to  them  by  patent  dated  3 
Apr.  1651  &  residue  for  trans,  of  10 
pers:  Jos.  Smith,  Fran.  Jones,  Wm. 
Hacklett,  Hen.  Sentence,  Ann  Corbell, 
James  Peirce,  Angell  Corbell,  Margtt. 
Baleor,    Samll.   Nicholls,    Hugh    Fouch. 

THOMAS  DORROW,  138  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  20  July  1661,  p. 
295,  (402).  Upon  little  Wiccocomico 
Riv.,  100  acs.  Sly.  adj.  land  of  Edward 
Coale,  Nly.  upon  land  now  in  posses- 
sion of  Richard  Spann  &c.  38  acs.  on 
Chikacone  Path,  S.E.  by  land  of  Hen. 
Smith  &  running  to  aforesd.  100  acs. 
100  acs.  by  patent  dated  10  Oct.  1652 
&  38  acs.  for  trans,  of  James  Herryfold 
(Haryfold). 

JNO.  HUGHLETT,  400  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  17  Sept.  1662,  p.  296, 
(403).  At  the  head  of  great  Wiccoco- 
mico Riv.,  Nly.  on  Wickars  branch 
which  divides  this  from  land  surveyed 
for  sd.  Hughlett  &  Thomas  Salisbury, 
S.S.W.  upon  a  path  which  goes  out  of 
Budds  neck  into  the  woods,  crossing 
Machotick  foot  path,  S.E.  on  land  of 
Robert  Wilson,  Wly.  upon  part  of  a 
line  of  Robt.  King  &c.  Trans,  of  8 
pers:  Wm.  Sandiford,  Charles  Winter, 
Manell  (or  Mavell)  Jones,  Mary  Hewes, 
Jno.  Bateman,  Tho.  Efford,  Mary  Bate- 
man, Sarah  Bradford. 


396 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


HENRY  WATTS,  650  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  13  Jan.  1661,  p.  296, 
(404).  On  S.  side  of  great  Wiccoco- 
mico  Riv.,  Ely.  upon  land  of  Richard 
Span,  Nly.  upon  James  Allen,  Wly.  up- 
on land  of  Jno.  Mosely,  Sly.  upon  Tho- 
mas Dorrow  &  Chickacone  path  from 
sd.  Span  &  Dorrows  land  &c.  500  acs. 
granted  unto  Edward  Cole  10  Oct.  1652, 
assigned  to  sd.  Span,  who  assigned  to 
sd.  Watts  and  150  acs.  added  &  now 
renewed. 

JOHN  HARRIS,  500  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  11  Jan.  1661,  p.  297,  (404).  Beg. 
near  a  path  leading  from  the  great 
swamp  to  Mr.  Parrots  &  running  along 
his  own  land.  Trans.  10  pers:  An 
Harris,  Margtt  Tompson,  Jno.  Cole, 
Stephen  Norman,  Wm.  Stephens,  Han- 
nah Mills,  Jno.  Hunt,  Mary  Tye,  Henry 
Nicholls,  Thomas  Norton. 

ABYA.  BONYSON,  1300  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  27  Nov.  1661,  p.  297,  (405). 
Beg.  at  Haddawayes  Cr.  at  a  branch, 
certain  trees  dividing  this  &  a  tract 
formerly  seated  by  Thomas  Salisbury, 
afterwards  planted  and  possessed  by 
Capt.  Fleets  people  &  since  by  Humphry 
Tabbs  sonns  &  servants,  running  to- 
wards head  of  Harpers  Cr.  running  over 
the  same  &  neere  the  house  where  Henry 
Rye  lived.  550  acs.  granted  to  Wm. 
Harper  &  Henry  Rye  19  Oct.  1652,  by  sd. 
Harper  wholly  assigned  to  sd.  Rye,  who 
assigned  to  sd.  Bonyson;  400  acs.  to  sd. 
Bonyson  dated  1  Feb.  1653  &  350  acs. 
due  for  trans,  of  7  pers:  Margtt.  Grimes, 
Jno.  Jones,  Phill  Norton,  Stephen  Win, 
Ann  Harte,  Mary  Sharpe,  Susan  Jones. 

WM.  POPE,  200  acs.  Nancimond 
Co.,  30  Oct.  1662,  p.  298,  (406).  Beg. 
near  the  miles  end  of  land  of  Symon 
Symons  &  running  to  Capt.  Thomas  God- 
wins land  Granted  unto  Wm.  Pope  8 
Oct.   1656.    Renewal. 

RICHARD  NEAW,  750  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  20  Oct.  1662,  p.  298,  (406). 
On  N.  side  of  James  Riv.  &  E.  side  of 
Chikahominy  Riv.,  bounding  S.E.  on 
Margt.  Land,  N.  E.  on  Thomas  Brookes 
Land  &  Sly.  on  Mr.  Rolphs  Land.  Re- 
newal of  patent  dated  6  Apr.  1655. 


JAMES  AUSTIN,  900  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  28  Sept.  1661,  p.  298, 
(407).  Ely.  upon  land  patented  by  Mr. 
Geo.  Coldclough  &  Sly.  upon  Wicco- 
comico  Cr.  300  acs.  granted  sd.  Col- 
clough  4  June  1655  &  assigned  to  sd. 
Austin  &  the  residue  by  2  patents  to 
Jno.  Hughlett  &  Jno.  Palmer,  24  Oct. 
1655,  by  them  deserted  &  now  due  for 
trans,  of  12  pers:  7  Negroes,  Ann 
Young,  Mary  Tompson,  Wm.  Hill, 
Edw.  Wiseman,  Wm.  Norgrove. 

JOHN  GREEN,  350  acs.  Gloster  Co., 
at  the  head  of  Poropotanck  Cr.,  13 
Jan.  1661,  p.  299,  (407).  Beg.  by 
the  Eastern  branch  &  running  to  Mr. 
Blunts  corner  &c.  Granted  to  Henry 
Hubberd  25  Aug.  1655  &  assigned  to 
sd.  Greene. 

WM.  PULLAM  &  WM.  WEBB,  580 
acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  16  Sept.  1662,  p. 
299,  (408).  Upon  the  S.  side  of  the 
Narrowes  of  Yorke  Riv.,  Beg.  in  a 
branch  of  Mattedecum  Cr.,  by  an  Indian 
feild  &  Ely.  to  land  of  Wm.  Stone. 
Trans,  of  12  pers:  John  Pashe,  Job 
Turner,  Pet(er)  Hadaway,  Roger  Walke, 
Wm.  Billingsly,  Tho.  Slattor,  Wm. 
Broughton,  Mary  Percy,  James  Kent, 
Thomas  Coocke,  Tho.  Gunt(er),  Rebec- 
ca Harrison. 

JOHN  FRUMPTON,  800  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  20  July  1662,  p.  299,  (408).  On 
N.  side  the  river  &  W.  side  of  a  branch 
on  the  main  swamp  of  Rappa.  Cr.  adj. 
land  of  Wm.  Lane  &  George  Morris. 
Trans,  of  16  pers:  Jane  Robinson,  Eliz. 
Vaughan,  Tho.  Michell,  Ann  Burny, 
Henry  Caple,  Eliz.  Morter,  James  Piget, 
Noble  Martin,  Rich.  Archer,  Walter 
Brookes,  Abra.  Law,  Tho.  Jarvis,  Mary 
Young,  Tho.  Boote,  James  Hicton,  Jno. 
Ingleton. 

DR.  RICHARD  HALL,  100  acs. 
Warwick  Co.,  13  Jan.  1661,  p.  300, 
(409).  S.W.  on  James  Riv.,  N.E.  into 
the  woods  beg.  at  a  Cr.  parting  this 
from  Merry  Cr.  poynt,  ending  at  a  small 
locus  parting  this  &  land  of  Mr.  Tho. 
Owen  &c.  to  Mr.  Robt.  Newman,  his 
Dam  etc.  Granted  to  John  Layden  5 
May  1636,  by  him  deserted  &  granted 
unto  sd.  Hall  23  Oct.   1650.    Renewal. 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


397 


SAMUELL  GRIFFIN,  Merchant,  2200 
acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  6  Aug.  1662,  p.  300, 
(409).  Upon  a  great  swamp  issueing 
into  the  head  of  Totoskey  alias  Cross 
Cr.  &  near  path  going  from  Totoskey 
to  Chikacone  &c,  along  Machotickes 
path  &c.  Trans,  of  44  pers:  David 
Griffin,  Bagnell  Vincent,  Wm.  Benaden, 
Edw.  Wetherhorne,  Ambrose  Clare,  Wm. 
Gunter,  Thomas  Bell,  Lewis  Butler, 
Wm.  Feild,  Henry  Margrett,  Alice 
Arsly,  Ellin  Meredeth,  Jno.  Back,  Robt. 
Sanders,  Roger  Barbar,  Richd.  Hartless, 
Emanuell  Consues  (?),  Tho.  Symmons, 
Richard  Apleby,  Richard  Collins,  Ed- 
ward Franclin,  Rice  Cookman,  Tho.  a 
Negro,  Frank  a  Negro,  Munky  a  Negro, 
Mary  a  Negro,  9  Negroes,  Nathaniel! 
Medly,  Henry  Turner,  Richard  Wil- 
liams, William  Conaway,  Jno.  Bagle, 
Mary  Burd,  Nicholas  White,  Francis 
Cossens,   Christopher  Walker. 

CAPT.  THOMAS  HAWKINS,  386 
acs.  &  40  perches,  on  S.  side  of  Rappa. 
Riv.,  beg.  on  the  head  of  a  branch  called 
Popemans  Cr.,  E.S.E.  to  Occopason  Cr. 
&c.  20  Sept.  1661,  p.  301,  (410). 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  Maudlin  Davis,  Rice 
Harvy,  Edwd.  Porter,  Giles  Towning, 
Mary  Howard,  Hugh  Weekes,  Edwd. 
James,   Elianore  Parry. 

SAMUELL  NICHOLLS,  688  acs.  in 
the  freshes  &  upon  N.  side  of  Rappa. 
Riv.,  beg.  at  Whitlocks  Cr.,  running  to 
a  white  oake  dividing  this  from  land  of 
Thomas  Whitlock,  deed.  &c.  20  Sept. 
1661,  p.  301,  (411).  Part  of  1000  acs. 
granted  to  sd.  Whitlock  but  belonging 
to  sd.  Nicholls  by  virtue  of  a  copart- 
nership, as  appear  by  records  of  Rappa. 
Co.  Ct.,  &  238  acs.  lately  purchased  of 
Major  Wm.  Underwood  of  the  aforesd. 
county. 

JOHN  BEBEY,  700  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  13  Feb.  1661,  p.  301,  (411).  On 
S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  about  1  mi.  up 
Coxes  Cr.,  formerly  called  Pascaticon 
Cr.  on  the  E.  side  thereof.  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  4  Oct.   1653. 

ROBERT  BAYLY,  300  acs.  &  13  po. 
in  Rappa.  Co.,  20  Sept.  1661,  p.  302, 
(412).  Beg.  at  the  head  of  a  branch 
of  Farnham  Cr.  parting  this  &  land  of 


Col.  More  Fantleroy  &  Mr.  Tho. 
Griff eth.  Trans,  og  6  pers:  Sarah 
Bunny,  Jno.  Smith,  Richd.  Reekes, 
Henry  Michaell,  Ann  Mills,  James 
Nailor. 

CAPT.  HUMPHRY  BOOTH,  1000 
acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  20  Sept.  1661,  p.  302, 
(413).  On  S.  side  the  Riv.,  200  acs. 
beg.  at  Eastermost  cor.  of  land  of  Mr. 
Wm.  White,  Clerke,  running  to  land  of 
Augustine  Blidenburd.  Trans,  of  20 
pers:  And.  Davis,  Mary  Wild,  Tho. 
Webb,  Joane  Webb,  Wm.  Jones,  Giles 
Hope,  Peter  White,  Jno.  Gray,  Geo. 
Wood,  Jasper  White,  Wm.  Cooke,  Tho. 
Sherman,  Wm.  Gower,  James  Stevens, 
Walter  Hoes,  Xtop.  Wilson,  Rog(er) 
Evans,  Tho.  Wms.  (Williams),  Jane 
Welch,   Machaell   Grant. 

LT.  COL.  THO.  GOODRICH,  1134 
acs.  3  furlongs,  18  poles  on  S.  side  of 
Rappa.  Riv.  on  the  back  of  a  devdt.  of 
land  belonging  to  Sr.  Henry  Chickeley, 
about  3  mi.  from  the  river,  running  to 
eastermost  main  branch  of  Ralphs  Cr. 
which  runs  into  Puscatticon  Cr.  20 
Sept.  1661,  p.  302,  (413).  650  acs. 
granted  unto  Robt.  Armstrong  10  Sept. 
1658  &  sold  to  sd.  Goodrich  &  residue 
for  trans,  of  10  pers:  Abigail  Rige, 
Tho.  Clowd,  Seath  Edward,  Tho.  Bun- 
bridge,  Wm.  Suran,  Wm.  Talbott,  Jno. 
Warner,  Jno.  Clower,  Kath.  Moroughen, 
Nich.  Stelman. 

JOHN  FLEMING,  493  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.  on  S.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.  20 
Mar.  1661,  p.  303,  (414).  Lieing  be- 
tween lands  of  Lt.  Col.  Gooch,  Rice 
Hughes  &  Edmond  Price.  Trans,  of  10 
pers:  Jno.  Jones,  Wm.  Jacobs,  Henry 
Linny,  Denis  Corbell,  Doro.  Farmer, 
Wm.  Farmer,  Jno.  Shaw,  Mary  Spratt, 
Wm.  Ward,  Tho.  Claughton, 

JOHN  HALLOWES,  2400  acs.  on  S. 
side  of  Patomecke  Riv.,  28  July  1662,  p. 
303,  (414).  From  the  mouth  of  Cona- 
woman  Cr.,  N.W.  to  the  marsh,  N.  by 
E.  on  Conawoman  bay,  E.  by  S.  on 
Nomeny  bay,  S.W.,  N.W.  by  N.  on  sd. 
Riv.  &  S.E.  on  land  of  Mr.  Speake. 
Renewal  of  patent  dated  11  Sept.  1653. 

RALPH  HORSLEY,  495  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,   30  Oct.   1662,  p.   303, 


398 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


(415).  Nly.  upon  Petomecke  Riv.,  Ely. 
upon  mouth  of  Chickacoane  Riv.,  S. 
upon  Cabbin  Cr.  &  Wly.  upon  land  of 
Henry  Rainer  (or  Ranier).  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  16  Nov.  1652. 

THOMAS  MORRIS,  670  acs.  on  S. 
side  of  the  N.  Riv.  in  Mockjack  Bay,, 
running  to  Ewd.  side  of  Basses  Cr.  13 
Feb.  1661,  p.  303,  (415).  Granted  to 
Thomas  Curtis  20  Sept.  1652  &  by  sd. 
Curtis  &  Averilla,  his  wife,  assigned  to 
John  Curtis,  who  assigned  to  sd.  Morris. 

ROBERT  TOMLYN,  528  acs.  on  S. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  at  a  creek 
dividing  it  from  an  island,  extending  to- 
wards Mattumsarkin.  29  Oct.  1662,  p. 
304,  (416).  Renewal  of  patent  dated 
13  Dec.  1653. 

WM.  ap  THOMAS,  700  acs.  on  N.E. 
side  of  Mockjack  Bay,  beg.  at  corner 
tree  of  Mr.  Ranson,  running  to  marked 
tree  of  Tho.  Preston,  deed.  &  S.W.  by 
S.  &c.  28  Oct.  1662,  p.  304,  (416). 
Renewal  of  patent  dated  16  Nov.  1652. 

GYLES  BRENT,  Jr.,  son  of  Gyles 
Brent,  Esqr.,  1800  acs.  Westmoreland 
Co.,  3  Nov.  1662.  p.  304,  (417).  1000 
acs.  beg.  at  the  Richahockian  stands,  ex- 
tending to  near  mouth  of  Hunting  Cr. 
&  E.S.E.  along  Petomake  Riv.  800  acs. 
on  S.  side  sd.  river  opposite  against  the 
Indian  Towne  of  Pascatway.  Renewal 
of  patents  dated  6  Sept.  1654  &  11 
Sept.  1653. 

JOHN  SHEPARD,  1,000  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  18  Oct.  1662,  p.  305, 
(417).  Upon  the  N.W.  side  near  the 
mouth  of  a  swamp  upon  the  head  of 
Jernews  Cr.  dividing  this  &  land  of 
John  Powell,  along  land  of  Nich.  Jer- 
new,  Mr.  Wm,  Hockaday,  N.W.  to 
branch  of  Machoticke  Cr.  &c.  Renewal 
of  patent  dated  6  May  1652. 

ALEX.  MECANTER,  300  acs.,  N.Ely. 
on  Yeocomoco  Cr.  in  Patomecke  freshes, 
N.Wly.  upon  a  seate  of  2000  acs.  taken 
up  by  John  Wood  &c.  13  Jan.  1661, 
p.  305,  (418).  Renewal  of  patent 
dated  15  July  1657. 

CAPT.  PETER  ASHTON,  485  acs. 
Northumberland   Co.,   2  Apr.   1662,   p. 


305,  (418).  400  acs.  S.  upon  Wiccoco- 
moco  Riv.,  Wly.  upon  a  creek  &  Ely. 
upon  a  creek  dividing  this  &  land  of 
Col.  Wm.  Claiborne;  85  acs.  on  N. 
side  of  sd.  Riv.  betwixt  land  of  Mr. 
Hawly  &  Wm.  Betts  &  Sly.  upon  the 
head  of  a  tract  of  land  called  Peter 
Ashtons  Necke.  400  acs.  renewal  of 
patent  dated  17  Nov.  1654  &  85  acs. 
granted  to  John  Johnson  4  June  1655 
&  by  him  assigned  to  sd.  Ashton. 

SAMLL.  PARRY,  1250  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  13  Jan.  1661,  p.  306,  (419).  On 
S.  side  of  Pascatticon  Cr.,  bounded  on 
E.S.E.  with  land  of  Ralph  Paine  &c. 
Renewal  of  patent  dated  7  Feb.   1652. 

EDWARD  WYATT,  Gent.,  1230 
acs.  Gloster  Co.,  20  July  1662,  p.  306, 
(419).  Upon  Peanketanke  Riv.,  a 
marked  tree  dividing  this  &  land  of  Mr. 
Edw.  Kemp,  &  along  Wadeing  Cr. 
Trans,  of  25  pers:  Wm.  Jarvis,  Tho. 
Jones,  Mary  Hart.  (No  other  names 
appear.) 

DAVID  THOMAS  &  RICHARD 
MACUBINS,  100  acs.  Lancaster  Co., 
28  July  1662,  p.  306,  (420).  On  N. 
side  of  Coxes  Cr.  &  running  towards 
land  of  Wm.  Johnson.  Granted  to 
Randall  Chumbly,  10  May  1654,  as- 
signed to  John  Henly,  who  assigned 
back  to  sd.  Chambly,  who  assigned  to 
Wm.  Johnson,  by  him  assigned  to  Rich- 
ard Stephens  &  by  him  assigned  to  sd. 
Thomas  &  Macubin. 

JOHN  MOTTLY,  600  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  13  Jan.  1661,  p.  306, 
(420).  On  S.  side  of  Wiccocomoco 
Cr.,  towards  the  horse  path,  S.E.  upon 
land  of  James  Allen  &  S.W.  upon  land 
of  Roger  Walters.  Renewal  of  patent 
dated   4   June    1655. 

ARTHUR  SHOORE  (Shore)  & 
HENRY  COSSUM,  350  acs.  Westmore- 
land Co.,  4  Sept.  1661,  p.  307,  (421). 
Bounded  N.W.  with  branch  of  upper 
Machoticks,  beg.  upon  back  line  of  Tho. 
Davis,  extending  S.E.  &c.  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  27  Mar.  1660. 

CAPT.  GYLES  BRENT,  312  acs.  on 
S.    side    of    Pamonkey    Riv.,    bounding 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


399 


S.Ely,  with  a  rivulett  parting  this  from 
land  of  Capt.  Anth.  Langstone.  4  Sept. 
1662,  p.  307,  (421).  Marginal  note: 
The  true  date  appears  to  be  1661  as  by 
order  of  the  General  Ct.,  19  Apr.  1708. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Wm.  Harris,  Tho. 
Martin,  Mary  Wood,  Edw.  Jones, 
Samll.  Clay,  Fra.  Faire. 

WM.  THATCHER  &  THO.  CHET- 
WOOD,  800  acs.  on  N.  side  of  Rappa. 
Riv.  in  Lancaster  Co.,  16  June  1662,  p. 
307,  (421).  Trans,  of  16  pers:  Rich. 
Taner,  Jno.  (a)  Frenchman,  Jno.  Can- 
ter, John  King,  Jno.  Cotler,  Henry 
Tailor,  John  Giden,  Tho.  Stephens, 
Jacob  a  Negro;  7  rights  by  a  patent  of 
350  acs.  granted  to  Toby  Horton  1 
Feb.  1653  &  by  him  relinquished. 

THO.  CHETWOOD,  300  acs,  on  N. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  in  Lancaster  Co, 
16  June  1662,  p.  307,  (422).  Upon 
Teages  Cr,  bounding  upon  land  former- 
ly John  Phillips.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
Tho.  Reynolds,  Hen.  Reynolds,  Henry 
Parker,  Jno.  Aires,  Joseph  Baker. 

JOHN  ASHLY  (Ashley),  240  acs. 
on  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  in  Lancaster 
Co,  16  June  1662,  p.  308,  (422).  Up- 
on the  head  of  Nanbypoyson  (?)  Cr. 
Trans,  of  7  pers:  Jno.  Cone,  John 
Bolton,  Jno.  Pritchet,  Eliz.  Poore,  Jacob 
(a)  Negro. 

CAPT.  DANIELL  PARKE,  580  acs. 
Yorke  Co,  20  Sept.  1662,  p.  308  (422). 
On  S.W.  side  of  Yorke  Riv,  beg.  on 
S.W.  side  of  a  branch  of  the  old  Mill 
Sw.  in  the  line  of  Tho.  Smith,  running 
to  Richard  Foards  line,  by  Warrany 
path,  at  hot  water  path,  on  Richahock 
path,  to  Thomas  Smiths  line  &c.  Trans, 
of  12  pers:  Wm.  Jarvis,  Tho.  Shawly, 
Wm.  Murton,  Mary  Young,  Tho.  Cal- 
ver,  Wm.  Foster,  Edward  Hary,  Tho. 
Stanly,  Jane  Ward,  Tomasin  Flint,  Wm. 
Hart,  Tho.  Carew. 

JOHN  FITCHETT,  1/2  acre  in 
James  City,  18  Oct.  1662,  p.  308, 
(423).  Beg.  on  N.  side  of  the  path 
that  goes  to  Mr.  Chiles  next  unto  the 
office,  N.E.  by  N.  to  the  next  path  that 
goes  to  Mr.  Chiles  &c.  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  8  June  1660. 


THOMAS  BELL,  1100  acs.  New 
Kent  Co,  16  Oct.  1662,  p.  309,  (424). 
On  N.  side  of  Yorke  Riv,  beg.  in 
Cattaile  branch,  running  S.E.  by  land 
of  Ashwell  Battin  to  Mattassux  Sw.  &c. 
600  acs.  for  trans,  of  12  pers  &  the 
residue  granted  to  him  6  Mar.  1658. 
Rebecca  Newell,  Fra.  Drinkwater,  Wm. 
Maior,  Mary  Bennett,  Charles  Nicholls, 
Jno.  Tignall,  Mary  Nicholls,  Mary 
Browning,  Robt.  Horsington,  Edward 
Thompson,  Wm.  Ives,  Isabell  Taylor. 

RICH.  SLAUGHTER,  650  acs. 
Nancemond  Co,  30  Oct.  1662,  p.  309, 
(424).  Renewal  of  patent  dated  3  June 
1656. 

RICHARD  NEW  (Neaw),  750  acs. 
James  City  Co,  20  Oct.  1662,  p.  309, 
(425).  On  the  E.  side  of  Chickhominy 
Riv,  S.E.  on  Margt.  Land,  N.E.  on 
Thomas  Brookes  land  &  Sly.  on  Mr. 
Rolphs  land.  Renewal  of  patent  dated 
6  Apr.  1655. 

MRS.  MARGT.  BRENT,  1000  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.  formerly,  now  Rappa.  Co, 
20  July  1662,  p.  309,  (425).  Bounded 
upon  N.N.E.  side  with  Rappa.  Riv, 
S.E.  with  a  branch  of  same  &  N.W. 
upon  a  valley  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile 
above  the  beg.  of  the  falls  of  James  Riv. 
Renewal  of  patent  dated  8  June  1658. 

JOHN  SIMPSON,  600  acs.  Lancaster 
Co,  28  July  1662,  p.  310,  (425).  Up- 
on S.E.  side  of  Moratticon  Cr.  &  W.S. 
W.  upon  land  of  Lambert  Lamberton  & 
Rich.  Hatton.  Granted  to  Alexander 
Pourteous  6  Oct.  1656  &  assigned  to  sd. 
Simpson. 

RICHARD  DAVIS,  420  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co,  19  July  1662,  p.  310,  (426). 
On  W.  of  Coratoman  Riv,  300  acs.  to- 
wards Mongars  Cr,  granted  to  John 
Monger  29  July  1650;  120  acs.  towards 
Morattico  path  &  in  N.W.  line  of  the 
aforesd.  tract.  Trans,  of  9  pers:  Tho. 
Joyner,  Wm.  Ward,  Mary  Farmer,  Tho. 
Cartwright,  Wm.  Gulin  (?),  Tho. 
Wood,  Jane  Sherley,  Kath  Woold, 
James  Coffer. 

COL.  VALENTINE  PAYTON,  1600 
acs.  Westmoreland  Co,  20  July  1662,  p. 


400 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


310,  (426).  On  S.  side  of  Patomecke 
Riv.,  beg.  at  a  small  branch  of  Oquia 
Riv.,  W.S.W.  along  land  of  Capt. 
Mason  &c.  Granted  to  Robert  Hubberd 
12  Dec.   1654  &  by  him  assigned. 

WILLIAM  WALKER,  839  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  30  Oct.   1662,  p. 

311,  (427).  639  acs.  S.Ely,  upon  Yeo- 
comoco  Riv.,  S.Wly.  upon  land  of  Rich- 
ard Holder  ;&  200  upon  a  creek  towards 
John  Earles  plantation,  which  200  acs. 
is  comonly  called  Bloyces  land.  Re- 
newal of  patent  dated  24  Oct.  1655. 

MR.  GEORGE  WHALE,  1400  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  10  Oct.  1662,  p.  311, 
(427).  600  acs.  on  S.  side  of  Corato- 
man  Cr.  being  the  next  Cr.  Nly.  to 
Haddawaies  Cr.,  S.  Ely.  upon  land  sur- 
veyed for  Toby  Horton  by  some  called 
Mr.  Wetherlies  land  &  S.Wly.  upon 
land  of  John  Taylour,  dec'd.  300  acs. 
near  the  glade  above  Wiccocomoco  In- 
dian Towne,  adj.  to  S.  side  of  land  of 
Jno.  Cossens  &  Thomas  Steed,  E.  by  S. 
to  500  acs.  assigned  to  sd.  Wale  by 
Gervase  Dodson;  300  acs.  near  the  head 
of  a  Cr.  by  some  called  Chesticon  &  by 
others  Coratoman,  S.Ely,  upon  land  of 
sd.  Dodson  &  Taylour.  1100  acs. 
granted  to  sd.  Dodson  by  patents  dated 
3  Mar.  1656  &  29  Nov.  1658  &  300 
acs.  renewal  of  patent  dated  29  Nov. 
1658. 

JOHN  COX,  1150  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  28  Aug.  1662,  p.  312,  (428).  On 
S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  &  N.W.  side  of 
Piscaticon  Cr.,  beg.  on  a  peninsula 
called  Coxes  Island,  running  to  N.W. 
side  of  Hodgkins  Cr.  &  by  the  mouth 
of  a  branch  dividing  this  from  land  of 
William  Johnson.  1000  acs.  granted 
him  1  May  1650  &  50  acs.  found  to  be 
wanting  within  the  same;  &  100  acs. 
for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Judeth  Holman  & 
Eliz.  Newsom. 

MR.  WM.  DRUMMOND,  1200  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  26  Mar.  1662,  p.  312, 
(429).  In  Chikahomany  Riv.,  beg.  at 
point  of  land  next  above  Warreny 
Landing  place.  Granted  to  Wm.  Taylor 
9  Nov.  1638  &  by  him  long  since  de- 
serted &  now  granted  by  order  of  court. 
(The    following    names    appear    under 


this  patent)  John  Farsey,  Petro  Gillard, 
Eliz.  ux  (wife  of  Gillard  ?),  Jno. 
Ingram,  Machaell  Hamond,  Abram 
Vodin,  Marice  Vodin,  Jno.  Vodin, 
Isack  Vodin,  Rich.  Stanford,  Abram 
Hill,  Wm.  Grum,  Wm.  Dabye,  Susanna 
Childes  (?),  Susanna  Catts  (?),  Susana 
Garment,  Wm.  Hearny,  2  Negroes,  Jno. 
James,  Wm.  Wells,  Susan  Carter, 
Edwd.  Wells,  Jno.  Turner. 

RICHARD  BROWNE,  300  acs. 
Westmoreland  Co.,  4  Sept.  1661,  p. 
313,  (430).  100  acs.  on  S.  side  of 
Hallowes  Cr.  &  200  acs.  upon  Hollis 
Cr.  including  a  small  island,  Wly.  upon 
land  of  Tho.  Blagg,  Ely.  towards  land 
of  little  Browne  &  Sly.  upon  a  swamp 
by  Nangatico  path.  200  acs.  by  patend 
dated  13  Sept.  1654  &  100  acs.  for 
trans,  of  2  pers:  Mary  Phillips  &  Susan 
Jones. 

THO.  LETHERBURY  &  ALEX 
MATTOCKS,  516  acs.  Northampton 
Co.,  20  Oct.  1661,  p.  313,  (431).  At 
the  head  of  Naswattocks  Cr.,  Ely.  at 
the  head  of  former  devdt.  of  James 
Jones.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  10  June 
1654. 

GEORGE  PARKER,  1300  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  26  Sept.  1661,  p.  313, 
(431).  At  Anancock  Cr.,  beg.  at  land 
of  Mr.  Wm.  Waters.  Trans,  of  26 
pers:  Peter  Mills,  17  Negroes,  Judeth 
Barber,  An  Barber,  Henry  Wms.  (Wil- 
liams), Stephen  Norgrove,  Wm.  Hart, 
An   Stone,   Wm.   Norton,   Mary  Jones. 

WALTER  ENGLISH,  360  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  20  Oct.  1661,  p.  314, 
(431).  On  Lower  Mechoticks  opposite 
land  of  Henry  Rocke  (or  Roche)  run- 
ning nigh  Nomany  path  N.N.E.  along 
land  of  Thomas  Atwell  &c.  Trans,  of 
8  pers:  Mary  English,  Jno.  English, 
Peter  Mills,  Tho.  White,  Andrew  Stone, 
Roger  Norton,  Stephen  Norman,  a 
Negro. 

VINCENT  COX,  346  acs.  Northum- 
berland Co.,  20  Oct.  1661,  p.  314, 
(432).  On  N.  side  of  little  Wiccoco- 
mico,  beg.  on  line  of  trees  dividing  this 
from  land  of  Robt.  Smith,  S.E.  &c.  to 
trees  dividing  this  &  land  of  Robt.  Ben- 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


401 


nett,  son  of  Jno.  Bennett,  deed.  Trans, 
of  7  pers:  Wm.  Jones,  Thomas  Cooper, 
Mary  Coop(er  ?),  Wm.  Peterson,  Peter 
Stewart,  Wm.  Stephens,  Wm.  Stow. 

GEORG  LIGHT  &  THO.  SPENCER, 

1127  acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  13  Jan.  1661, 
p.  314,  (432).  Upon  N.  side  of  Matta- 
pony  Riv.,  beg.  at  Mr.  Holmes  lower 
corner  tree  in  Chescake  path,  running  to 
main  swamp  of  Peancketanck  &c.  to 
marked  trees  dividing  this  &  sd.  Mr. 
Thomas  Holmes  land.  Trans,  of  23 
pers:  Wm.  Maris,  Mary  Stephens,  Ann 
Brodhurst,  Jane  Bandon,  Wm.  Sewell, 
Mary  Jones,  Jane  Godlad,  16  Negroes. 

EDWARD  REVELL,  1000  acs. 
Northampton    Co.,    26    Sept.    1661,    p. 

315,  (433).  On  S.  side  of  Pungotege 
Cr.,  being  a  neck  of  land  parted  by 
White  Sapenny  Cr.  from  land  of  An- 
thony Hoskins,  running  to  an  Indian 
bridge,  Sly.  to  a  swamp  near  head  of  a 
run  of  sd.  Whitsapenny  Cr.  500  acs. 
by  patent  dated  27  Nov.  1652  &  500 
acs.  for  trans,  of  10  pers:  5  Negroes; 
Ann  Morris,  Mary  Wiggins,  Wm.  Ste- 
phens, Andrew  Gadstone,  Walter  Jones. 

ISAAK  ALLERTON,  500  acs.  West- 
moreland Co.,  28  Mar.  1662,  p.  315, 
(434).  300  acs.  on  S.  side  of  Lower 
Machotique  River  2  mi.  up  the  same  & 
near  Oyster  Shell  poynt  &  200  acs. 
bounding  S.Ely,  towards  sd.  land  &c,  2 
white  oaks  being  in  a  line  of  division 
between  this  &  land  of  Mr.  Henry  Vin- 
cent, N.Ely,  upon  land  of  Capt.  Richard 
Wright  &  S.Wly.  on  land  of  Jno.  Haw- 
kins. 300  acs.  granted  to  George  Watts 
19  Oct.  1653,  assigned  to  Jno.  Wood 
who  assigned  to  sd.  Allerton  &  200  acs. 
for  trans,  of  4  pers:  Anthony  Harris, 
Stephen  Harris,  Peter  Mackro,  Wm. 
Andrewes. 

MR.  OBEDIENCE  ROBINS,  450  acs. 
Northampton    Co.,    22    Mar.    1643,    p. 

316,  (434).  (By  Sir  Wm.  Berkeley) 
Bounded  on  S.  by  his  own  land,  on  N. 
by  land  of  Samll.  Scott,  on  E.  by  land 
of  Mr.  Taylor  &  on  W.  by  the  former 
grant  of  Cherristons.    Trans,  of  9  pers.* 

MONTOY  EVELIN.  Gent.,  650  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  20  June  1651,  p.  316, 


(435).  On  S.  side  the  Riv.  200  acs.  adj. 
another  parcel  herein  granted  sd.  Evelin 
formerly  Mr.  Edw.  Gandons;  150  acs. 
divided  on  E.  by  a  swamp  from  land  of 
Wm.  Ewens;  300  acs.  opposite  James 
Citty,  Wly.  upon  land  formerly  Jno. 
Baynhams  &  extending  on  land  of  Ed- 
ward Grindon.  200  acs.  granted  unto 
John  Baynham  17  Jan.  1619,  150  acs. 
granted  to  Edward  Grindon  5  Dec.  1620 
&  300  acs.  granted  to  Mr.  George  Sands 
4  Dec.  1624  &  purchased  of  Thomas 
Grindon  by  Capt.  Geo.  Evelin  3  Aug. 
1649  who  gave  same  by  deed  to  his  son, 
the  sd.  Monjoy  28  Apr.  1650.  (By  Sir 
Wm.  Berkeley) 

CAPT.  JNO.  UNDERHILL,  250  acs. 
Yorke  Co.  formerly  called  Charles 
River  Co.,  6  Aug.  1662,  p.  317,  (435). 
Beg.  on  W.  side  of  Felgats  Cr.  at  the 
mouth  of  a  branch  dividing  this  from 
the  Gleabe  Land  of  Hampton  Parish, 
N.  by  W.  upon  the  Pond  (of)  Col. 
John  Waines,  S.  upon  land  of  Wm. 
Barber  &  E.  upon  land  of  Capt.  Jno. 
West.  Granted  to  Capt.  Robt.  Felgate 
29  Aug.  1637  for  ventureing  "to  seate 
those  fronteer  parts"  &  now  granted  sd. 
Underhill  by  order  of  court  &  for  trans, 
of  5  pers:  Peter  Cornhill,  Andrew 
Stone,  William  Jackson,  John  Jackson, 
Mary  Williams. 

JNO.  JOLLIFFE.  200  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  13  an.  1661,  p.  317,  (436). 
Renewal  of  patent  dated  30  May  1653. 

THOMAS  DYER,  300  acs.  in  the 
Western  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  called  the 
brack  rige,  lying  at  the  head  of  Robt. 
Capes  land.  9  Apr.  1662,  p.  318, 
(437).  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Ann  Love- 
ing,  Peter  Sutor,  Andrew  Jones,  Mary 
Nitter,  Wm.  Holmes,  Tho.  Mines. 

THOMAS  BELL,  1100  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  on  N.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.,  17 
Oct.  1662,  p.  318,  (437).  Beg.  in 
Cattail  branch,  running  S.E.  by  land  of 
Ashwell  Battin  to  Mattasup  Swamp  &c. 
Trans,  of  22  pers:  Tho.  Bell  twice, 
Andrew  Bell,  Susan  Bell,  Mary  Jones, 
Georg  Austin,  Jno.  Wms.  (Williams), 
Wm.  Pope,  Thomas  Stephens,  Wm. 
Lewis,  Wm.  Caps,  Roger  Sheely,  Jno. 
Mathews,  Rich.  Joy,  8  Negroes. 


402 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


RALPH  ELKINS,  30  acs.  Yorke  Co., 
13  Jan.  1661,  p.  318,  (437).  S.W.  on 
the  greate  Horse  path,  S.E.  on  land  of 
Goodman  Jones,  N.E.  on  Stephen  Gar- 
ner, N.W.  on  Georg  Wyatt  &  old  Farr. 
Trans,  of  Peter  Nicholls. 

MR.  RICHARD  PARROTT,  300  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  20  Mar.  1662,  p.  319, 
(438).  Formerly  granted  unto  Minor 
Minson,  lately  found  to  escheat  &  now 
granted  sd.  Parrott  who  hath  made  his 
composition  to  be  paid  according  to  act. 

SAME.  800  acs.  Same  county,  date 
and  Page.  Formerly  granted  unto  Tho- 
mas Dale  &c.  as  above. 

SAME.  300  acs.  on  S.  side  of  Rappa. 
Riv.,  beg.  at  a  poynt  on  Ewd.  side  of 
Fishing  Cr.  &  at  the  miles  end  of  his 
own  land.  16  Jan.  1661,  p.  319,  (438). 
Granted  sd.  Parrott  6  Oct.  1657  &  by 
him  sold  to  Minor  Minson,  who  died 
without  heir  &  sd.  land  escheated  to  his 
Majesty  &  bought  of  Sir  William 
Berkeley,  Treasurer,  13  May  1661. 

MR.  ROBERT  GRIGG  &  MR.  ED- 
WARD WYATT,  370  acs.  in  Gloster 
Co.,  Kingston  Parish,  19  Apr.  1662,  p. 
320,  (439).  Bounding  upon  land  of 
Jno.  Smithy  &  running  from  Garden 
Cr.  upon  the  bay  S.E.  &c.  Trans,  of  8 
pers:  Mary  Jones,  Wm.  White,  Jno. 
Tappin,  Andrew  Mayle,  Jane  Carter, 
Stephen  Godlad,  Wm.  Hankin,  Antho. 
Grigson. 

HENRY  WATTS,  146  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  20  July  1661,  p.  320, 
(439).  At  the  head  of  Little  Wiccoco- 
mico,  beg.  at  a  tree  dividing  this  &  land 
of  Major  George  Colclough,  extending 
along  a  branch  falling  into  the  Scotts 
Cr.  &  N.E.  on  land  of  Jno.  Motley. 
Trans,  of  3  pers:  Henry  Walker,  An- 
drew Jones,  Paul  Hargrove. 

JAMES  HILL,  350  acs.  Northumber- 
land Co.,  10  May  1661,  p.  320,  (440). 
On  S.  side  of  great  Wiccocomico,  be- 
tween lands  surveyed  for  John  Fawsett, 
Freeman  Conaway  &  John  Howard  & 
lands  surveyed  for  Jno.  Hughlett  &  Tho- 
mas Read,  patterned  only  for  Thomas 
Read,  bounding  N.N.E.  upon  2000  acs. 


patterned  for  Isaak  Foxcroft,  afterwards 
sold  to  Thomas  Prittiman  &c.  Trans. 
of  7  pers:  Susan  Hunt,  Timothy  Cole, 
Wm.  Seward  Godale,  Andrew  Stevens, 
Henry  Creighton,  Walter  Ashdowne. 
(By  Sir  Wm.  Berkeley). 

SYMON  RICHARDSON,  384  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  10  July  1661,  p. 
321,  (440).  Beg.  on  Herring  Cr.  divid- 
ing this  &  land  of  Major  George  Col- 
clough, extending  along  Patomeck  Riv. 
N.W.  by  W.  to  a  pond  dividing  this  & 
land  of  John  Bales  &c.  300  acs.  granted 
to  John  Hailes  &  Thomas  Sheppard  16 
Sept.  1651,  by  them  assigned  unto  Cle- 
ment Carbill  &  Samll.  Nicholls,  by 
Nicholls  assigned  unto  John  Hany,  who 
assigned  to  John  Raven  &  Thomas 
Rowe;  sd.  Raven  assigned  his  part  to 
sd.  Rowe,  who  assigned  to  Symon  Rich- 
ardson &  Richard  Island;  Island  as- 
signed unto  George  Markes  &  Thomas 
Swan,  who  assigned  to  sd.  Richardson. 
84  acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Peter  Rich- 
ards (?),  Susan  Hardrop.  (By  Sir  Wm. 
Berkeley). 

GILES  BRENT,  Esqr.,  1000  acs. 
Westmoreland  Co.,  29  Nov.  1662,  p. 
321,  (441).  In  Chapawansick  Cr.,  beg. 
at  the  head  of  land  of  Mr.  Walter 
Broadhurst,  extending  on  both  sides  of 
the  run  of  sd.  Cr.  &c.  N.N.Wly.  up 
the  sd.  run,  including  the  Rock  line  to 
Caves  called  Machezan.  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  24  Nov.  1658.  (By  Sir 
Wm.  Berkeley). 

WILLIAM  DEBNAM,  1500  acs.  in 
Mock  jack  Bay,  beg.  at  marked  tree  of 
George  Ludlow,  Esqr.,  a  mile  distant 
from  a  branch  in  Seaverne  &c.  through 
Cedar  Island  to  the  bay  &c.  13  Jan. 
1661,  p.  322,  (441).  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  26  Dec.  1653. 

SAME.  600  acs.  Same  date  &  page, 
(442).  Beg.  on  W.  lines  of  land 
formerly  belonging  to  George  Warleich 
against  Cranie  Island  in  Ware  Riv.  in 
Mock  jack  bay  &c.  to  Swd.  corner  tree  of 
Mr.  Breemans  land  &c.  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  6  May  1652. 

JOHN  NEWMAN,  400  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co.,   22  July  1662,  p.  322,    (442). 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


403 


On  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  on  the  head 
of  Moraticon  Riv.,  bounded  N.  by  W. 
by  the  side  of  a  branch  dividing  this  & 
land  of  Mr.  Whitby  &c.  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  15  Mar.  1657. 

RICHARD  NORMANSELL,  2550 
acs.  Staff.  Co.,  5  June  1666,  p.  323, 
(443).  On  N.W.  side  of  Potomack 
Riv.  on  the  maine  run  of  Pohick  Cr. 
Trans,  of  51  pers:  Tho.  Durant,  James 
Banns,  Jno.  Stone,  Robt.  Durner,  Wm. 
Castro  (or  Carter),  Jno.  Redock,  Tho. 
James,  Tho.  Norrich,  Edw.  Cooke, 
Matt.  Hutson,  Stephen  Coleman,  Robt. 
Weddge,  Wm.  Dolton,  George  Greene, 
Wm.  Bond,  James  Porter,  Johannah 
Browne,  May  Birch,  Tho.  Metchalfe, 
Wm.  Fox,  Tho.  Betchman,  Tho.  Dunce, 
Eliz.  Gardner,  James  Harny,  Xtopr. 
Wood,  Patrick  Miller,  Jno.  Davis,  Tho. 
Godfrey,  Tho.  Watson,  Abram  Wright, 
Fran.  Thomas,  Wm.  Price,  Ann  Clay, 
Robt.  Browne,  Walter  Key,  Wm.  Knox, 
Eliz.  Wren,  Rich.  Glover,  Henry  Foster, 
Antho.  Thorpe,  Mary  Atkins,  2  Negroes, 
Wm.  Jones,  Xpr.  Wood,  Hump.  Long, 
Eliz.  White,  Wm.  Griffeth,  Jno.  Graves, 
Robt.  More,  Edward  Tilson.  (Granted 
by  Sir  Wm.  Berkeley) 

MR.  RICHARD  COLE,  Merchant, 
1350  acs.  Northumberland  Co.,  20  Aug. 
1661,  p.  323,  (443).  Be<*.  at  a  poynt 
at  the  E.  side  of  the  mouth  of  Macho- 
ticque  Riv.,  extending  along  Potomack 
E.  by  N.  &c.  to  a  tree  divding  this  & 
land  of  James  Hurd,  to  land  of  Mr. 
Isaak  Allerton  &c.  1050  acs.  granted  to 
Wm.  Goower  18  Feb.  1650  &  300  acs. 
the  residue  for  trans,  of  6  pers:  Jno. 
Edwards,  Jno.  Williams,  Susan  Edmond, 
Edwd.  James,  Peter  Story,  Hanah  Dew. 

CAPT.  GEORGE  LYDDALL,  3306 
acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  12  Oct.  1662,  p. 
324,  (444).  On  both  sides  of  Black 
Cr.,  running  by  land  of  Anthony  Arnold 
&c.  to  Wanieoake  (or  Warrieoake) 
Sw,  &c.  over  Maddicon  path  to  the 
mountains  &  along  Col.  Jno.  West 
back  line.  2900  acs.  granted  to  sd. 
Lyddall  27  Sept.  1657,  1750  acs.  of 
which  was  granted  to  Joseph  Cro- 
shall  8  Nov.  1653  &  purchased  of  sd. 
Croshaw  &  patented  in  name  of  sd.  Lyd- 


dall 25  Nov.  1654;  640  acs.  by  patent 
dated  27  Dec.  1657  &  916  acs.  newly 
taken  up  &  due  for  trans,  of  19  pers: 
Charles  Greene,  Jno.  Kippin,  Wm. 
Sanders,  Edward  Frost,  Will  Jones, 
Thomas  Core,  Francis  Jeffs  (?),  Edward 
Cooper,  Francis  Parker,  Isaak  Ball,  Tho- 
mas Leonard,  Wm.  Addison,  Wm. 
Leech,  Alice  Goodale,  An  Church, 
Charles  Farthing,  Richard  White,  Abram 
Iveson,  Isaak  Brumly. 

GEORGE  SMITH,  592  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  20  Oct.  1662,  p.  325,  (445). 
Before  Westham  path  &  adj.  land  of 
Tho.  Meredeth  upon  branch  of  Chika- 
homany  Sw.  called  Bever  quarter,  run- 
ning to  land  of  Mr.  Richmond  Terrill 
&c.  Trans,  of  12  pers:  Jno.  Browne, 
Mary  Gage,  Tho.  Webster,  Wm.  Tho- 
mas, Mathew  Wms.  (Williams),  Jno. 
Short,  Alexr.  Davis,  Charles  Greene, 
Jno.  Kippin,  Wm.  Sanders,  Edward 
Froste,  Wm.  Jones. 

GEORGE  SMITH  &  EDMOND 
PRICE,  800  acs.  part  in  James  City  Co. 
&  part  in  New  Kent  Co.,  20  Oct.  1662, 
p.  325,  (445).  Upon  S.  side  of  the 
freshes  of  Yorke  Riv.,  beg.  on  the  S. 
side  of  the  Ridge  path  bet.  branches  of 
Chikahomani  Sw.  &  Black  Cr.  Trans, 
of  16  pers:  Tho.  Carr,  Ed.  Cooper, 
Fran.  Parke,  Isaak  Bell,  Tho.  Leonard, 
Alice  Goodale,  Ri.  White,  Isaack 
Brumly,  Wm.  Addison,  Ann  Church, 
Jno.  Rauling  (?),  Francis  Jeffs,  Wm. 
Leech,  Charles  Farthing,  Fug.  (?) 
Tompson,  Wm.  Tompson. 

GEORGE  SMITH,  1020  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  20  Oct.  1662,  p.  326,  (445). 
850  acs.  on  S.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.,  run- 
ning to  a  branch  near  Rockahock  path 
to  Chikahomani  fort  &  from  sd.  Smith's 
now  dwelling  house,  &  170  acs.  on  N. 
side  of  Dyascun  Sw,  running  to  Pullams 
corner  &c.  850  acs.  by  patent  8  Sept. 
1657  &  170  acs.  for  trans,  of  4  pers: 
Nicholas  Jnoson  (Johnson),  Joseph 
Cort,  Peter  Francklin,  Jno.  Lincolnshire. 

WILL  DRUMMOND,  Gent.,  4750 
acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  20  Sept.  1661, 
p.  326,  (446).  Beg.  a  mile  from  the 
Nominy  Riv.,  S.  &  Wly.  &  on  the  back 
of  land  belonging  to  Jno.  Wood.  Trans. 


404 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


of  95  pers:  Samll.  Howard,  Jno.  Thom- 
son, Wm.  Cooke,  Eliz.  Smith,  Jno. 
Warren,  Fran.  James,  Richd.  Harma, 
Jno.  Cotton,  An  Dunbar,  Wm.  Worden, 
Marg.  Rowlins,  Geo.  Howkett,  Samll. 
Harford,  Robt.  Floring,  Jno.  Greene, 
Tho.  Wood,  Rich.  Parker,  Fran.  Willis, 
Henry  Mills,  Alice  Potter,  Mary  Hunt, 
Daniell  Wms.  (Williams),  Dennis 
Shorpe,  James  Adkins,  Jno.  Poore, 
James  Man,  Erasmus  Pewry  (or  Penry), 
Mary  Smith,  Wm.  Cooke,  Lawrence 
Hooker,  Saml.  Welch,  Dennis  Watkins, 
Danll.  Dickins,  Michaell  Wadloe,  Nich 
Spruce,  Mary  Spruce,  Henrick  Vandu- 
lett,  Robt.  Surlin,  Elinor  Woodbridge, 
James  Bruce,  Henry  Sand  (or  Sanders), 
Silvest.  Thacker,  Dorothy  Thacker,  Jno. 
Deane,  Wm.  Hope,  Francis  Jones,  Jno. 
Worlech,  Nath.  Spencer,  Rich.  Spicor, 
Mathew  Hains,  Wm.  Thompson,  Jane 
Salter,  Mary  Wood,  Daniell  Parker, 
Walter  Wms.  (Williams),  Gartred 
Sparkes,  Francis  Spie,  Martin  Woodliffe, 
Robt.  Savin,  Rich.  Palmer,  Samll.  Prime 
(or  Prince),  Nich.  Wells,  Wm.  John- 
son, Isaak  Rose,  Patriak  Wicks,  Jno. 
Hobbs,  Mary  Hart,  Samll.  Davis,  Tho. 
Portman,  Nich.  Smart,  Danll.  Wills, 
Rich.  Forrest,  Jno.  Roak  (?),  Jane 
Wallis,  Tim.  Saltir,  Robt.  Datrill,  Phill. 
Woodford,  Wm.  Garrett,  Tho.  Johnson, 
Ralph  Mathew.  Henry  Betts,  Mary 
Bateman,  8  Negroes,  Robt.  Serly,  Davy 
Darlins,  Roger  Armes,  Jno.  Huger  (or 
Hager),  Tho.  Keiton. 

Note. — The  following  patents  are  in- 
serted between  pages  64  and  65,  in  old 
book,  and  pages  are  not  numbered. 

By  Sir  William  Berkeley 

COL.  RICHARD  LEE,  Councillor  of 
State,  4,000  acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  26 

Nov.  166—,  p. ,  (447).    1000  acs. 

behind  land  of  Mr.  Roger  Isham,  *** 
the  dwelling  house  of  sd.  Isham;  part 
thereof  in  Patomeck  freshes  on  the  N.E. 
of  a  creek  below  Pascattaway,  but  on 
the  opposite  side  of  the  river,  S.Wly. 
on  Hopkins  Cr.,  running  towards  land 
surveyed  for  Henry  Vincent;  2,000  acs. 
Nly.  on  a  creek  issuing  out  of  sd.  river 
dividing  this  from  tract  of  2000  acs. 
***  John  Wood,  Robert  Smith  &  John 
Eyres.    1000  acs.  granted  to  John  Wood 


14  Jan.  ,   part  granted  to   Robert 

Cart(er)  July  1657  ***lands  due 

for  want  of  seating  &c.  &  due  sd.  Lee 
by  order  of  the  Gen'l.  Ct.  &  trans,  of 
80  Negroes.  Note:  Record  badly  muti- 
lated. 

THOMAS  WILLIAMS  &  GEORGE 
ENGLISH,  1000  acs.  between  Wiccoco- 
moco  Indian  Town  &  Miridiths  River 
or  branch,  beg.  at  head  of  land  of  John 
Cossens,  &c  to  head  of  land  of  Thomas 
Dodson  &  along  Dodsons,  Cosens  & 
Steede.  Trans,  of  20  pers.*  26  Nov. 
1660,  p.  ,  (448).    (Mutilated). 

MR.  JAMES  HURD,  1770  acs.  New 

Kent  Co.,  13  Dec.  1660,  p. ,  (448). 

On  S.  side  of  York  Riv.  &  commonly 
called  Old  Warraney  Town,  ***  going 
across  to  a  payth  that  goeth  to  Thomas 
Merydaies  to  a  white  oak  standing  on 
W.  side  of  Brushes  Sw.  near  the  head 
thereof,  E.  to  marked  red  oak  that 
stands  near  the  Percimon  tree  Plain,  S. 
then  Ewd.  of  a  great  Indian  Field,  &c. 
880  acs.  granted  unto  Mr.  Robert  Booth 
14  Apr.  1653  &  assigned  to  sd.  Hurd 
&  890  acs.  for  trans,  of  18  pers:  Roger 
Barlow,  Wm.  Wilkin,  James  Payton, 
Jeremy  Revet,  Mary  Martin,  James 
Mallinge,  Mary  James,  Rich.  Scragg, 
John  Hardy,  Roger  Lasley,  John 
Dromer,  Jacob  Johnson,  Susan  Higley, 
James  Hill,  Patrk.  Drunkee,  Wm. 
Harris,  James  Varley,  Hugh  Newitt. 

MR.  FRANCIS  BURNELL,  2,000  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  on  S.  side  of  York  Riv. 
Date  &  page  missing.  (449).  Mentions 
Burchen  Swamp,  Warrany  Swamp  & 
Rickahock  Path.    (Mutilated.) 

GEORGE  MORRIS  &  JOHN  PIGGE, 
1,000    acs.    New    Kent    Co.,    14    Dec. 

(1660),  p.  ,   (450).    Trans,  of  20 

pers:  Evan  Walker,  Roger  Peirce, 
Katherine  Prickett,  Peter  Grove,  Wm. 
Barby,     Roger     Batman,     Tho.     Large, 

M Collins,    Peter   Arundell,    Wm. 

Warrey,  Tho.  Hinkes,  Ed.  Tunstell, 
David  Hoskins,  Wm.  Nicholas.  Richd. 
Harvy,  Tho.  .    (Mutilated.) 

MR.  RICHARD  BUSHROD,  2000 
acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  15  Oct.  1660, 
p.  ,    (450).    Opposite  against  the 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


405 


Myampses  Island,  commonly  called  the 
Dogs  Island,  bounding  W.  &  N.  upon 
Potomeck  Riv.  1000  acs.  patented  by 
Col.  Speake  11  Oct.  1653  &  granted  sd. 
Bushrod  by  order  of  Councill  &  the 
residue  for  trans,  of  40  pers.*  (Muti- 
lated.) 

COL.  EDWD.  HILL,  2476  acs.  Chas. 

City  Co.,  8  Dec.  1660,  p.  ,  (450). 

416  acs.  lying  in  Shirley  Hundred, 
bounded  S.  on  the  swamp  that  parts  *** 
Island,  E.  on  Mrs.  Aston,  N.  on  Joseph 
Royall  &  W.  on  the  main  river.  The 
following  names  and  places  are  men- 
tioned in  this  record,  which  is  badly 
mutilated:    John  Meeres,  Cameages  Cr., 

Mrs.    Ashton,    Lewellin,    Turkey 

Island  Cr.,  Mrs.  Haymans  land.  316 
acs.  by  purchase;  850  acs.  deserted  by 
John  Meeres  was  granted  to  sd.  Hill 
3  Oct.  1659,  by  order  of  the  Quarter 
Ct.,  &  due  for  trans,  of  17  pers.*  The 
residue  likewise  due  for  trans,  of  26 
pers.* 

WILLIAM  HARRISON,  900  acs. 
Chas.   City  Co.,   last  of  Jan.   1660,   p. 

(451).    On  S.  side  of  James  Riv. 

upon  the  head  of  Florida  Hundred  Cr. 
Trans,  of  18  pers.*    Mutilated. 

MATTHEW  KEMP,  Gent.,  500  acs. 
in  Petomack  freshes,  something  above 
a  half  a  mile  below  the  Falls,  ***  run- 
ning S.W.  to  the  Acquacond  Riv.,  by 
land  John  Wood  assigned  to  a  Scotch- 
man. Granted  to  Henry  Vincent  18 
Sept.  1657.    Trans,  of  10  pers:    Roger 

Greene,  Wm.  Standish,  Han:   Har , 

Jane  Bauston,  David  Corke,  Fra.  French. 
(Badly  mutilated)  15  Oct.  1660,  (452). 

CAPT.  PETER  JENINGS,   650   acs. 

"something    below    Puscattaway.     

Oct.   1660,"    (452)    Mutilated. 

MR.  PETER  EFFORD,  900  acs.  in 
the   Counties    of   James    City   &   York, 

of  Feb.  1660,  p.  (453).    From  the 

run  side  of  Queens  Creek,  towards 
Bradshaws,  thence  to  Mr.  Kemps,  take- 
ing  in  that  Neck,  &c.  to  division  line 
between  Efford  and  Vardy,  etc.  400  acs. 
by  purchase  from  John  Baker,  assignee 
of  John  Bromfield,  who  was  assignee  of 
Capt.   John   Shepard   &   Lucy  Webster, 


the  original  patent  for  1000  acs.  granted 
*9  January,  1640,  etc.,  &  500  for  trans. 
of  10  pers.* 

JOHN  WILLIAMS,  500  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.  at  Anancock.  3  Nov.  1660, 
(454).  Trans.  10  pers:  Peter  Cole, 
Wm.  Chilturne,  Jno.  Gwinn,  Bryan 
Clarke,  Geo.  Andrewe,  Fran.  Knight, 
Tho.  Edwards,  Francis  Garland,  Wm. 
Reeves,  Edward  .    (Mutilated.) 

GEORG  TREWETT,  500  acs.  North- 
ampton Co.,  3  Nov.  1660,  p.  (454).  At 
Anancock.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  John 
Tompson,  Charles  Barcroft,  Alexander 
Mottrick,  Wm.  Branch,  Tho.  Moore, 
Tho.  Musgrave,  Robert  Huntley,  Jno. 
Young,  Walter  Lane,  Jno.  Watson. 

RICHARD  SMITH,  200  acs.  at  the 
head  of  Ockahanock  Cr.,  Northampton 
Co.,  called  by  the  name  of  Capt.  Tho- 
mas' his  neck,  bounded  Sly.  on  N.W. 
branch  of  William  Taylour  &  W.  on 
land  that  was  William  Davis.  3  Nov. 
1660,  p.  (455).  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
Joseph  Harrison,  Jno.  Thomas,  Kather- 
ine  Harris,  Henry  Scott. 

JOHN  ELLSEY,  1200  acs.  Northamp- 
ton Co.,  3  Nov.  1660,  p.  (455).  Trans. 
of  24  pers:  Benjamin  Jones,  Margarett 
Palmer,  Elizabeth  Davis,  Mary  Johnson, 
Alice  Wattson,  Tho.  Tull,  Ann  Smith, 
Margarett  Moyner  (?),  Abraham  Tay- 
lour, Wm.  Hemseley  (or  Hensseley), 
Tho.  Tucker,  Micha.  Hooton,  Henry 
Scott,  Jane  Webb,  Elizabeth  Hayman, 
Isabell  Heath,  Edward  Sanders,  Jose. 
Stonward,  Eliz.  Yorke,  Sarah  Rider, 
Jane  Coalson,  Jno.  Blaye,  Judith  Dole, 
Samuell  Jackson.  Marginal  note:  This 
patent  was  by  John  Ellsey  sold  &  as- 
signed to  Thomas  Leatherbury  &  granted 
since  to  Leatherbury  by  patent  dated  10 
Mar.  1663.    (Mutilated.) 

JOHN,  SARAH  &  MARGARETT 
MACHILL,  1000  acs.,  500  acs.  on  S. 
side  of  Chiccanessecks  Cr.,  bounded  on 
W.  by  the  main  bay,  on  E.  by  land  of 
William  Waters  &  &  S.  towards  Anan- 
cock Cr.  500  acs.  on  E.  side  of  sd. 
Waters'  land,  bounded  on  N.  by  sd.  Cr. 
&  running  S.  towards  Anancock  Cr. 
Trans,  of  20  pers:    Jno.  Michaell,  Senr., 


406 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Jno.  Michaell,  Junr.,  Lawrence  Jacob, 
Wm.  a  Negro,  Bando,  a  Negro,  Row- 
land Irish  (?)  Derman  Adonneway 
(?),  John  Flinte,  Rachell  Metkalfe, 
Elizabeth  Bansby,  Mary  Teage,  Abraham 
Rogers,  Robert  A  Chewe  (?),  Jno.  Jen- 
ings,  Wm.  Morgen,  Jno.  Cannedy,  Ellis 
Appaie  (?),  Thomas  Irish,  Georg 
Scotch,  (?),Mary  Greenwood.  P.  (455). 

Note. — The  following  54  abstracts 
are  not  found  in  Old  Volume  5  and  the 
pages  here  given  refer  to  the  copied 
Book  4.  It  is  assumed  this  omission 
was  due  to  the  dilapidated  condition  of 
the  original  book,  of  which  Old  Volume 

5  is  a  copy. 

PETER  ASHTON,  2550  acs.  W'more- 
land  Co.,  26  Mar.  1661,  p.  (456).  N. 
on  Patowmack  Riv.  Adj.  land  of  Henry 
Eggerton.  550  acs.  by  patent  dated  13 
Mar.  1657  &  2000  acs.  by  patent  dated 
20  Aug.  1658  &  now  renewed  by  order 
&c.    (Record  Incomplete.) 

CAPTAIN  WILLIAM  CLAIBORNE, 

4000  acs.,  26  Mar.  1661,  p.  (456). 
Mentions  Pyanketank  Riv.,  Robins 
branch  &  Contrary  branch.  Trans,  of 
80  pers.*     (Record  incomplete.) 

GRIFFETH,    62    acs.,    6    Apr. 

1661,  p.  (457).  Mentions  a  field  called 
Scotch  Quarter,  Mulberry  Island.  &  At- 
kins Neck.  Trans,  of  2  pers.*  (Record 
incomplete. ) 

MRS.  DOROTHY  FOARD,  Widow, 
115  acs.  James  City  Co.,  28  Mar.  1661, 
p.  (458).  Upon  E.  side  of  drinking 
swamp  &  adj.  land  where  she  now  lives 

6  adj.  land  of  Secretary  Kemp.  Trans, 
of  3  pers.* 

MRS.  ANN  TOFT,  800  acs.  N'amp- 
ton  Co.,  3  Nov.  1660,  p.  (458).  At 
Chicanessecks  Cr.,  being  a  neck  facing 
the  middle  of  same.    Trans,  of  16  pers.* 

JOHN  PACKER  (or  Parker),  600 
acs.  N'ampton  Co.,  3  Nov.  1660,  p. 
(458).  At  Anancock  &  running  Sly. 
towards  Machotank.    Trans,  of  12  pers.* 

EDWARD  SMITH,  300  acs.  N'amp- 
ton Co.,   3   Nov.   1660,  p.    (459).    At 


Matchepungo,  bounded  on  E.  by  the 
Cattail  br.,  on  S.  by  land  of  John  Crewe 
&  on  N.  by  land  of  John  Sellby.  Trans. 
of  6  pers.* 

JOHN  MILBY  (Millby),  700  acs.  3 
Nov.  1661,  p.  (459).  Bounded  on  N. 
with  Nonduy  Cr.,  on  the  W.  by  the 
main  bay,  on  the  E.  by  his  former  devdt. 
&  on  the  S.  by  a  little  creek  &  great 
marsh.    Trans,  of  14  pers.* 

WILLIAM  ANDERSON,  600  acs. 
N'ampton  Co.,  3  Nov.  1660,  p.  (460). 
At  Matchotank  Cr.,  bounded  on  the  W. 
by  the  main  bay,  on  S.  by  the  main  br. 
of  sd.  Cr.  &  running  N.  towards  Anan- 
cock. Trans,  of  12  pers.*  (Record  in- 
complete). Note:  600  acs.  by  assign- 
ment of  a  patent  &  the  rights  of  Nicho- 
las Waddilow  bearing  date  the  12th  of 
Oct.  1652  &  by  him  relinquished. 

RICHARD  SMITH,  500  acs.  N'amp- 
ton Co.,  3  Nov.  1660,  p.  (460). 
Bounded  on  the  S.  by  the  head  of  Occa- 
hannock  Cr.,  on  W.  by  land  of  Richard 
Kellum.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  24 
Mar.  1650. 

WM.  BENSON,  300  acs.  N'ampton 
Co.,  3  Nov.  1660,  p.  (460).  Bounded 
on  W.  with  a  br.  parting  this  from  land 
formerly  granted  to  Thomas  Leather- 
bury,  on  the  N.  by  the  mouth  of  U 

branch  &  part  of  the  main  br.  Df  Anan- 
cock Cr.  Granted  to  John  Westlock,  2 
Oct.  1655,  by  him  assigned  to  John 
Williams,  Jr.,  who  assigned  to  sd. 
Benson. 

MR.  ROBERT  PARKER,  250  acs. 
N'ampton  Co.,  3  Nov.  1660,  p.  (461)- 
At  great  Nuswattocks  Riv.,  bounding 
Nly.  at  the  head  of  his  former  devdt. 
lying  in  Macksoomuck  Neck,  Ely.  upon 
a  swamp  &c.    Trans,  of  5  pers.* 

JOHN  NICHOLLS,  400  acs.  N'amp- 
ton Co.,  3  Nov.  1660,  p.  (461).  At 
Anancock,  bounded  on  the  N.  by  the 
main  S.  br.  of  Anancock  Cr.,  on  the  E. 
by  a  small  br.  called  Ekeeks,  parting 
this  from  land  of  William  Mellings, 
Wly.  down  the  cr.  &c.  Trans,  of  8 
pers.*  Due  by  assignment  of  the  rights 
of  a  patent  granted  unto  John  Jenkins, 
dated  17  Mar.  1655. 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


407 


RICHARD  HINMAN,  son  of  John 
Hinman,  800  acs.  N'ampton  Co.,  3  Nov. 
1660,  p.  (462).  At  Anancock  Cr.  Due 
as  heir  of  said  John,  to  whom  it  was 
granted  3  Oct.  1655. 

CHARLES  &  MARY  CALVERT,  800 
acs.,  being  a  neck  of  land,  in  N'ampton 
Co.,  3  Nov.  1660,  p.  (462).  Upon  S. 
side  of  the  main  S.  br.  of  Anancock, 
bounded  on  the  N.  by  the  main  Cr.,  on 
the  W.  by  a  br.  parting  this  &  land  of 
John  Jenkins  &  on  the  E.  by  another 
br.  parting  it  from  land  of  William 
Mellings.  Granted  to  Christopher  Cal- 
vert, 2  Oct.  1655  &  assigned  to  the 
abovenamed. 

JOHN  JENKINS,  400  acs.,  called 
Egg  neck,  N'ampton  Co.,  3  Nov.  1660, 
p.  (463).  On  S.  side  of  the  main  br. 
of  Anancock,  bounded  on  W.  by  a  br. 
parting  it  from  land  of  Richard  Wans- 
worth,  E.  upon  another  br.  &c.  Trans, 
of  8  pers.*  The  rights  are  by  assign- 
ment of  a  patent  of  400  acs.  granted  to 
John  Nicholls,  2  Oct.  1655  &  by  him 
relinquished. 

JOHN  WEST,  800  acs.  N'ampton 
Co.,  3  Nov.  1660,  p.  (463).  On  the  S. 
side  of  Anancock,  being  two  necks  of 
land,  bounded  Nly.  on  a  small  bay  on 
the  main  cr.,  W.  on  Buttellers  br.  part- 
ing it  from  land  of  Robert  King  & 
William  Taylour,  Ely.  on  Spoon  br.  &c. 
Granted  unto  Jenkin  Price,  26  Apr. 
1655  &  by  him  assigned. 

WALTER  GRANGER,  2000  acs. 
Rappa.  Co.,  on  N.  side  the  river,  to- 
wards the  head  of  preat  Rappa.  Cr.,  25 
Mar.  1661,  p.  (464).  Beg.  at  the  miles 
end  of  a  devdt.  of  land  of  Lt.  Col. 
Henry  Fleet  of  about  750  acs.,  running 
S.W.  &c.  &  N.W.  along  the  Cr.  called 
by  the  Indians  Gibsey.  Granted  to  sd. 
Fleet  25  Aug.  1657,  by  him  relapsed  & 
now  granted  by  order  &c,  &  due  for 
trans,  of  40  pers.*  Note:  800  acs.  by 
an  old  patent  granted  to  Captain  An- 
thony Langsone  &  1200  acs.  by  certifi- 
cate granted  him  in  Kent  Court  in 
February,  both  which  are  assigned  to 
sd.  Granger  by  sd.  Langstone  in  open 
court.    Test:    Thomas  Brereton,  Clk. 


MRS.  AVARILLA  CURTIS,  410  acs. 
Gloucester  Co.,  3  Apr.  1661,  p.  (464). 
Beg.  upon  the  head  of  the  Back  Cr.  in 
the  North  Riv.  by  Major  Curtis  &  Mr. 
Harris's  marked  trees,  N.  &c.  to  the 
head  of  Whites  Cr.  &c.  S.  to  the  mouth 
of  back  Cr.  350  acs.  granted  to  Mr. 
John  Curtis,  8  Oct.  1656  &  assigned  to 
the  said  Avarilla  &  the  whole  now  due 
for  trans,  of  9  pers.* 

COL.  OBEDIENCE  ROBINS,  1500 
acs.  N'ampton  Co.,  4  Apr.  1661,  p. 
(465).  On  the  S.  side  of  Anancock, 
being  two  necks  of  land,  bounded  Nly. 
on  the  main  br.,  Wly.  on  Diamond  br. 
parting  it  at  the  mouth  from  land  of 
Thomas  Letherbury  &  towards  the  head 
from  land  of  John  Westlock,  running 
Ely.  upon  Cabbin  br.  &c.  Trans,  of  30 
pers.* 

JAMES  PRICE,  400  acs.  N'ampton 
Co.,  12  Apr.  1661,  p.  (465).  Bounded 
on  the  N.  by  Matchotank  Cr.,  on  the 
W.  by  the  main  bay,  E.  upon  sd.  creek 
&  Sly.  towards  land  of  Matilda  Scar- 
burgh.    Trans,   of  8   pers.* 

TIMOTHY  COE  (or  Cox),  300  acs. 
N'ampton  Co.,  12  Apr.  1661,  p.  (466). 
Beg.  Wly.  at  land  of  William  Col- 
borne,  bounded  on  the  S.  by  the  Otter- 
dams  &  on  N.  by  lands  of  Occahannock. 
Trans,  of  6  pers.* 

ROBERT  BRACE,  800  acs.  N'ampton 
Co.,  12  Apr.  1661,  p.  (466).  At  Chu- 
canessecks  Cr.,  bounded  on  the  S.  there- 
with, on  the  W.  by  the  Bay  &  running 
Nly.  towards  Deep  Cr.  Trans,  of  16 
pers.* 

ROBERT  WINDLEY,  500  acs.  at  the 
seaboard  side,  near  Matchepungo,  called 
by  the  name  of  Aliens  Quarter,  bound- 
ing Ely.  on  a  neck  of  Thomas  Hannans, 
Wly.  towards  Occahannock,  Nly.  on  a 
br.  of  Matchepungo  Riv.  parting  this 
from  land  of  Capt.  Francis  Potts.  12 
Apr.  1661,  p.  (466).  Trans,  of  10 
pers.* 

THOMAS  LEATHERBURY,  600  acs. 
N'ampton  Co.,  12  Apr.  1661,  p.  (467). 
At  Anancock  Cr.,  bounded  on  W.  by 
land  of  John  Williams,  on  N.  by  Wil- 


408 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Ham  Robinson  &  on  the  S.  by  the  main 
br.   of  Anancock.    Trans,   of   12   pers.* 

JOHN  EVANS,  400  acs.  N'ampton 
Co.,  12  Apr.  1661,  p.  (467).  Near 
Matchepungo  Cr.  &  adj.  Wly.  on  land 
of  Captain  Francis  Potts.  Trans,  of  8 
pers.* 

LT.    COL.    ROBERT    ABRAHALL, 

640  acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  9  Mar.  1660,  p. 
(467).  Upon  N.  side  of  Mattapony 
River,  some  4  mi.  from  same,  upon 
branches  of  Oppactenoke  Cr.  Trans,  of 
13  pers.* 

MR.  FRANCIS  BURNELL,  1000  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  18  Feb.  1660,  p.  (468). 
Upon  the  main  br.  of  Chickahominy 
Swamp,  beg.  at  cor.  tree  of  Capt.  Gooch 
&  William  Pullams  land,  N.E.E.  &c. 
over  a  branch  called  by  the  Indian  name 
Toweywinch  &c. 

MR.  HUMPH,  BOOTH,  620  acs.,  20 
Mar.  1660,  p.  (468).  Beg.  at  the  mouth 
of  Ralph  Warrens  Creek,  running  N.W. 
&c.    Trans,  of  13  pers.* 

JAMES  COLE,  661  acs.  upon  the 
Dragon  Swamp,  15  Mar.  1660,  p. 
(469).    Trans,  of  14  pers.* 

JOHN  MASON,  325  acs.  Up.  Norf. 
Co.,  24  Mar.  1661,  p.  (469).  At  the 
S.  side  of  the  W.  branch  of  Nancemum 
River,  beg.  at  a  swamp  side  above  the 
beaver  Dams  that  is  in  James  Foster  & 
Andrew  Bining's  land  &c.  Trans,  of  7 
pers.* 

MAJOR  GENERAL  HAMOND,  850 

acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  1  May  1661,  p. 
(470).  On  S.W.  side  of  York  River  & 
running  to  Eastern  br.  of  black  Cr.  &c. 
Trans,  of  17  pers.* 

PHILLIP  FREEMAN,  1000  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  2  May,  1661,  p.  (470). 
Upon  N.  side  of  Chickahominy  main 
Swamp,  beg.  at  Thomas  Meridiths  land, 
running  E.N.E.  &c.  towards  Powhite 
Swamp,  thence  W.S.W.  to  the  main 
swamp  &c.    Trans,  of  2  pers.* 

JOHN  BADHAM,  150  acs.,  12  Oct. 
1660,  p.  (470).    Sly.  on  the  middle  br. 


on  the  seaboard  side,  Nly.  &  Wly.  on 
the  patent  land  of  Capt.  William  Stone 
&c.    Trans,  of  3  pers.* 

MR.  ROBERT  PYLAND,  250  acs. 
Warrick  Co.,  24  Nov.  1660,  p.  (471). 
On  N.  side  of  James  River,  beg.  at  Mr. 
Nowells  marked  trees,  &c.  over  a  branch 
dividing  this  &  land  of  Mr.  Nowell  &c. 
over  the  marsh  &c.  to  Capt.  Flints 
marked  trees  &c.  to  the  cart  path,  up 
the  same  to  Capt.  Harrads  cor.  tree  by 
Mr.  Stevens  Fence,  E.  by  N.  &c.  to  the 
Church  path  &c.  Granted  to  Capt. 
Nathaniell  Heard,  12  May  1653,  who 
assigned  to  said  Pyland. 

HENRY  GOOCH  &  WILLIAM 
PULLAM,  2500  acs.  in  Chickahominy 
Co.,  16  Oct.  1660,  p.  (472).  Beg.  by 
Chickahominy  Sw.,  S.Ely,  down  the 
main  run  of  same  &c.  Trans,  of  50 
pers.* 

SAMUEL  GRIFFIN,  Gent.,  1155  acs. 
Rappa.  Co.,  1  Jan.  1660,  p.  (472).  N. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  near  the  head  of 
Farnhams  Cr.,  beg.  on  the  S.  side  of  the 
Eastern  br.  by  an  Indian  field  side,  run- 
ning E.S.E.  near  the  head  of  a  br.  of 
Morrattaquond,  thence  N.N.E.  &c. 
Trans,  of  pers.* 

SAME.  1046  acs.  on  N.  side  of 
Rappa.  Riv.,  1  Jan.  1660,  p.  (473).  On 
branches  of  Totoskey  Cr.  near  the  head, 
beg.  at  a  br.  called  Turkey  Buzard  br., 
running  Ely.    Trans,  of  21  pers.* 

MR.  JOHN  APPLETON,  1000  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  15  May  1661,  p.  (473). 
On  the  S.  of  Rappa.  Riv.  &  N.  side  of 
the  great  swamp,  Wly.  from  land  of 
John  Howard,  N.  towards  the  bay  of 
Clifts  &  S.E.  down  the  neck.  Granted 
to  Miles  Dixon,  gent.,  8  Dec.  1656,  by 
him  relapsed  for  want  of  seating,  &  now 
granted  by  order  &c,  &  due  for  trans, 
of  20  pers.* 

THOMAS  BRERETON,  200  acs. 
N'umberland  Co.,  17  Oct.  1660,  p. 
(474).  On  the  S.  side  of  great  Wicco- 
comoco  River,  Sly.  on  land  of  Jeffery 
Gooch,  Wlv.  &  Nly.  on  Vulcans  Cr., 
which  divides  this  &  land  of  Thomas 
Salisbury.    Granted  unto  John  Hany,  5 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


409 


Oct.  1657,  by  him  relapsed  &c.  &  now 
granted  by  order  &c,  &  due  for  trans, 
of  4  pers.* 

CAPTAIN  JOHN  WHITTY,  1450 
acs.  N'umberland  Co.,  15  May  1661,  p. 
(474).  On  N.  side  of  great  Wiccoco- 
moco  River,  bounding  Sly.  on  land  of 
Mr.  John  Bardon,  Mr.  Radford,  dec'd., 
&  William  Downing  (?),  bought  of 
Martin  Cole,  John  Edwards  &  others, 
&  Ely.  on  lands  of  Roger  Walters  & 
John  Motley  &c.  Granted  unto  Jane, 
the  daughter  of  Col.  William  Claiborne, 
10  Feb.  1657  &  now  assigned  unto  sd. 
Whitty  by  Col.  Wm.  Claiborne,  Capt. 
William  Claiborne  &  Thomas  Brereton, 
who  married  said  Jane,  &  likewise  con- 
firmed by  order  &c.  Due  said  Whitty 
for  trans,  of  29  pers.* 

JOHN  PHIPPS,  half  an  acre  in  James 
City,  4  May  1661,  p.  (475).  Beg. 
on  a  Ditch  side,  running  S.W.  &c. 
Lease.  Fee  Rent:  1  Capon,  yearely  at 
the  feast  of  St.  Thomas  the  Apostle. 
Provided  if  sd.  Phipps,  or  his  assigns, 
do  not  build  within  6  months  it  shall 
be  lawful  &c. 

MR.  WILLIAM  MAY,  half  an  acre, 
James  City,  20  May  1661,  p.  (475). 
Bounded  Sly.  with  land  reputed  (to  be) 
Mr.  Chiles,  Wly.  &  Nly.  on  land  of 
John  Phipps  &c.    Lease,  as  above. 

EDWARD  WELLS,  81  acs,  2  Mar. 
1660,  p.  (475).  On  Swd.  side  of  a  br. 
of  Deep  Cr.    Trans,  of  2  pers.* 

JAMES  JONES,  200  acs.  N'umber- 
land Co,  27  Sept.  1660,  p.  (476).  On 
Swd.  side  of  1000  acs.  formerly  patented 
by  Thomas  Read,  lying  near  Turkey 
Cock  hills  at  Wicocomoco,  S.  towards 
&  among  branches  of  Corotoman  &c, 
including  some  indifferent  good  land 
lying  upon  &  near  said  branches.  Trans, 
of  4  pers.* 

LT.  COL.  ROBERT  ABRALL.  500 
acs.  New  Kent  Co,  1  May  1661,  p. 
(476).  On  branches  of  Aquintanio 
Swamp,  beg.  at  Capt.  William  Clai- 
borne's lower  corner  of  his  1000  acs, 
running  down  the  swamp,  joining  to 
Anthony  Haines'  land  &c.  Trans,  of  10 
pers.* 


HENRY  CORBIN,  Gent,  CAPT. 
PETER  ASHTON  &  MR.  WILLIAM 
THOMAS,  900  acs.  N'umberland  Co, 
30  Sept.  1660,  p.  (476).  Beg.  on  land 
of  John  Sheapard  &  Nicholas  Jernew, 
N.W.  on  Major  Hoccaday,  N.Ely,  on 
sd.  Hoccaday  &  Ludlow,  N.Wly.  to  land 
of  Mr.  Allerton  &  Swly.  on  Col.  Lee. 

WILLIAM  HICKMAN,  300  acs. 
James  City  Co,  9  Mar.  1660,  p.  (477). 
Upon  N.  side  of  Diascun  Swamp. 
Trans,  of  6  pers.* 

WILLIAM    HICKMAN    &  PETER 

GILL,    1000    acs.    James    City  &    New 
Kent  Counties,  9  Mar.  1660,  p.  (477). 

Beg.   in   the   S.E.   line   of  Mr.  Charles 

Woodington,   S.E.   &c.   to   land  of   Mr. 

William     Blackey     &c.    Trans,  of     20 
pers.* 

THOMAS  BRERETON,  1500  acs. 
New  Kent  Co,  25  May  1661,  p.  (477). 
On  N.  side  of  Mattapony  River  &  E. 
side  of  Hoarcock  Swamp,  beg.  at  a 
former  dividend  of  Mr.  Chapman,  run- 
ning N.  by  W.  &c.  Granted  to  George 
Chapman,  1  Sept.  1658,  by  him  assigned 
unto  sd.  Brereton. 

EDMUND  PRICE,  600  acs.  James 
City  Co,  3  May  1661,  p.  (478).  Nigh 
Toweywick  (or  Weywick)  Swamp,  nigh 
land  of  Mr.  Francis  Burnell,  dec'd.  Beg. 
at  Richard  Scruggs  corner  gum  by  an 
Indian  path,  running  W.N.W.  &c. 
Trans,  of  12  pers.* 

PHILLIP  FREEMAN,  100  acs.  New 
Kent  Co,  20  Apr.  1660,  p.  (478). 
Beg.  by  the  path  &  running  S.E.  by  E. 
&c.  along  land  of  William  Cox,  W.  by 
S.  &c.  to  a  branch  &c.  to  the  swamp  &c. 
to  land  of  John  Woodington  &c.  Trans. 
of  2  pers.* 

MR.  DANIEL  NEALE,  300  acs. 
N'umberland  Co.,  20  June  1661,  p. 
(479).  200  acs.  abutting  Sly.  upon  land 
of  Thomas  Kedby,  Wly.  upon  a  creek 
of  Wicocomoco  River  Sec.  100  acs.  Sly. 
upon  land  of  sd.  Kedby,  sold  to  John 
Johnson,  Ely.  upon  land  of  John  Haw- 
ley  &c.  Granted  unto  Thomas  Garrett, 
24  Oct.  1655  &  assigned  unto  sd.  Neale. 


410 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


JOHN  COBB,  600  acs.  N'ampton 
Co.,  8  June  1661,  p.  (479).  Bounded 
on  E.  by  land  of  Elizabeth  Charlton,  on 
W.  by  land  of  Occahannock  &  Nuswat- 
tocks  Cr.,  Nly.  by  William  Taylor  & 
Sly.  by  a  right  line  running  from  the 
Otterdams  to  the  seaboard  side.  Trans, 
of  12  pers.* 

Note: — Pages  33  and  34  in  old  book, 
are  left  blank,  with  exception  of  the 
following  names,  space  having  been  left 
to  record  the  patents:  NICH.  MERI- 
WEATHER,  300  acs;  RICH. 
SCRUGGS,  1000  acs;  JAMES  HILL, 
1000  acs;  WM.  BANKES,  861  acs; 
MAJ.  WM.  ANDREWES.  Marginal 
note  states  this  last  mentioned  patent 
"Deserted  by  Major  Andrews  and 
granted  to  Coll.  Wm.  Kendall  by  order 
of  the  Quarter  Court  and  by  pattent 
Dated  1st  September  1664."  Test  Fra. 
Kirkman. 

By  Sir  William  Berkeley. 

FRANCIS  BURNELL,  Gent.,  2,300 
acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  1  Apr.  1661,  p. 
35,  (479).  The  lower  part  lieth  in 
Yorke  about  7  mi.  up  the  narrowes  on 
the  S.  side,  along  land  of  Mr.  Francis 
Flood,  along  land  of  Tho.  Broughton, 
along  tankes  Queens  Cr.  &  along  land 
of  William  Blackey.  Granted  to  Tho- 
mas Vaulx  20  Jan.  1650  &  by  order  &c. 
dated  6  June  1657  granted  to  Robert 
Vaulx  heir  to  sd.  Thomas  &  by  sd. 
Robert  &  Elizabeth,  his  wife,  sold  to 
sd.   Burnell. 

WM.  BLAZE,  250  acs.  Lancaster  Co., 
31  Dec.  1662,  p.  35,  (480).  On  S. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  adj.  land  of  John 
Sharpe.  Granted  to  John  Robinson  29 
Nov.  1652,  assigned  to  John  Hudson, 
who  sold  to  sd.  Blaze. 

To  all  &c.  Whereas  his  most  Ex- 
cellent Majty.  did  by  his  Letters  patterns 
beareing  date  the  22th  day  of  Septem- 
ber 1650  give  &  grant  unto  his  Trusty 
Subject  and  Servt.  HENRY  NOR- 
WOOD, Esqr.,  the  office  of  being  his 
sd.  Majtye.  Treasurer  of  Virginia  *** 
&  whereas  the  sd.  Henry  Norwood  hath 
by  his  deed  beareing  date  the  17th  of 
Oct.  1660  Given  power  &  authority  to 


me  the  sd.  William  Berkeley  &c.  to 
execute  and  doe  all  and  every  thing 
and  things  in  the  premisses  by  his  sd. 
Sacred  Majty.  to  him  the  sayd  Henry 
Norwood,  Esqr.  in  as  ample  manner  as 
he  the  sayd  Henry  could  have  done  if 
he  had  bin  psonally  present  Now  know 
yee  &c.  unto  JULIAN  ALLAIN  (or 
Allam)  200  acs.  according  to  ancient 
lawfull  bounds  thereof  now  in  posses- 
sion of  the  sd.  Julian  att  or  neere 
Dancing  poynt  in  James  Citty  Co.,  be- 
ing part  of  700  acs.  granted  to  Benja- 
min Carroll  deed.,  16  May  1638  & 
lately  found  to  escheat  &c,  as  by  an  in- 
quisition &c.  under  the  hand  &  seales  of 
the  Jury  sworne  by  Col.  Miles  Carey, 
Escheator  Genii,  for  this  contrey  &c.  and 
is  now  granted  to  the  sd.  Julian  whoe 
hath  made  her  composition  &c.  18 
June  1663.  Marginal  note:  Mrs.  Al- 
lain  (or  Allam)  her  pattent.  P.  36, 
(480). 

WILLIAM  BLAZE,  350  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co.,  1  Sept.  1663,  p.  36,  (481). 
On  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  running  to 
marked  oak  standing  upon  Rice  Jones' 
clift  &  to  land  of  sd.  Blaze.  Trans,  of 
7  pers:  Jno.  Lockey,  Robt.  Boke,  Anne 
Townesend,  Ed.  Ranshow,  Wm.  Wicken- 
field,  Jno.  Harris,  Eliz.  Jnoson  (John- 
son). 

THOMAS  PAINE  (Payne)  &  JOHN 
CHINLEY,  2100  acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  4 
Sept.  1663,  p.  37,  (482).    Adj.  land  of 

Cha.     Grimes.    Trans,    of    pers. 

Rights  out  of  a  relinquished  patent 
dated  29  July  1663  in  their  names  for 
2000  acs.  Tho.  Bacon,  Will.  North. 
(Note:  These  are  the  only  names  ap- 
pearing and  presumably  are  for  the  100 
acs.  remaining). 

SAME.  3100  acs.  Same  Co.,  page, 
&  date.  Rights  for  3000  acs.to  be  taken 
out  of  patent  relinquished,  dated  29 
July  1663.  Margery  Atkins,  Tho.  Webb. 
(Note:     100  acs.  same  as  above). 

MR.  DAVID  FOX,  Gent.,  510  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  8  Sept.  1663,  p.  37 
(482).  On  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv, 
running  W.  along  land  of  Coll%  Bur- 
bage,  to  branch  of  Corotoman  Riv,  by 
another  parcell  of  land  of  sd  Fox  called 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


411 


Poplar  Neck.  360  acs.  granted  to  Jno. 
Robinson  5  June  1657;  210  acs.  to  Vin- 
cent Stanford  &  afterwards  by  Robt. 
Pollard,  whoe  marryed  the  Relict  of  sd. 
Stanford,  sold  to  sd.  Fox,  &  150  acs. 
sold  by  sd.  Robinson  to  Edw.  King, 
who  assigned  to  sd.  Fox  &  150  acs.  for 
trans,  of  3  Negroes. 

NICHOLAS  COCK  &  MAURICE 
COCK,  600  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  25  Aug. 
1663,  p.  38  (483).  300  acs.  on  S.  side 
of  Rappa.  Riv.  bounding  on  land  of 
Randolph  Chamlett,  now  in  possession 
of  Jno.  Jadwin.  300  acs.  granted  to 
Fra.  Browne  18  June  1652  &  sold  to  sd. 
Nicholas  &  300  acs.  due  for  trans,  of 
6    pers:*    Ellin    Franklin,    Eliza.    King. 

MATHEW  KEMP  &  PETER  JEN- 
NINGS, Gent.,  1000  acs.  Lancaster  Co., 
10  Sept.  1663,  p.  39  (484).  Upon  N. 
W.  branch  of  Corotoman  Riv.  &  S.E. 
along  land  of  John  Nicholls.  Granted 
to  Eanoch  Hawker  &  Antho.  Dony,  6 
Oct.  1656,  by  them  deserted  &  granted 
to  sd.  Kempe  &  Jennings  by  order  of 
Quarter  Ct.  25  Mar.  1661  &  also  due 
for  trans,  of  20  pers.* 

MR.  MATH.  KEMPE  &  CAPT. 
PETER  JENNINGS,  1,000  acs.  at  the 
head  of  a  Cr.  in  Potomecke  freshes  be- 
yond the  Doegs  Island  &  land  of  Coll. 
Speake,  bounding  Sly.  upon  the  head  of 
the  N.  branch  thereof  &  land  of  Robt. 
Lord  &  James  Magregory,  Wly.  upon  a 
seate  of  Jno.  Woods.  10  Sept.  1663,  p. 
39  (485).  Granted  to  Nich.  Jernew 
22  Mar.  1657,  by  him  deserted  & 
granted  &c.  26  Mar.  1661  &  due  for 
trans,  of  20  pers.* 

JNO.  ROBINSON,  Junr.,  700  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  40 
(485).  At  Anancocke,  beg.  at  a  poynt 
where  Ambrose  Dixon  &  Steph.  Horsley 
doe  end  for  their  devdt.  Renewal  of 
patent  granted  12  Oct.  1652. 

COLL.  ABRAHAM  WOOD,  2073 
acs.  at  Fort  Henry,  Chas.  City  Co.,  16 
Sept.  1663,  p.  40  (486).  On  S.  side  of 
Appamatocke  Riv.,  bounding  from 
marked  tree  on  the  back  of  a  little 
swamp  on  sd.  river  &c.  to  lower  end  of 
Flea    Island,    thence    running    upon    a 


straight  line  along  the  dam  to  poynt 
above  tenement  of  John  Evens  (?)  in- 
cluding the  island  &  inletts  of  water, 
dams  &  rocks  within  sd.  line  &c.  being 
in  3  tracks,  viz:  1502  acs;  49  acs.  2  R., 
&  456  acs.  24  p.  Granted  to  Abrm. 
Wood  9  June  1653  &  now  renewed. 
Survey  made  by  Tho.  Lyon  (?)  8  June 
1663.  Part  of  this  land  due  for  trans, 
of  10  servts.:  Henry  Manneringe,  Mar- 
garett  Farrer,  Nicholas  Brookes,  Nichola 
Overbey,  Robt.  Harrison,  Thom.  Ed- 
wards, David  Phillippe,  Edw.  Weascock, 
Willm.  Fleminge,  John  Blackshaw. 

WILLIAM  HITCHMAN,  1000  acs. 
James  Citty  Co.,  24  Sept.  1660,  p.  45 
(487).  On  N.  E.  side  of  Tyascun  Sw., 
beg.  on  David  Cants  marked  trees  &c. 
Trans,  of  20  pers.* 

By  Francis  Moryson,  Esqr. 

HENRY  WATTS,  457,  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  12  Feb.  1661,  p.  41  (487). 
157  being  land  &  marsh  N.  upon  a 
small  creek,  N.E.  &  S.  upon  Pagan 
Poynt  Cr.  &  W.N.W.  upon  land  of  sd. 
Knight  &  Nly.  on  land  of  John  Moone. 
157  acs.  renewal  of  patent  dated  18  Oct. 
1643  &  300  acs.  granted  to  John  Speck- 
man  from  whom  it  was  purchased,  & 
both  parcels  joined  together  &  granted 
sd.  Watts  26  Nov.  1652. 

** 

**Pages  42,  43  and  44  in  old  book 
are  left  blank. 

THOMAS  &  ANTHONY  STE- 
PHENS (Stevens),  1800  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  19  July  1662,  p.  46  (488).  Upon 
N.E.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  at  the  head  of 
Farnham  Cr.,  running  parallel  to  head 
line  of  land  of  Mr.  Tho.  Griffith  & 
along  land  of  John  Williams.  Trans,  of 
36  pers:  Humph.  Tompson,  Wm.  Gar- 
rett, Jos.  Lambert,  Tho.  Briggs,  James 
Baley,  Christian  Webb,  Marv  Brewer, 
James  Hicks,  Jno.  Cheyney,  Wm.  Charl- 
ton, Susanna  Smith,  James  Warner, 
Hen.  Cobb,  Grace  Wilson,  Ralph  Prye, 
John  Grymes,  Anth.  Kenston,  Aug.  (or 
Ang.)  Withey,  Sara:  Watson,  Margt. 
Grey,  and  800  acs.  more  rights  by  a 
relinquished   pattern. 


412 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


DOCTOR  GEORGE  HACKE,  1000 
acs.  Northampton  Co.,  23  Sept.  1661, 
p.  46  (488).  900  acs.  at  Pungotegue 
Cr.,  beg.  at  a  little  branch  on  S.  side  of 
same,  running  Wly.  &c.  by  land  of 
Sampson  Robins  &c.  towards  Nondui 
Cr.  The  residue  being  200  acs.  con- 
teyned  in  2  small  islands  neere  N. 
poynt  of  Pungotegue  Cr.  invironed  with 
water  &  marsh  ground.  Trans,  of  20 
pers:  Cester  Yeomans,  Ann  Dooly, 
Mary  Edwards,  Wm.  Skiner,  Mary  Ed- 
ger,  Wm.  Tomlin,  Henry  Willis,  Tho. 
Browne,  John  Cary,  Mary  Williams, 
Johna:  Shewell,  Margt.  Purnell,  Susan 
Foster,  Jno.  Martin,  Howell  Glading, 
Fra.  Knight,  Lucresa  (?)  Pott,  Kath. 
Smith,  Walter  Wood,  Mary  Griffith. 

ROBERT  CHUNING,  300  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  16  June  1662,  p.  46  (489). 
On  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  on  branches 
of  Sunderland  Cr.  upon  Peanketan  Sw. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Wm.  Young,  Jno. 
Tanner,  Wm.  Murry,  Jno.  Silvester, 
Mary  Jones,  Jno.  Farling. 

(Note. — In  order  to  conserve  space, 
the  compiler  has  made  the  following 
abstracts,  all  of  which  are  renewals  of 
former  patents,  as  brief  as  possible. 
The  names  and  dates  enclosed  in 
brackets  refer  to  former  patents.) 

20  Oct.  1661. 

THOMAS  BELL,  350  acs.  Northamp- 
ton, adj.  Edward  Harrington,  dec'd.  P. 
47  (489).    (20  Nov.  1654.) 

RICHARD  BUNDUCKE,  650  acs. 
Northampton,  adj.  Nicholas  Waddilow, 
p.  47  (490).    (20  Nov.  1654.) 

NICHOLAS  WADDILOW,  1300  acs. 
Northampton,  adj.  John  Robingson,  p. 
47  (490).    (2  Apr.  1655.) 

RICHARD  PARKER,  350  acs. 
N'ampton,  p.  47  (490).  Granted  to 
Mr.  Thomas  Teagle,  Minister,  12  Oct. 
1652,  by  him  sold  to  said  Geo.  Parker 
&  John  Elzey  &  by  Elzey  wholly  as- 
signed to  sd.  Parker. 

WM.  RADULPHUS,  300  acs.  N'amp- 
ton, adj.  Richard  Price,  James  Jones  & 
Benjamin    Mathews,     running    towards 


Occahanocke  Path.    P.  48    (491).    (10 
Oct.  1658.) 

JAMES  BARNABY,  150  acs.  N'amp- 
ton, adj.  Peter  Lang,  Orphant,  along  a 
maine  branch  of  Hungars  Cr.  dividing 
same  from  land  of  Mr.  Wm.  Jones,  p. 
48  (491).    (2  Oct.  1654.) 

WM.  OVERED  (Evered  ?),  400  acs. 
Westmoreland,  adj.  land  of  Col.  Geo. 
Read.  15  Feb.  1661,  p.  48  (492).  (10 
Sept.  1658.) 

EDWARD  MOORE,  200  acs.  N'amp- 
ton, p.  48  (492).    (9  Oct.  1656.) 

ALEXANDER  ADDISON,  350  acs. 
N'ampton,  adj.  Jonas  Jackson,  p.  49 
(493).    (10  May  1652.) 

EDWARD  MOORE,  200  acs.  N'amp- 
ton, bet.  land  of  Jonah  Jackson  &  Philip 
Merrday  (or  Merrdayth),  p.  49  (493). 
(2  Apr.  1655.) 

WILLIAM  STEVENS,  700  acs. 
N'ampton,  p.  49  (493).    (2  Oct.  1653.) 

WM.  WESTERHOUSE,  500  acs. 
N'ampton,  parted  by  trees  from  land  of 
John  Toulson  &  Stephen  Charlton,  p.  49 
(494.)     (2  Oct.  1654.) 

WILLIAM  THORNE,  387  acs. 
N'ampton,  adj.  land  of  Richard  Smith 
&  Richard  Kellam,  p.  49  (494.)  (21 
Nov.  1654.) 

STEPHEN  CHARLTON,  1700  acs. 
N'ampton,  adj.  his  own  land,  p.  50 
(495.)     (16  Mar.   1653.) 

WILLIAM  JORDAN,  550  acs. 
N'ampton,  300  acs.  of  which  granted 
to  Roger  Johns,  24  July  1651,  adj. 
Alexander  Addison,  &  purchased  of 
James  Barnaby;  250  acs.  adj.  land  of 
After  Upshott  &  John  Toulson.  P.  50 
(495).    (3  Mar.  1658.) 

ARTHUR  UPSHOTT,  700  acs. 
N'ampton,  p.  50  (496).  300  acs.  adj. 
Wm.  Taylor,  a  branch  dividing  this  from 
land  of  Roger  Johns.  300  acs.  by  patent 
10  May  1652,  300  acs.  by  patent  11 
Mar.  1655  &  100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2 
pers.* 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


413 


JOHN  STUDSON  (or  Hudson),  250 
acs.  N'ampton,  beg.  at  land  of  John 
Robins  &  running  towards  land  of  Tho. 
Johnson.    P.  50  (496).    (6  Mar.  1653.) 

WM.  ROBERTS,  600  acs.  N'ampton, 
adj.  John  Browne,  a  branch  parting  same 
from  land  of  Thomas  Bell,  p.  51  (497) 
(27  Nov.  1657.) 

RICHARD  KELLAM,  200  acs. 
N'ampton,  a  branch  parting  same  from 
land  of  Win,  Thorpe,  p.  51  (497)  (10 
June  1657.) 

THOMAS  LITTLEBERRY  (Lether- 
berry)  &  ALLEXANDER  MAD- 
DOCKS,  516  acs.  N'ampton,  along  land 
of  James  Jones,  p.  51  (497).  Granted 
to  sd.  Maddocks  &  James  Jones,  the 
latter  selling  his  part  to  Letherberry. 
(10  June  1654.) 

THOMAS  BELL,  227  acs.  N'ampton, 
a  branch  parting  same  from  land  of 
John  Tilney  &  John  Johnson,  Jr.  & 
Nly.  by  land  of  John  Pepper.  P.  51 
(498).    (27  Nov.    1657.) 

RICHARD  HILL,  300  acs.  N'ampton, 
a  branch  parting  same  from  land  of 
Toby  Norton.  P.  51  (498).  (10  May 
1652.) 

OBEDIENCE  JOHNSON,  son  &  heir 
of  Thomas  Johnson,  200  acs.  N'ampton, 
a  branch  parting  this  from  land  of 
Henry  Edwards  &  George  Tuett  (?), 
p.  52  (499).  (14  Mar.  1655— Major 
Thomas  Johnson). 

JOHN  REYNEY,  250  acs.  N'ampton, 
adj.  land  of  Charles  Scarburgh,  p.  52 
(499).  Part  of  500  ac.  patent  pur- 
chased by  sd.  Reyney  of  Matilda  Scar- 
burgh, to  whom  it  was  granted  31  Mar. 
1655. 

JOHN  WEST,  250  acs.  N'ampton, 
adj.  land  of  Charles  Scarburgh,  p.  52 
(499).  Part  of  patent  for  500  acs. 
granted  to  Matilda  Scarburgh,  31  Mar. 
1655  &  due  sd.  West  "as  marrying  with 
the  said  Scarburgh." 

JOHN  WISE,  200  acs.  N'ampton, 
adj.   lands   of  Mr.   Edward   Littleton  & 


George  Truett,  p.  52   (500.)     (24  Mar. 
1655.) 

JOHN  BILLIOT,  1050  acs.  N'amp- 
ton, a  creek  parting  this  from  land  of 
Thomas  Bell  &  marked  trees  separating 
it  from  land  of  Robert  Foster,  p.  52 
(500).    (9  Oct.  1656.) 

WILLIAM  TAYLOUR,  300  acs. 
N'ampton,  p.  53  (501.)  (11  Mar. 
1655.) 

JOHN  JENKINS,  250  acs.  N'amp- 
ton, adj.  lands  of  Tho.  Teagle,  Jno. 
Johnshon,  Negro,  &  Anthony  Johnson, 
Negro.  P.  53  (501.)  (17  Mar.  1655 
to  John  Williams,  who  assigned  same 
to  sd.  Jenkins.) 

MR.  THO.  TEAGLE,  700  acs. 
N'ampton,  a  branch  parting  this  from 
land  of  John  Norton  &  Richard  Hill, 
200  acs.  being  between  Nondewee  & 
Curratocke  Creeks,  adj.  land  of  Jenkine 
Price,  now  in  possession  of  John  Milby. 
P.  53  (501.)  (10  May  1652—500  acs., 
31  Mar.  1658—200  acs.) 

MICHAELL  RICKETTS,  300  acs. 
N'ampton,  adj.  lands  of  John  Wise  & 
John  Rogers,  p.  53  (502.)  (24  Mar. 
1655  to  Geo.  Truett  &  by  him  sold  to 
sd.  Ricketts.) 

ROBERT  WATSON,  450  acs. 
N'ampton,  p.  53  (502).  (4  July  1653 
to  Edw.  Harrington  &  by  Thomas  Bell, 
his  Admr.,  sold  to  sd.  Watson.) 

WM.  TAYLOUR,  600  acs.  N'ampton, 
p.    54    (503).    ( of  1650.) 

WM.  JORDAN,  400  acs.  N'ampton, 
p.  54  (503.)  (4  July  1653  to  John 
Toulson,  who  assigned  to  sd.  Jordan.) 

ANTHONY  HOSKINS,  700  acs. 
N'ampton,  p.  54  (503).  (12  Oct. 
1652.) 

CHRISTOPHER  CALVERT,  700  acs. 
N'ampton,  near  lands  of  Georg  Hack 
&  Thomas  Teagle,  p.  54  (504).  (4 
July  1653  to  Sampson  Robins,  who  sold 
to  Thomas  Teagle,  who  assigned  to  sd. 
Calvert.) 


414 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


EDWARD  DOUGLAS,  sonne  &  heire 
of  Edward  Douglas,  deed.,  3700  acs. 
N'ampton,  adj.  land  of  Mr.  Shrimpton, 
Wm.  Burdett  &  Mr.  Edward  Littleton. 
P.  54  (504).  (27  Sept.  1644,  1100 
acs.acs.  to  Edw.  Douglas,  dee'd.,  2,000 
acs.  to  Mr.  Wm.  Shrimpton,  Exor.  of 
Dame  Eliz.  Dale,  sole  Exix.  of  Sir  Tho. 
Dale  of  whome  sd.  Douglas  purchased 
this  land.) 

THOMAS  BOUTRACLE,  200  acs. 
N'ampton,  adj.  land  of  Thomas  Wyatt 
&  Elias  Hartree.  P.  55  (505).  (4 
July  1653  to  Michaell  Ricketts,  who 
assigned  to  sd.  Hartree,  who  resold  to 
Ricketts  who  assigned  to  sd.  Boutracle.) 

JOHN  VINES,  300  acs.  N'ampton, 
p.  55  (506).  (21  Nov.  1654  to  John 
Williams,  assigned  to  Samll.  Robins, 
who  sold  to  sd.  Vines.) 

WM.  WHITTINGTON,  sonne  of 
Capt.  Wm.  Whittington,  800  acs. 
N'ampton,  beg.  at  end  of  devdt.  bought 
from  Capt.  Wm.  Stone,  p.  55  (506). 
(11  Mar.  1653.) 

SAMPSON  ROBINS,  100  acs.  N'amp- 
ton, in  the  Middle  parish,  adj.  land  of 
Mr.  Charlton,  p.  55  (507.)  (15  Dec. 
1653  to  Mr.  John  Custis,  who  sold  to 
sd.  Robins.) 

JOHN  VINES,  350  acs.  N'ampton, 
adj.  Wm.  Jones  &  running  towards 
Richard  Jacobs,  p.  55  (507).  (24  Mar. 
1655  to  Sampson  Robins,  who  assigned 
to  sd.  Vines.) 

JAMES  KINE,  500  acs.  N'ampton,, 
adj.  land  of  Christopher  Calvert,  &  land 
of  Mr.  Wm.  Melling,  p.  56  (507.) 
(17  Mar.  1655  to  Robert  Bayly,  who 
assigned  200  acs.)  &  300  acs.  for 
trans,  of  6  pers:  Jno.  Harwood,  Ann 
Harwood,  John  Samon,  Mich.  Richard- 
son, Richard  Nodes,  John  Lucas. 

EDWARD  SMITH,  300  acs.  N'amp- 
ton, adj.  land  of  John  Towlin.  P.  56 
(508).  (21  Nov.  1654,  granted  to 
Jno.  Grey,  who  assigned  to  John  James, 
who  assigned  to  Alex.  Draper,  who  as- 
signed   to    Edward    Southern,    who    as- 


signed to  Robert  Hart,  who  assigned  to 
sd.  Smith.) 

SIR  WILLIAM  BERKELEY,  5062 
acs.  James  Citty  Co.,  between  the  heads 
of  Pohatan  Sw.  &  Jones  Cr.  27  Oct. 
1662,  p.  56  (508)     (5  Mar.  1658.) 

COLL  JOHN  CARTER,  Esqr.,  450 
acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  adj.  land  of  Thomas 
Chetwood.  25  Sept.  1661,  p.  56  (509.) 
Trans,  of  9  pers.* 

EDWARD  LITTLETON,  1200  acs. 
N'ampton,  26  Nov.  1661,  p.  57  (509). 
(25  Mar.  1656). 

26  Nov.  1661. 

PHILLIP  FISHER,  100  acs.  N'amp- 
ton, adj.  land  of  Stephen  Horsely,  p. 
57  (510).  (17  Mar.  1655  to  Richard 
Bayly,  who  sold  to  sd.  Fisher.) 

SOUTHEY  LITTLETON,  2300  acs. 
N'ampton,  adj.  land  of  John  Wise,  p. 
57  (510).    (25  Mar.  1656.) 

HENRY  ARMITRADEING,  300  acs. 
at  Accomake,  N'ampton,  S.  side  of 
Hungars  Cr.  by  the  bridge,  p.  57  (511). 
(6  Mar.  1653.) 

NICHOLAS  WADDILOW,  600  acs. 
N'ampton,  by  land  of  Richard  Johnson, 
Negro,  &  adj.  Richard  Bunduck.  P.  57 
(511)     (2  Mar.  1655.) 

JOHN  DORMAN,  Junr.,  850  acs. 
N'ampton  Co.,  a  branch  parting  it  from 
land  of  Jehnkin  Price,  p.  58  (511). 
(Due  as  heire  of  his  father,  John  Dor- 
man,  dee'd.) 

NICHOLAS  WADDILOW,  700  acs. 
N'ampton,  P.  58  (512).  (10  May 
1652  to  John  Robinson,  who  sold  to  sd. 
Waddilow.) 

JOHN  BROWNE,  Junr.,  1262  acs. 
N'ampton,  P.  58  (512)  (13  June  1655 
to  John  Browne,  his  father.) 

RICHARD  JACOBS,  300  acs.  N'amp- 
ton, adj.  land  of  Roger  Jones,  Elias 
Hartree,  &  Richard  Allen.  P.  58  (513). 
(4  June  1653  to  Richard  Allen,  who 
sold   to   sd.   Jacobs   &   200   acs.   to   sd. 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


415 


Jacobs  10  June  1654.)  (Note:  Re- 
newed in  Wm.  Jacobs'  name  1  Nov. 
1669.) 

SIR  WILLIAM  BERKELEY,  Knt., 
2090  acs.  James  Citty  Co.  1000  acs.  N. 
upon  land  formerly  belonging  to  Mr. 
Robt.  Wetherell  &  Mr.  Wm.  Edwards, 
S.S.E.  upon  land  belonging  to  the  Re- 
spective Governor,  W.  towards  land  of 
Capt.  Freeman  &  W.S.W.  upon  Chicka- 
hominy  path;  700  acs.  W.  upon  Thomas 
Stout  &  part  of  land  of  Richard  Bell,  S. 
into  Poetan  Sw.,  running  Nly.  up  the 
side  of  Poetan  Sw.  1^4  mi.  &c.  by  land 
of  Wm.  Stephens;  300  acs.  upon  head 
of  the  land  of  Richard  Bell  &c.  upon 
Xtian  Williams  &  Jno.  Edwards.  P.  59 
(513).  1090  acs.  knowne  by  the  name 
of  Greene  Spring  by  patent  dated  9 
Oct.  1652;  1000  by  purchase  from  Mr. 
Robert  Wetherell  who  assigned  his 
patent  dated  20  May  (Sixteen)  fourty 
eight  unto  sd.  Berkeley  May   11    1652. 

20  Oct.  1661. 

JOHN  BARKER,  Junr.  600  acs. 
Surrey  Co.,  about  7  or  8  mi.  from  the 
head  of  Upper  Chepoakes  Cr.  P.  59 
(514)     (15  Oct.  1657.) 

JAMES  TURNER,  800  acs.  on  S. 
side  of  Yorke  Riv.  in  the  Narrowes, 
adj.  land  of  Mr.  Croshaw  &  John  Butt- 
ler,  p.  59   (515).    (9  July  1653.) 

WILLIAM  CORNIX,  390  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  in  Linn  Haven  Parish,  beg. 
on  N.E.  poynt  of  the  Damm  Necke  &c. 
by  William  Dyers  land;  also  500  acs. 
adj.  to  the  sd.  land  called  by  the  name 
of  Salisbury  Plaines.  P.  60(515).  (25 
Nov.  1657.) 

JOHN  JOHNSON,  150  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  in  Linn  haven  Parish.  P.  60 
(516).    (24  Nov.  1657.) 

LANCASTER  LOVETT,  500  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  Linn  haven  Parish;  300 
acs.  beg.  at  an  island  to  the  Wwd.  of 
John  Martins  house  where  Bennetts  Cr. 
divides  itselfe  into  3  branches,  lieing 
bet.  the  S.  &  W.  branch  &  from  E. 
point  of  sd.  island  runs  parallel  to  the 
W.    branch    of   Bennetts    Cr.    &c.    to    a 


place   called   the  Labour  in   Vaine  Sec. 
P.  60  (516).    (8  Mar.  1658.) 

THOMAS  EVERIDGE,  200  acs.  in 
S.  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv,  beg.  at  the  miles 
end  of  Tho.  Wight.  P.  60,  (517).  (27 
Mar.  1655.) 

SAVILL  GASKIN,  250  acs.  Linn 
haven  parish,  Low.  Norf.  Co.  Beg.  at 
corner  tree  of  James  Starling,  running 
along  the  head  of  his,  Stratton's  & 
Davis'  land,  N.W.  by  Burroughs,  thence 
by  Mary  Gookins  &c.  S.S.E.  to  Col. 
Yardlies  land  &c.  P.  61  (517)  (6  Dec. 
1652.) 

THOMAS  HARDING,  740  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  100  acs.  on  the  Nwd.  side  of 
broad  Cr.,  P.  61,  (518).)  (20  Oct. 
1653.) 

JOHANNA  YATES,  Widdow,  300 
acs.  in  Eliz.  Riv.,  Low.  Norf.  Co.  P.  61 
(518).    (9  Mar.    1652.) 

WM.  MORTON,  150  acs.  Eliz.  Riv. 
Parish,  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  p.  61  (519). 
Neere  John  Mannings  Cr.  &  running  to 
Maringtons  land.    (6  Nov.   1652.) 

ROBERT  BOTT,  380  acs.  Low.  Norf. 
Co.,  p.  62,  (519).  Adj.  land  formerly 
taken  up  by  Trustrum  Nazworthy.  (3 
Mar.   1656.) 

WM.  JACOB,  660  acs.  Low.  Norf. 
Co.,  p.  62  (520)  On  the  second  bay 
issuing  into  Linn  haven  Riv.,  adj.  Geo. 
Keth  &  running  to  Kempes  line.  (25 
Aug.   1656) 

NICH:  SEABURNE,  170  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  p.  62  (520).   (9  Mar.  1652). 

SYMON  PEETERS,  500  acs.  in 
Daniell  Tanners  Cr.,  a  branch  of  Eliz. 
Riv.,  beg.  the  Indian  Towne  poynt.  (26 
Mar.  1656.)    P.  62  (521). 

GEORGE  KEMP,  500  acs.  in  Linn 
haven  Par.,  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  p.  63 
(521).  Beg.  at  corner  of  Col.  Jno. 
Sidneys  land  in  possession  or  Mr.  Jno. 
Porter.    (24   Nov.    1657.) 

MARMADUKE  MARINGTON,  250 
acs.  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  p.  63   (522).    On 


416 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Gaythers  Cr.}  a  branch  of  the  S.  br.  of 
Eliz.  Riv.    (6  June  1654) 

WM.  SMITH,  300  acs.  being  a  marsh 
knowne  by  the  name  of  Ballase  Marsh, 
Is.  of  Wight  Co.,  at  mouth  of  Hughes 
Cr.  &  running  along  James  Riv.  oppo- 
site to  mouth  of  the  Deep  Swamp.  (17 
Mar.  1657)    P.  63  (522). 

THOMAS  GRAVES,  55  acs.  about  a 
mile  from  Timber  necke  Cr.,  Gloster 
Co.,  a  tree  dividing  this  from  land  of 
Christopher  Abbott.  P.  63  (523).  (20 
Mar.  1657.) 

20  Nov.  1661. 

ISAAC  RICHESON,  300  acs.  Gloster 
Co,  upon  head  branches  of  Atapota- 
moyes  Cr.,  S.W.  upon  land  of  Samll. 
Sollis  &  E.  upon  land  of  John  Dav.  P. 
64  (523)     (10  Oct.  1652.) 

JOANE  CARELESSE,  450  acs.  at  the 
head  of  the  N.  Riv.  in  Mockjack  Bay, 
on  N.  side  of  a  run  dividing  this  from 
land  of  Richard  Tomkins.  P.  64  (523). 
(5  Oct.  1653.) 

EDWARD  DOBSON,  920  acs.  on  S. 
side  of  Seaverne  in  Mockjack  Bay,  beg. 
on  Ewd.  side  of  Burnt  point,  along  trees 
of  Mr.  Ceely  &c.  to  E.  side  of  Cedar 
Is.,  incompassing  the  sd.  island  &c.  P. 
64  (524).    (4  Apr.  1653.) 

JOHN  SMITHEY,  300  acs.  on  S. 
side  of  Garden  Cr.  P.  64  (524).  (14 
July  1655.) 

JOHN  CHAPMAN,  250  acs.  Gloster 
Co.,  Kingstone  Parish,  upon  S.  side  of 
Peanketanke  Riv.  on  back  of  Mr.  Wil- 
liam Armsteads  land,  running  to  Coll. 
Gwynns  marked  tree  &c.  P.  64  (525). 
(15  Mar.   1657.) 

JOANE  CARLES  (Careless)  200  acs. 
at  head  of  the  N.  Riv.  in  Mockjack 
Bay,  beg.  at  cor.  tree  of  Andrew  Care- 
less' land.  P.  65  (525).  (Thomas 
Morgan  23  Nov.  1653,  assigned  to 
Richard  Wilshin,  who  sold  to  sd.  Care- 
less.) 


HENRY  HUBERD,  250  acs.  Gloster 
Co.  in  the  forke  of  Poropetanke  Cr., 
beg.  at  his  own  land,  running  to  land 
of  Mr.  Knight  &c.  P.  65  (525).  (17 
Mar.  1655) 

RICHARD  CAREY,  350  acs.  on  W. 
side  of  eastermost  river  in  Mockjack  bay, 
beg.  at  marked  tree  of  Wm.  Armstead 
&c.    P.  65  (526).    (13  Oct.  1653.) 

JOHN  BOORUM  (Borum),  400  acs. 
on  Swd.  side  of  Home  Harbour  Cr.  P. 
65  (526).  (Rich:  Hull,  24  Nov.  1655, 
who  assigned  to  sd.  Boorum). 

PHILLIP  HUNLEY,  300  acs.  on  W. 
side  of  Budden  Cr.  in  Mockjack  Bay. 
P.  65   (527).    (11  June  1658.) 

WILLIAM  MACKENNY,  450  acs. 
on  Ewd.  side  of  the  Eastermost  riv. 
(Mockjacke  Bay),  beg.  at  tree  of  Phil- 
lip Hunley,  running  to  trees  of  Marke 
Foster  &c.  P.  66  (527).  (Thomas 
Helliard,  3  Dec.  1652,  assigned  to  John 
Singleton,  who  sold  to  sd.  Mackenny.) 

MR.  MATHEW  KEMP,  1100  acs.  on 
N.  side  of  Peanketanke  Riv.,  beg.  on  E. 
side  of  the  mouth  of  Blands  Cr.,  run- 
ning parallel  to  land  of  Perigreene 
Bland,  deed.,  crossing  branches  of  Bon- 
ners  Cr.  &c.  to  W.  side  of  Gleabe  land 
Cr.,  dividing  this  from  land  of  Col.  Jno. 
Mattron,  dee'd.  &c.  P.  66  (528).  (Ed- 
mond  Kemp,  Gent,  father  of  sd. 
Mathew,  4  Nov.  1656.) 

MARKE  THOMAS,  350  acs.  on  S. 
side  of  Home  Harbour  Cr.,  marked 
trees  dividing  this  &  land  of  Mrs.  Morri- 
son, S.W.  by  Mr.  Armstead's  trees,  over 
the  creek  to  Mr.  Hulls  land,  N.W.  to 
trees  of  Henry  Shingleton  to  cor.  tree  of 
John  Teage  &  Edward  Morgan.  P.  66 
(528).  (John  Bannister,  Tho.  Foote  & 
John  Borham,  25  Nov.  1653.  Bannister 
&  Borham  wholly  assigned  to  sd.  Foot, 
who  sold  to  John  Thomas  &  due  sd. 
Marke  as  sonne  &  heire.) 

ROBERT  LEND  ALL,  150  acs.  on  N. 
side  of  the  E.  Riv.  in  Mockjack  bay, 
beg.  at  marked  trees  of  Mr.  Armstead. 
P.  66   (529).    (18  Oct.  1652). 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


417 


RICHARD  CAREY,  1000  acs.  on 
Swd.  side  of  Queens  Cr.  in  Peanketanke 
Riv.,  running  up  Cr.  dividing  this  from 
land  of  Conydell.  P.  67  (529)  (13 
Oct.  1653.) 

THOMAS  GRAVES,  240  acs.  in  a 
swamp  betwixt  Seaverne  &  the  Indian 
path  in  Gloster  Co.  P.  67  (530).  (20 
Mar.   1657.) 

COLL.  HUGH  GWYNN,  2000  acs. 
Gloster  Co.,  P.  67  (530).  1700  acs. 
near  mouth  of  Peanketanke  Riv.  &  200 
acs.  of  Marsh  beg.  at  Sandy  Poynt  that 
butts  upon  Cheesepiake  Bay,  extending 
up  Millford  haven  Bay  unto  the  Narrows 
where  it  is  bounded  by  Sting  Graye  Bay 
&c.  300  acs.  S.  side  of  Gwynns  Island 
&c.    (17   Jan.    1642   &   6   Dec.    1652.) 

JOHN  MAN,  600  acs.  on  E.  side  of 
Eastermost  Riv.  in  Mockjack  Bay,  beg. 
at  Chesnutt  Cr.,  running  to  marked  trees 
of  Wm.  Holden.  P.  67  (531).  (Tho- 
mas Todd,  5  Oct.  1653  &  assigned  to 
sd.  Man.) 

WM.  SMART,  450  acs.  in  Winter 
Harbour,  beg.  at  John  Smith's  land. 
P.  68  (532).  (Thomas  Todd,  20  Oct. 
1652  &  assigned  to  sd.  Smart.) 

ELIZABETH  KEMP,  900  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  on  N.  side  of  Mattapony  Riv., 
running  S.  to  trees  of  Mr.  Diggs.  P. 
68  (532.)  (Sir  Grey  Skipwith,  11  Oct. 
1658  &  assigned  to  sd.  Kemp.) 

HENRY  SINGLETON,  400  acs.  on 
Ewd.  side  of  Eastermost  riv.  in  Mock- 
jack  Bay,  beg.  at  marked  trees  of  Rich: 
Rapley  (Ripley).  P.  68  (532).  (Wm. 
Leathermore,  &  John  Thomas,  6  Dec. 
1652,  by  Leathermore  assigned  to  sd. 
Thomas,  who  assigned  to  sd.  Singleton.) 

WM.  ROBERTS,  150  acs.  on  W.  side 
of  the  maine  swamp  upon  the  head  of 
Crany  Cr..,  adj.  land  of  Jeffrey  Bew. 
P.  68  (533).  (Wm.Cordery,  15  Mar. 
1657,  &  by  him  assigned). 

SAME.  200  acs.  Gloster  Co.,  on  N. 
side  of  Yorke  Riv.,  N.W.  side  of  Jones 
Cr.,  E.  upon  a  white  marsh.  P.  68 
(533).    (29  Nov.  1652). 


Note. — Pages  69  to  74,  inclusive,  are 
missing  in  the  old  Book  5,  and  pages 
here  given  refer  to  the  transcript  in 
Book  4. 

MRS.  ANN  BERNARD,  900  acs. 
Gloucester  Co.,  27  Nov.  1661,  p.  (534). 
N.  side  of  York  Riv.,  near  the  main 
swamp  upon  the  head  of  Jone's  Cr., 
along  land  of  Hugh  Dowding,  N.N.W. 
&c.  against  land  of  Samuel  Sollis,  E.  to 
Rappa.  path  &c.  to  land  of  William 
Thorne,  assignee  of  Col.  Richard  Lee, 
Esqr.  Renewal  of  her  patent  dated  26 
Feb.  1653. 

SAMUEL  SOLLIS  &  ROBERT 
TOLLIVER,  900  acs.  Gloucester  Co., 
27  Nov.  1661,  p.  (534).  On  S.E.  side 
of  Poropotanke  Cr.  200  acs.  upon  N. 
E.  side  of  a  br.  of  sd.  creek  known  by 
the  name  of  Attapotamoy  Cr.,  next  & 
adj.  land  of  Oliver  Green  &c.  700  acs. 
upon  S.W.  side  of  a  br.  of  a  swamp  of 
sd.  Cr.,  which  divides  this  &  land  of 
Isaac  Richeson  &c.  Renewal  of  their 
pattern  dated  26  Mar.  1655.  Note: 
Renewed  in  Tolliver's  name,  1  Dec. 
1662. 

MAJOR  THOMAS  CURTIS,  730 
acs.  on  N.  side  of  Ware  Riv.  in  Mock- 
jack  bay,  27  Nov.  1661,  p.  (535).  Beg. 
on  E.  side  of  Browns  bay  &c.  by  marked 
trees  dividing  this  &  land  of  Mr.  Tho- 
mas Boswell  &c.  Renewal  of  his  patent 
dated  3  June  1657. 

MR.  THOMAS  CURTIS,  1150  acs. 
upon  Black  Water  Cr.  in  the  North 
Riv.  of  Mockjack  bay,  27  Nov.  1661,  p. 
(535).  Beg.  on  N.W.  side  of  Phesant 
Cr.,  running  N.E.  &c.  Renewal  of  his 
patent  dated  20  Sept.  1652. 

SAML.  SOLLIS,  son  of  Samuel  Sollis, 
dec'd.,  352  acs.  Gloucester  Co.,  27  Nov. 
1661,  p.  (536).  Upon  S.E.  side  of 
Poropotank  Cr.,  upon  N.E.  side  of  a 
swamp  dividing  this  &  land  of  Isaac 
Richeson,  along  a  br.  of  same  dividing 
this  &  land  of  John  Day,  thence  N.E. 
by  N.  &c.  Granted  Samuel  Sollis,  dec'd., 
26  Mar.  1655,  &  now  due  the  above- 
named  as  son  &  heir. 

WILLIAM  WATERS,  1200  acs. 
N'ampton  Co.,  20  Feb.  1661,  p.  (536). 


418 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Beg.  at  a  br.  on  the  S.  side  of  Anan- 
cock  Cr.,  N.  to  Chichanesecks  Cr.  &c. 
Due  said  Major  Waters  for  trans,  of 
24  pers.* 

LT.  COLONEL  JOHN  STRINGER, 

2900  acs.  N'ampton  Co.,  13  Mar.  1661, 
p.  (536).  Part  of  a  devdt.  declined  by 
Mr.  John  Savage,  bounded  on  the  E.  by 
the  Seaboard  &  on  the  N.  S.  &  W.  by 
land  of  John  Savage.  Trans,  of  58  pers.* 

JOHN  MILLBY  (Milby),  100  acs. 
N'ampton  Co.,  20  Feb.  1661,  p.  (537). 
Bounded  on  N.  by  Nondices  Cr.,  E.  by 
land  of  Jenkin  Price,  W.  by  the  main 
bay  &  Sly.  towards  land  of  Mr.  Tho. 
Teagle.  Granted  to  Jenkin  Price,  10 
Mar.  1652  &  assigned  to  sd.  Milby. 

SAME.  150  acs.  Same  Co.,  date  & 
page.  Beg.  at  land  of  John  Major  & 
extending  Wly.  down  the  Cr.  Due  as 
above. 

BENJAMIN  STRATTON,  son  & 
heir  of  Thomas  Stratton,  257  acs. 
N'ampton  Co.,  26  Mar.  1662,  p.  (538). 
Being  a  neck  of  land  called  Acquasca, 
bounding  W.  upon  the  Old  Plantation 
&  Cr.,  N.  on  John  Dennis,  S.  on  Henry 
Charlton,  E.  between  two  branches  &c. 
Granted  to  Thomas  Stratton,  5  Oct. 
1654. 

ROBERT  THOMPSON,  son  &  heir 
of  Robert  Thompson,  700  acs.  N'amp- 
ton Co.,  26  Mar.  1662,  p.  (538).  Beg. 
at  Harlows  holes  near  the  head  of  Old 
Plantation  Cr.  &c.  Granted  to  William 
Waters,  10  May  1652  &  by  him  as- 
signed to  sd.  Thompson. 

BENJAMIN  STRATTON,  son  &  heir 
of  Thomas  Stratton,  300  acs.  N'ampton 
Co.,  26  Mar.  1662,  p.  (538).  On  the 
ridge,  bounding  Sly.  on  Dunn  branch, 
Ely.  on  land  of  Francis  Jones  &  George 
Traveller  &  Nly.  on  Maj.  William 
Waters.  Granted  to  sd.  Thomas,  27 
Nov.  1657. 

JAMES  NEVIL  (Nevill),  1300  acs. 
N'ampton  Co.,  26  Mar.  1662,  p.  (539). 
On  the  seaboard  side,  being  a  neck  of 
land  or  Island,  bounding  Ely.  by 
Matchepungo  Riv.,  W.  by  creeks   issu- 


ing out  of  sd.  river  &  by  cattle  marshes 
or  branches,  Nly.  &  Sly.  upon  sd.  creeks 
including  all  points,  marshes  &  islands 
within  said  Neck  or  Island.  Granted 
to  Thomas  Herman,  12  June  1654  & 
assigned  to  sd.  Nevil. 

CHRISTOPHER  KIRKE,  son  &  heir 
of  Christopher  Kirke,  500  acs.  N'amp- 
ton Co.,  26  Mar.  1662,  p.  (539).  At 
Nuswattocks  Cr.,  bounded  on  N.E.  with 
land  of  Thomas  Johnson  &c.  Granted 
to  James  Bruse,  21  Mar.  1645  &  as- 
signed to  the  above. 

THOMAS  LETHERBURY  (Leather- 
bury),  600  acs.  N'ampton  Co.,  26  Mar. 
1662,  p.  (539).  On  S.  side  of  the  S. 
br.  of  Anancock  Cr.  &  adj.  land  of  John 
Dorman.  Renewal  of  his  patent  dated 
2  Oct.  1655. 

JAMES  PRICE,  600  acs.  N'ampton 
Co.,  26  Mar.  1662,  p.  (540).  Upon  S. 
side  of  Occahannock  Cr..  Granted  to 
Benjamin  Mathews,  2  Oct.  1654  &  as- 
signed to  the  abovenamed. 

COLONEL  EDMUND  SCAR- 
BURGH,  600  acs.  N'ampton  Co.,  26 
Mar.  1662,  p.  (540).  N.W.  upon  great 
Nuswattoke  Riv.,  from  Chingandokee 
Cr.  mouth  unto  Arakoke  Cr.  Granted 
to  Randall  Harle,  5  Oct.  1649,  by  him 
deserted  &  granted  said  Scarburgh  by 
order  &c,  dated  28  Sept.  1661  &  due 
for  trans,  of  12  pers.* 

WILLIAM  SMITH,  son  &  heir  of 
Thomas  Smith  alias  Hiniman,  400  acs. 
N'ampton  Co.,  26  Mar.  1662,  p.  (541). 
At  Nuswattocks  Cr.  Granted  to  John 
Major,  4  Sept.  1643  &  by  him  assigned 
to  Sarah  Smith,  the  mother  of  said 
William. 

HUGH  YEO,  450  acs.  N'ampton  Co., 
28  Sept.  1661,  p.  (541).  At  Pungotea- 
gue  Cr.,  beg.  at  a  br.  of  same  called 
Pocomoke  branch.  Due  for  trans,  of  9 
pers.* 

JOHN  ROBINS,  550  acs.  N'ampton 
Co.,  28  Sept.  1661,  p.  (541).  300  acs. 
bounded  on  N.  by  land  of  William 
Sache  (?),  S.  by  Richard  Patrick  &  on 
E.  by  the  Seaboard,  &  250  acs.  adj.  said 
tract.    Due  for  trans,  of  11  pers.* 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


419 


COL.      EDMUND      SCARBURGH, 

2100  acs.  N'ampton  Co.,  26  Mar.  1662, 
p.  (542).  At  Great  Matomkin  Cr.  Due 
for  trans,  of  52  pers.* 

JOHN  ROGERS,  200  acs.  N'ampton 
Co.,  26  Mar.  1662,  p.  (542).  At  the 
head  of  the  N.  br.  of  Nondices  Cr., 
bounded  on  W.  by  land  of  George 
Truett,  E.  by  Anthony  Johnson  &  N. 
by  John  Williams.    Trans,  of  4  pers.* 

WILLIAM  TAYLOR  &  BARTHO- 
LOMEW MEARS,  500  acs.  N'ampton 
Co.,  26  Mar.  1662,  p.  (542).  Bounded 
on  E.  by  land  of  John  Evans  &  part  of 
the  Beaver  Dams  of  Matchepungo  Cr., 
on  the  W.  by  lands  of  the  head  of 
Occahannock  Cr.  &c.  Trans,  of  10 
pers.* 

RICHARD  KELLUM,  400  acs. 
N'ampton  Co.,  26  Mar.  1662,  p.  (543). 
At  the  head  of  Matchepungo  Cr.,  Sly. 
on  land  of  John  Evans  &  Wly.  upon 
land  of  Pungoteague  &c.  Trans,  of  8 
pers.* 

NATHANIEL  BRADFORD,  1000 
acs.  N'ampton  Co.,  26  Mar.  1662,  p. 
(543).  Near  Matchepungo  Cr.,  bounded 
on  the  S.  by  the  N.  line  of  2000  acs. 
granted  to  Mr.  Kendall,  on  the  E.  by 
the  seaboard  &c.    Trans,   of   20  pers.* 

JOHN,  SARAH  &  MARGARET 
MITCHELL,  1000  acs.  in  Accomack,  at 
Chichanessecks  Cr.,  26  Mar.  1662,  p. 
(543).  500  acs  .bounded  on  the  W. 
by  the  main  bay,  on  the  N.  by  Che- 
chanesscks  Cr.,  E.  by  land  of  Major 
Waters  &  running  Sly.  towards  Anan- 
cock;  the  other  500  acs.  bounded  on  W. 
by  land  of  sd.  Waters,  N.  by  Chichanes- 
secks &  running  Sly.  into  the  woods. 
Due  for  trans,  of  20  pers.* 

JOHN,  SARAH  &  MARGARETT 
MITCHELL  (or  MICHELL),  200  acs., 
Accomack  Co.,  p.  75,  (544).  26  Mar. 
1662.  Beg.  at  land  of  Wm.  Burditt, 
along  land  formerly  belonging  to  George 
Smith.  (Granted  to  Mr.  Jno.  Custis,  8 
Oct.  1657,  by  him  deserted  &  granted 
by  order  of  Gen.  Ct.,   16  Oct.   1660  to 


sd.  Michell.)  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Wm. 
Appy,  Tho.  Irish,  Geo.  Stith,  Mary 
Greenwood.    (Multilated.) 

WALTER  TAYLOUR,  400  acs. 
Northampton  Co.,  being  an  island 
known  as  Gabriells  Is.,  lieing  over 
against  Anancocke  &  environed  on  all 
sides  with  the  bayes  of  Chesepiake.    P. 

75,  (544).  (Nicholas  Wadilow,  12 
Oct.  1652,  by  him  assigned  to  Robt. 
King,  Jno.  Watts,  Gilbert  Henderson  & 
Robt.  Blake,  &  after  severall  other  as- 
signments, sold  to  sd.  Wa:  Taylour.) 
26  Mar.  1662. 

CAPT.  JNO.  CHEESMAN,  150  acs. 
includ.  the  ponds,  beg.  at  his  own  land 
by  the  river  coming  out  of  the  Pequo- 
son  pond.  P.  75,  (544).  17  Oct.  1662. 
Trans.  3  pers:  Richard  Watts,  Geo. 
Billops,  Geo.  Cable. 

PETER  KNIGHT,  2700  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,   23   Nov.   166 (2), 

p.  75,  (545).  1200  acs.  on  S.  side  of 
great  Wicocomoco  Riv.,  adj.  land  of 
Thomas  Seoggin;  1500  acs.  on  S.  side 
sd.  river,  E.S.E.  upon  a  branch  dividing 
this  &  land  of  Nich.  Morrice,  adj.  land 

of  Tho. &  David  Kiffin.    ***  part 

of  which  land  land  next  Tho.  Read  be- 
ing formerly  called  Palmer (Muti- 
lated.)    (3  June  1657.) 

By  Sir  William  Berkeley 

MR.  ALEX:  FLEMING,  650  acs.  on 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  9  Dec.  1662,  P. 

76,  (546).  250  acs.  being  called  Yar- 
retts  Marsh,  adj.  Colemans  Thickett; 
400  acs.  marsh  &  woodland,  108  acs.  of 
the  latter  lieing  bet.  S.  side  of  Silvester 
Thetchers  Cr.  &  N.  end  of  the  land 
whereon  the  sd.  Fleming  now  liveth. 
(250  acs.  in  1658)  &  400  acs.  for  trans, 
of  8  Pers:  Tho.  Stone,  Jno.  Mason, 
Wm.  Taylour,  Eliz.  Weekes,  Ann 
Stokes,  Roger  Reeves,  Roger  Read,  Wm. 
Jones.    (Mutilated.) 

JOHN  CATTLETT,  (Catlet),  Gent., 
1850  acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  bet.  the  river  & 
Occapason  Cr.,  adj.  land  of  Mr.  Tho. 
Hawkins.  20  Feb.  1662,  p.  76,  (546). 
304  acs.  granted  to  Geo.  Eaton,  after- 
wards  purchased   by  sd.   Cattlet   in   co- 


420 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


partnership  with  Ralph  Rowzee;  400 
acs.  in  like  manner;  336  acs.  to  sd. 
Cattlett  &  Tho.  Lucas,  Senr.,  20  July 
1652,  since  purchased  by  sd.  Cattlett; 
502  acs.  by  patent  to  Cattlett  &  Rowzey, 
1  July  1655;  308  acs.  for  trans,  of  6 
pers.* 

SAME.  792  acs.  Same  Co.  20  Feb. 
1662,  p.  77,  (548).  Below  the  place 
where  the  path  leadeth  bet.  Poretobacco 
&  Mattapony  crosseth  Occapaton  maine 
run.  Granted  10  Sept.  1662  for  1100 
acs.  but  upon  resurvey  found  to  be  but 
792  acs. 

THOMAS  HANSFORD,  75  acs.  in 
Hampton  Parish,  Yorke  Co.,  14  Jan. 
1662,  p.  77,  (549).  Beg.  at  corner  of 
Mr.  (or  Mrs.)  Ellice  Richardson's  land. 
Trans,  of  2  pers:  Jno.  Harris,  Wm. 
Whiteby. 

WM.  HALL,  573  acs.  122  perches,  in 
the  freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv.  on  S.  side  of 
Occapacon  Cr.  &  nigh  land  of  Jno. 
Barrow.   (23  Mar.  1659.)   P.  77,  (549). 

THOMAS  CHRISTIAN,  100  acs. 
more  or  less,  James  Citty  Co.,  18  Mar. 
1662,  P.  77,  (549).  On  N.  side  of  the 
James  &  E.  side  of  Chickahominy  Riv., 
upon  marked  trees  of  Thomas  Young 
&  on  the  Island  Cr.    (15   Jan.   1657). 

JNO.  KILLMAN  &  GEO.  KILL- 
MAN,  550  acs.  on  S.  side  of  Rappa. 
Riv.  upon  Pascaton  Cr.  alias  Cox  Cr. 
Part  of  sd.  land  formerly  belonging  to 
Ralph  Paine.  (Granted  sd.  Jno.  &  Geo. 
4  Oct.  1655).  P.  78,  (550).  9  Dec. 
1662. 

MR.       WALTER       BRODHURST, 

(Broadhurst)  300  acs.  Westmoreland 
Co.,  9  Dec.  1662,  p.  78,  (550)  S.  side 
Petomake  Riv.,  bounded  on  N.W.  side 
with  the  head  of  Conawoman  Cr.,  S.E. 
upon  land  of  William  Hardish.  (4 
Sept.  1655.) 

WM.  HARDIDGE  (Hardridge), 
1000  N'umberland  Co.,  9  Dec.  1662,  p. 
78,  (551).  S.  side  Petomake  Riv.,  beg. 
at  an  Oyster  Shell  point  at  the  mouth  of 
Poore  Jacke  Cr.,  extending  to  another 
Cr.  dividing  this  from  land  of  Mr.  Tho. 


Speake,  S.W.  upon  land  of  Mr.  John 
Rosier,  N.E.  along  land  of  Mr.  Walter 
Broadhurst.    (19  Oct.   1653.) 

THOMAS  WOODWARD,  100  acs. 
in  Low.  Parish  of  Is.  of  Wight  Co.,  28 
Feb.  1662,  p.  78,  (551).  Adj.  land 
now  in  occupation  of  Tho.  Jones  & 
lately  purchased  by  sd.  Woodward  of 
Sd.  Jones,  bounded  with  patented  lands 
of  Capt.  Jno.  Upton,  Capt.  Jno.  Moone 
&  sd.  Jones,  (24  Sept.  1659). 

ROBT.  GILLATT,  (Gillat),  100  acs. 
bet.  Newport  Newes  &  Blunt  point  & 
Wly.  upon  land  of  Wm.  Bentley,  p. 
78,  (552).  (Tho.  Godbye,  1  Dec.  1624 
&  after  severall  sales,  assigned  to  sd. 
Gillatt.)   9  Jan.  1662. 

CAPT.  THO.  HAWKINS,  627^acs., 
16  perches  on  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
19  Feb.  1662,  p.  79,  (552.)  621  acs. 
beg.  at  upper  end  of  land  of  Jno.  Cat- 
lett  &  Ralph  Rowsey;  the  residue  adj. 
his  own  &  land  of  Wm.  Veale.  (621 
acs.  20  Nov.  1657.)  Residue  for  trans, 
of  Wm.  West. 

GERRARD  BROADHURST,  500  acs. 
Westmoreland  Co.,  9  Dec.  1662,  p.  79 
(553).  Upon  S.  side  of  Petomake  Riv. 
&  upon  N.E.  side  upon  head  of  Chapa- 
wansick  Cr.,  S.E.  upon  land  of  Mr. 
Nich.  Pope.  (Walter  Broadhurst,  deed., 
father  of  Gerrard,  4  Sept.  1655,  &  given 
by  will  to  sd.  Gerrard.) 

ROBT.  JADWIN,  200  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  12  Feb.  1662,  p.  79, 
(553).  Ely.  upon  Petomake  Riv..  Sly. 
upon  land  of  Thomas  Hayles.  (John 
Earle,  16  Nov.  1652,  assigned  to  Wm. 
Thomas  &  after  severall  sales  assigned 
to  sd.  Jadwin.) 

WALTER  BROADHURST,  Junr., 
500  acs.  Ely.  on  Petomake  Riv.  in  the 
freshes  above  the  Narrowes  of  Pascata- 
way,  Sly.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Hugh  Lee. 
9  Dec.  1662,  p.  79,  (554).  (Jno. 
Wood,  15  July  1657,  assigned  to  sd. 
Broadhurst.) 

KATH:  (Katherine)  BRENT,  daugh- 
ter of  Ed:  Brent,  dee'd.,  300  acs.  North- 
umberland   Co.,    N.E.    upon    Quiough 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


421 


Riv.,  S.E.  upon  land  of  Capt.  Giles 
Brent.  9  Dec.  1662,  p.  79,  (554). 
(Capt.  Gyles  Brent,  4  May  1653,  as- 
signed to  sd.  Edm:  Brent  &  by  him 
given  by  will  to  sd.  Kath.) 

SAME.  1050  acs.  Same  Co.  &  date, 
P.  80  (555).  On  N.W.  side  of  Nomeny 
Riv.,  a  small  branch  dividing  this  & 
land  surveyed  for  Lewis  Burrell,  deed., 
now  in  possession  of  Capt.  Robt.  Hen- 
feild.  (Jno.  Rosier,  14  Jan.  1656,  as- 
signed to  Edmond  Brent,  who  by  will 
&c.  as  above.) 

WILLIAM  PEIRCE,  300  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  9  Dec.  1662,  p.  80, 
(555).  N.N.E.  upon  Petomake  Riv.  & 
adj.  land  of  John  Rosier.  (Samll.  Bon- 
man  (Bowman  ?)  4  July  1653,  assigned 
to  Rich.  Heabeard,  who  assigned  to 
Peirce.) 

WM.  HALLOWES,  3900  acs.  West- 
moreland Co.,  9  Dec.  1662,  p.  80, 
(555).  1600  acs.  upon  Petomake 
(Riv.),  at  the  mouth  of  Poteseck  Cr., 
N.  W.  on  land  of  Pancake;  700  acs. 
Nly.  on  sd.  Riv.,  Ely.  on  the  aforesd. 
land  at  a  great  marsh,  running  to  a  line 
dividing  this  from  land  of  Nicholas 
Merywether;  1600  adj.  the  700  acs.,  a 
line  dividing  this  from  land  of  Ro. 
Maphee  &  Mr.  Jarney,  Sly.  upon  Macho- 
ticke  Towne.  (Jno.  Walton  &  Jno. 
Bagnall,  10  June  1654  &  by  them  as- 
signed to  sd.  Hallowes.) 

MAJOR  WM.  CANFEILD,  550  acs. 
of  land  and  marsh,  Surrey  Co.,  24  Jan. 
1662,  p.  80,  (556).  On  Wwd.  side  of 
Lyons  Cr.,  bounded  on  N.  side  with 
Hog  Is.  Cr.,  on  S.  side  with  his  own 
land,  formerly  patented  by  Capt. 
Cockram  &  Jno.  Medmore.  (24  Jan. 
1656). 

THOMAS  BAYLES,  300  acs.  North- 
umberland Co.,  28  Jan.  1662,  p.  80, 
(557).  S.  side  of  Great  Wiccomoco 
Riv.,  N.N.E.  upon  the  head  of  a  creek 
above  land  of  Tho.  Salsbury  &  W.N.W. 
upon  land  of  Martin  Coale.  (Tho. 
Kedby,  13  Oct.  1653.) 

MAJOR  WM.  CANFEILD,  1230  acs. 
Surrey  Co.,  28  Jan.  1662,  p.  81,  (557). 


Bounded  from  Hog  Is.  marsh  to  Launes 
Cr.,  which  divides  this  from  land  of 
Mr.  Jno.  Bland,  running  to  land  of 
Capt.  Wm.  Cockram  &c.  to  Banfords 
Cr.,  with  Tarpitt  branch  &c.  (4  Mar. 
1656.) 

REES  HUGHES,  860  acs.  New  Kent 
Co.,  28  Jan.  1662,  p.  81.  (558)  410 
acs.  on  S.W.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.,  adj. 
land  of  George  Smith  &  running  to  Mr. 
Langstones  line  &c.    (1  Mar.  1657.) 

JNO.  MARSHALL,  200  acs.  Is.  of 
Wight  Co.,  28  Jan.  1662,  p.  81,  (558). 
120  acs.  part  of  land  formerly  belong- 
ing to  Jno.  Valentine;  80  acs.  adj. 
George  Midland  &  Richard  Penny.  (8 
June  1655.) 

TOBIAS  HANSFOARD  (Hansford), 
200  acs.  upon  Deepe  Creeke  in  Ware 
Riv.  in  Mockjack  Bay,  beg.  at  corner 
tree  of  Edward  Willis.    27  Feb.  1662,  p. 

81,  (559.)     (6  Dec.  1652.) 

ANTHONY  LENTON,  1425  acs. 
Northumberland   Co.,   6   Dec.    1662,   p. 

82,  (559).  Upon  land  of  Jno.  Meekes 
&  Wm.  Newman,  Nly.  on  Yeocomoco 
Riv.,  Sly.  upon  broad  cr.  &c,  &  adj. 
land  surveyed  for  Mr.  Bacon.  (1025 
acs.  1  Aug.  1653;  400  acs.  1  Dec. 
1657.) 

MR.  THO.  BOSWELL,  972  acs.  on 
N.  side  of  Ware  Riv.  in  Mockjack  Bay, 
marked  trees  dividing  this  from  land  of 
Major  Curtis.  28  Jan.  1662,  p.  82, 
(560.)     (8  Oct.   1656.) 

RICHARD  LONG,  430  acs.  on 
branches  of  Millford  Haven,  beg.  at  a 
run  dividing  this  from  land  of  George 
Billips.  28  Jan.  1662,  p.  82  (560.) 
(6  Nov.  1653.) 

JOHN  SANDAVOR  &  RICHARD 
ADAMS,  200  acs.  at  new  poquoson  in 
Yorke  Co.,  28  Tan.  1662,  p.  82  (561). 
Adj.  land  of  John  Haward  &  Wm.  Hay. 
(5  Oct.  1658.) 

MR.  EDWARD  LOCKE Y.  1600  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  28  Jan.  1662,  p.  83. 
(561.)  N.  side  of  Mattapony  Riv., 
from  Wwd.  side  of  his  plantation  &  a 


422 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


maine  run  of  Awhore  Cock,  &c.  towards 
land  of  Col.  Abrall  &  near  land  of  Robt. 
Rolls.    (25  Jan.  1650.) 

JOHN  BARSBY,  350  acs.  Yorke  Co., 
28  Jan.  1662,  p.  83  (562).  S.  side  Chas. 
Riv.  on  backe  side  of  Mount  Folly,  run- 
ning by  lands  of  John  Welding  (or 
Holding.)  (Charles  Edmunds,  8  Oct. 
1653.) 

JAMES  POPE,  700  acs.  Northumber- 
land Co.,  28  Jan.  1662,  p.  83,  (562). 
Among  certain  branches  of  the  great 
swamp  belonging  to  the  head  of  Gr. 
Wiccocomoco  Riv.  above  lands  of  Mr. 
Peter  Knight  &  Capt.  Budd.  (27  Sept. 
1659.) 

SAME.  1000  acs.  Same  Co.,  date  & 
page.  (563).  Ely.  on  Chinkakun  or 
Mr.  Preslies  Cr.,  Nly.  on  land  of  Coll. 
Matrom,  sd.  Presly  &  Coll.  Trussell, 
Wly.  upon  Gervase  Dodson  &  Sly.  to- 
wards Coll.  Claiborne.  (Richard  Rus- 
sell, 25  Sept.  1657,  by  him  deserted  & 
granted  sd.  Pope  by  order  of  Ct.  &c.) 

JOHN  LEGGATT,  376  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  12  Jan.  1662,  p.  83,  (563). 
Upon  branches  of  blacke  Cr.,  beg.  at 
corner  of  Tho.  Londons  in  Westover 
path,  running  N.  to  land  of  John  Hor- 
sington,  thence  to  line  of  Edm.  Price 
&c.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  Barnaby  Eaton, 
Wm.  Bagly,  Wm.  Jent,  Jno.  Vaughan, 
Sarah  Rose,  Tho.  Harding,  Tho.  Jackson. 

THOMAS  PINKEMAN,  125  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,  28  Jan.  1662,  p.  84,  (564). 
80  acs.  bounded  on  E.  with  swamp 
dividing  this  &  land  of  Wm.  Graves, 
W.  to  Skimino  to  land  of  Wm.  Gant- 
lett,  S.E.  upon  land  of  Stephen  Taylour, 
deed.,  now  in  possession  of  Wm. 
Heward;  45  acs.  upon  Skimino  Cr.,  beg. 
at  a  landing  by  the  Cr.  &c.  by  Mr. 
Dipnalls  landing,  including  a  peece  of 
marsh  land  &c.  80  acs.  by  patent  dated 
24  July  1654  &  the  residue  for  trans, 
of  John  Shaw. 

RICHARD  LEWIS,  190  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co.,  2  Feb.  1662,  p.  84  (564).  Up- 
on S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  adj.  land  of 
Dennis  Conniers  &  Evan  Davis,  along 
head  of  Oberts  Cr.  &  S.E.  upon  land  of 


Mr.  Bertrum  Obert.  Granted  to  Capt. 
Wm.  Brocas  18  Nov.  1653,  assigned  to 
Sir  Henry  Chichly,  who  assigned  to  sd. 
Lewis. 

JNO.  LEWIS  &  THOMAS 
MICHELL,  1680  acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  15 
Jan.  1662,  p.  84  (565).  Beg.  at  Mr. 
Michells  land,  N.N.E.  by  Westover 
path,  thence  to  Coll.  Gooch's  cor.  tree 
&c.  Trans,  of:  Wm.  Thornton,  Rich. 
Boyne,  Tho.  Shugge,  Law.  Baker,  Tho. 
Walder,  Ellen  Harwod,  Mary  Stinson, 
Jane  Mayson,  Rich.  Saucer,  Jno.  Tillett, 
Geo.  Catleton,  Bryan  Hazlewod,  Ann 
Lulow  (?),  Eliz.  Palmer,  Joane  Madd, 
Hugh  Davis,  Jno.  Gunne,  Wm.  Colvert, 
Eliz.  Gittins,  James  Ridly,  Mary  Taylor, 
Eliz.  Smith,  Ann  Norton,  Bridg.  Black, 
Nich.  Hart,  Nich.  Flower,  Wm.  Pearce, 
Rich.  Overton,  Ann  Shilooe  (?),  Tho. 
Hanson,  Sarah  Russell. 

JOHN  PIGG,  300  acs.  New  Kent 
Co.,  10  July  1658,  p.  84  (565).  On 
branches  of  Peanketanke,  beg.  at  cor.  of 
John  Axolls  land.    (4  July  1658). 

WM.  BLACKEY,  Gent.,  1300  acs., 
including  the  land  he  is  now  seated  on, 
New.  Kent  Co.,  12  Feb.  1662,  p.  85 
(566).  On  S.  side  the  Narrowes  of 
Yorke  Riv.,  bounded  on  S.  E.  with  land 
of  Mr.  Burnell  &  N.W.  with  land  of 
Mr.  George  Lydall.    (9  June  1655.) 

JOHN  JADWIN,  650  acs.  on  S.  side 
of  Rappa.  Riv.  upon  the  head  of  Sharpes 
Cr.,  12  Feb.  1662,  p.  85  (566).  Adj. 
300  acs.  granted  to  Jno.  Sharpe,  lately 
in  possession  of  Wm.  Thompson.  (23 
Nov.  1658.) 

GEORGE  PICKARIN,  450  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  4  Feb.  1662,  p. 
85  (567).  Upon  S.W.  side  &  towards 
the  head  of  lower  Chotanke  Cr.,  op- 
posite to  land  of  James  Magregorie  & 
Fowches.  Granted  to  James  Magregory 
&  Hugh  Fowch,  11  June  1658;  assigned 
to  Allex.  Macoter,  who  assigned  to 
Charles  Hoyle  &  by  him  to  sd.  Pickerin. 

ROGER  WALTERS,  1,000  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,  2  Mar.  1662,  p. 
85  (568).  N.  side  of  Wiccocomoco 
Riv.  upon  St.  Johns  Cr.  dividing  lands 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


423 


of  Tho.  Saffall  &  Wm.  Thomas  &  on 
Saffalls  Cr.  &  running  towards  land  of 
Coll.  Claiborne.    (28   Feb.    1654.) 

JOHN  HULL,  770  acs.  Northumber- 
land Co.,  21  Oct.  1659,  p.  85  (568). 
Bet.  Chetanke  &  Cupids  Crs.,  abutting 
on  Petomacke  Cr.  A  line  of  trees  divid- 
ing this  &  land  of  James  Magregory  & 
Hugh  Fowch.    (21  Oct.  1659). 

RICHARD  HARGRAVE  (Hargrove), 
250  acs.  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  18  Dec.  1662, 
p.  86  (569).  150  acs.  beg.  on  the  N. 
side  of  a  branch  of  the  Eastermost  Br. 
of  Eliz.  Riv.,  called  broad  Cr.,  running 
N.N.E.  &c,  &  100  acs.  on  said  Cr.  & 
adj.  his  former  land.  Renewal  of  patent 
dated  11  Mar.  1652. 

CAPT.  JNO.  ROGERS,  450  acs.1* 
N'umberland  Co.,  9  Jan.  1662,  p.  86. 
(569).  250  acs.  N.  on  Claughtons  Cr., 
E.  upon  the  Gleabe  &  W.  upon  a  Sw. 
neer  land  of  John  Kent;  &  200  acs.  adj. 
his  own,  land  of  Henry  Tompsin,  John 
Kent,  Mr.  Hugh  Lee,  the  Gleabe  land 
&  Mattapony  Swamp.  Renewal  of  2 
former  patents.  (13  Sept.  1654 — 31 
Aug.  1657). 

WILLIAM  GRIFFIN,  400  acs. 
N'umberland  Co.,  9  Dec.  1662,  p.  86 
(570).  Betwixt  two  branches  of  the 
very  head  of  Dennis  his  Cr.,  N.  upon  a 
br.  dividing  this  &  land  of  Mr.  Geo. 
Fletcher  &  S.  upon  land  of  one  Howett. 
Formerly  granted  to  Richard  Budd,  1 
Dec.  1653  &  assigned  to  sd.  Griffin. 

JOHN  CUTTEN,  350  acs.  N'ampton 
Co.,  28  Jan.  1662,  p.  86  (570).  At 
Nuswattocks  Cr.,  bounded  on  W.  by  a 
br.  parting  same  from  land  of  Nich. 
Grainger  &c.  Granted  to  Nicholas 
Waddilow,  8  Oct.  1656  &  by  him  as- 
signed. 

WILKES  MAUNDERS,  1000  acs.  in 
Petomake  freshes,  running  N.  by  W.  to 
the  mouth  of  the  second  Cr.  above  Pas- 
cataway,  W.  by  S.  &c.  along  land  of 
Mr.  Randolph.  9  Jan.  1662,  p.  87 
(571).  Granted  to  Francis  Carpenter, 
5  June  1658  &  assigned  tosd.  Maunders. 


•  HENRY  VINCENT,  550  acs.  W- 
moreland  Co.,  22  Dec.  1662,  p.  87 
(571).  On  N.  side  of  Armsbies  Cr., 
opposite  Wells  his  point,  running  S.E. 
&c.  Granted  to  Richard  Searle,  25  Sept. 
1657  &  assigned  to  the  above. 

JOHN  KING,  480  acs.  Surry  Co.,  28 
Jan.  1662,  p.  87  (572).  S.  side  of 
James  Riv.  &  S.E.  side  of  Upper  Chip- 
poakes  Cr.,  E.  on  Wm.  Simons,  W.  on 
Wm.  Lee  &  N.  on  Wm.  Gapeing.  Re- 
newal  of  patent   dated   25   Nov.    1653. 

AUGUSTINE  HORTH,  350  acs., 
includeing  5  pine  Islands,  running  N. 
N.E.  by  Mr.  Thomas  Curtis  &c.  Granted 
to  Wm.  Dudley,  20  Sept.  1652  &  by 
him  assigned.  Dated  20  Sept.  1652,  p. 
87  (572). 

WILLIAM  HARPER,  150  acs.  Rap- 
pahanoke  Co.,  20  Feb.  1662,  p.  87 
(572).  Beg.  upon  a  point  by  a  little 
Cr.  of  Occapacon  Cr.,  butting  upon  land 
surveyed  for  Richard  Coleman,  parallel 
to  line  of  Wm.  Hall  &c.  Trans,  of  3 
pers:  Wm.  Jones,  Jno.  Jarman,  Wm. 
Kid. 

SAME.  230  acs.,  same  Co.  &  date, 
p.  88  (573).  From  Occapacon  Cr.  side 
S.E.  by  S.  &c.  to  a  swamp  dividing  this 
&  land  of  Wm.  Hall,  thence  N.E.  by  E. 
&c.  Granted  to  Richard  Lawson,  6  Oct. 
1656  &  after  severall  sales  sold  to  sd. 
Harper. 

ELIZABETH  LAWSON,  1400  acs. 
Gloster  Co.,  20  Feb.  1662,  p.  88  (573). 
Beg.  at  marked  trees  running  W.S.W. 
crosse  the  upper  end  of  the  great  Island 
in  Rappa.  Riv.,  crosse  the  marsh  & 
lower  part  of  the  Neck  of  Land  upon 
which  sd.  Lawson  liveth,  running 
parallel  to  the  river  &c.  to  land  of  Geo. 
Eaton,  E.S.E.  to  Lawsons  Cr.  &c. 
Granted  to  Richard  Lawson,  dec'd.,  6 
Oct.  1656  &  given  to  said  Elizabeth,  his 
wife,  by  will. 

JOHN  PAINE,  610  acs.  en  the  head 
of  the  E.  br.  of  Pepetick  Cr..  on  N. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  20  Feb.  1662,  p. 
88.  (574).  Renewal  of  pattern  dated 
6  Oct.  1656. 


424 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


WILLIAM  NUTT,  683  acs.  N'um- 
berland  Co.,  4  Feb.  1662,  p.  88.  (575). 
On  N.E.  side  of  great  Wiccocomoco 
Riv.,  from  Lamdens  Cr.  to  Island  Cr., 
W.  upon  same  &  land  of  William  Tho- 
mas, E.N.E.  upon  land  of  Tho.  Garratt 
&  Henry  Smith,  Orphant  &  towards  land 
Richard  Spann  bought  of  Edw.  Coles. 
Renewal  of  pattent  dated  4  June  1655. 

RALPH  GREENE,  350  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  10  Feb.  1662,  p.  89  (575). 
On  branches  of  Assatiam  Swamp.  Trans. 

of  7  pers:  Baker,  Ann  King,  Carey 

Fitts,  Jno.  (or  Jero.)  Burton  (or  Bar- 
ton), Dan.  Macoy,  Jno.  Browne,  Jno. 
Hill. 

THO.  POOLE,  100  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  16  Feb.  1662,  p.  89  (576). 
Beg.  at  his  own  land,  running  N.  &c. 
to  land  of  Mr.  Robt.  Bracewell,  then 
S.S.W.  &c.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Tho. 
Harin,  Robt.  Marrwood. 

JOHN  PAINE,  298  acs.  &  44  perches 
on  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  20  Feb. 
1662,  p.  89  (576).  About  a  mile  from 
same  on  the  W.  side  of  Pepeticke  Cr., 
E.  by  S.  towards  land  of  Tho.  Hawkins 
&c.  Granted  to  Thomas  Wright,  26 
Nov.  1657  &  assigned  to  sd.  Paine. 

RALPH  GREENE,  1100  acs.  Gloster 
Co.,  10  Feb.  1662,  p.  89  (577).  S.S.W. 
upon  Yorke  Riv.  from  Jones  Cr.,  divid- 
ing this  &  land  of  Coll.  Richard  Lee, 
W.N.W.  upon  land  of  Wm.  Thorne  &c. 
400  acs.  granted  sd.  Greene  16  Feb. 
1653  &  700  acs.  of  waste  land  added. 
Renewal  of  patent  dated  last  of  August 
1658. 


upon  land  of  Nich.  Jernew.  Assigned 
by  Major  William  Hockaday,  to  whom 
it  was  granted  3  Apr.  1651. 

MR.  ALEXANDER  FLEMING,  280 

acs.  in  the  freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg. 
neere  land  formerly  called  Yarratts 
Land,  etc.  20  Feb.  1662,  p.  90  (578). 
Granted  to  Walter  Dickeson,  6  Sept. 
1651  (or  1654),  &  after  severall  sales 
&c.  sold  by  Jno.  Barrow  to  sd.  Fleming. 

CAPT.  JOHN  WEIR,  400  acs.,  20 
Feb.  1662,  p.  90  (579).  Adj.  land  of 
John  Paine.  Granted  to  John  Paine,  15 
Nov.  1653,  who  sold  to  Thomas  Erwin 
&  Tho.  Wright,  &  afterwards  sold  to 
sd.  Weir. 

SAME.  1200  acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  same 
date  &  pages.  Upon  N.  side  of  Rappa. 
Riv.,  500  acs.  at  the  run  next  above 
land  of  George  Taylour;  700  acs.  upon 
ClifTts  Cr.  &  running  unto  land  of 
Antho.  Fullgam.  500  acs.  granted  to 
sd.  Fullgam,  5  Sept.  1650  &  assigned 
to  sd.  Weir;  700  acs.  granted  sd.  Weir, 
14  May,  1653. 

JOHN  GREENE,  200  acs.  in  the  W. 
br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  beg.  at  the  miles  end 
of  his  own  land  &c.  1  June  1655,  p. 
90   (580).    Renewal. 

RICHARD  JONES  &  JOHNA. 
HIGLY  (Higley),  640  acs.  New  Kent 
Co.,  25  Jan.  1662,  p.  91  (580).  Run- 
ning Wly.  along  Westover  path  &c. 
Granted  to  William  Pullam,  20  June 
1661  &  by  him  sold  to  Eliz.  Jones  &  sd. 
Johna.,  which  sd.  Eliz.  hath  given  to 
her  sonn,  the  sd.  Richard. 


SAME.  500  acs.,  same  Co.,  date  & 
pages.  Upon  S.E.  side  of  Mattapony 
Riv.,  S.S.W.  side  of  Arasantons  Cr.  & 
S.  S.  E.  upon  the  head  of  Aratico  Cr. 
Granted  to  Fra.  Morgan,  dec'd.,  &  sd. 
Greene,  13  Feb.  1652  &  due  sd.  Greene 
as  being  the  survivor. 

MR.  THO.  GERRARD,  1000  acs. 
N'thumberland  Co.,  9  Jan.  1662,  p.  90 
(578).  S.  side  of  Petomecke  Riv.,  N. 
&  N.  E.  upon  Machotique  Cr.,  opposite 
land  of  Geo.  Ludlow,  Esqr.,  E.  &  S.E. 


JOHN  ALEXANDER,  one-half  of 
3,900  acs.,  formerly  granted  unto  John 
Bagnall  &  John  Wallton,  &  by  Bagnall 
assigned  unto  Edmond  Scarburgh,  13 
Aug.  1656,  who  assigned  to  sd.  Alexan- 
der, 10  Mar.  1659,  both  of  which  are 
recorded  in  the  Secretaries  Office;  sd. 
land  scituate  in  Potowmack  Riv.  att  a 
place  called  Pochink  (or  Pochicck), 
Stafford  Co.,  bounded  according  to  the 
original  pattent  granted  sd.  Bagnall  & 
Wallton  &  due  for  the  rights  there  un- 
der written.  26  Sept.  1664,  p.  91  (581). 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


425 


EDMOND  SCARBURGH,  1450  acs. 
Accomack  Co.,  29  Sept.  ■  1663,  p.  91 
(581).  Being  a  neck  of  land  at  the 
seaboard  side,  formerly  elected  by  Rich- 
ard Burdock  &  by  him  againe  Declined 
called  Arcadia  Neck,  bounded  on  the 
N.  by  a  Cr.  &  br.  called  by  the  Indians 
Amburrocomico,  now  Gargaphe,  on  the 
S.  by  Arcadia  Cr.  &c.  Trans,  of  29 
pers:  Edward  Fleetewood,  Roger  Noell, 
Wm.  Bannister,  Henry  Farrington,  John 
Dickinson,  William  Ashley,  Ralph 
Castleton,  Robert  Drury,  Edward  Mor- 
ris, Thomas  Caros,  John  Byram,  Henry 
Porter,  Robert  Fleetewood,  William 
Wall,  Nicholas  Woodward,  Thomas 
Crispe,  Richard  Mills,  James  Jolly, 
Thomas  Perry,  William  Pearle,  Robert 
Drury,  Francis  Cranly  (or  Crauly), 
Elizabeth  Bydolph,  James  Silverlocke, 
Thomas  King,  Peter  Solm,  Robert 
Parker,  John  Hodge,  John  Angel. 

MRS.  ANN  TOFFT,  1200  acs.  Acca- 
macke  Co.,  23  Feb.  1663,  p.  92  (582). 
At  the  seaboard  side,  to  the  Swd.  of  a 
Cr.  called  by  the  Indians  Amburcomico, 
now  Garpaghie,  N.  along  the  main  br. 
of  Kisquotan  Cr.  to  the  head  of  the 
main  br.  of  same  called  Kisquotancke, 
now  Arathusa,  &  Wly.  to  the  head  of 
Gargaphie  Br.  Trans,  of  24  pers:  Even 
Jones,  Mary  Esthop,  James  Knowles, 
Mary  Willis,  Thomas  Shandler,  Owin 
Williams,  Richard  Porter,  Morgan 
Malin,  Michaell  Lues,  Abraham  Vincent, 
Peter  Strong,  Jeffry  Wilkins,  Mary 
Bridgnorth,  Atlanta  Hues,  James  West- 
gate,  Tobias  Dunster,  John  Hartford, 
William  Outred,  John  Jones,  John 
Smith,  Thomas  Messenger,  Margaret 
Roxby,  Michaell  White,  Thomas  Rouse. 

NATHANIELL  BRADFORD,  1400 
acs.,  Accomack  Co.,  assigned  to  him  by 
Edmond  Scarburgh,  adj.  his  own  &  land 
of  Richard  Kellum  on  the  S.  &  on  N. 
by  land  of  Jonah  Jackson  &  Edward 
Revell.  26  Sept.  1664,  p.  92  (582). 
Due  for  trans.,  &  the  following  names 
listed:  John  Evans,  John  Smith,  John 
Dry,  John  Casher,  Robert  Casher,  John 
Courtney,  Robert  Turges.  Samuell  Short, 
Thomas  Coles,  John  Cassick,  John  Han- 
cock, John  Wells,  Robert  Masters,  Jona- 
than Samuraies  (?),  John  Tyzard,  Jen- 
kin     Morgan,      John     Difneth,      John 


Sparkes,  Ezard  Paine,  Ann  Paine, 
Dammaris  Worthy,  Elinor.  Puckett, 
Ann  Found,  Crestlean  Wenters,  Joane 
Ossett,  Agnes  Taylor,  Joane  Mazed. 

JOHN  SHARPE,  210  acs.  at  the  head 
of  Seniors  Cr.,  out  of  the  S.W.  side  of 
Coratoman  Riv.,  running  along  land  of 
Thomas  Hackett,  bounded  by  land  of 
Anth.  Stephens,  Moratico  path  &  land 
of  David  Fox.  2  Mar.  1662,  p.  92 
(582).  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Tho.  Waker- 
ly,  Rich.  King,  Jno.  Gable,  Wm.  Lewin. 

CAPT.  THOMAS  STEGG,  Gent., 
800  acs.  Henrico  Co.,  29  Dec.  1662,  p. 
93  (583).  N.  side  of  James  River  be- 
low the  falls,  beg.  at  Chippiake  Cr., 
running  downe  the  river  &c.  Granted 
to  Mr.  Fra.  Hammond,  28  Mar.  1660  & 
by  Maj.  Generll.  Manering  Hammond, 
Adm'r.  &  brother  of  sd.  Francis,  wholly 
assigned  over  to  sd.  Stegg. 

Assignment  of  the  above,  dated  last 
day  of  Feb.  1660.  Witness:  Henry 
Pery. 

HENRY  PALIN,  450  acs.  at  the 
mouth  of  New  begin  Cr.,  25  Sept.  1653, 
p.  93  (584).  Trans,  of  9  pers:  Wm. 
Gailer,  Tho.  Giles,  Hen.  Sterne,  Roger 
Simons,  Isaac  Scott,  John  Atkins,  John 
Sheffild,  Nich.  Wilson,  Ralph  Sharpe. 
Marginal  Note:    "Carolina." 

THOMAS  HODGKIN,  1000  acs.,  in 
a  bay  of  Carolina  River,  beg.  at  a  small 
Cr.  called  Cannaughsaugh  (?),  running 
up  same  to  a  br.  of  Mattatomecke  Cr. 
&c.  25  Sept.  1663,  p.  93  (584).  Trans. 
of  20  pers:  John  Philpot,  Jno.  Tyler, 
Mary  Lewis,  Samll.  Burton,  Math. 
Hewes,  Wm.  Bateman,  Nich.  Wills, 
James  Rogers,  Alex.  Mont,  Marke 
Allister,  Geo.  Rayman,  Roger  Cleyton, 
Tho.  Kintly,  Robt.  Heme,  Wm.  Strood, 
Simon  Allen,  Ger.  Ward,  Rich.  Card, 
Cutt.  Fletcher,  Fard.  Downes. 

WILLIAM  MUNDAY,  300  acs.  in 
Carratucks  Cr.,  falling  into  Kecoug- 
tancke  River,  which  river  falls  into 
Carralina;  beg.  at  the  mouth  of  a 
swamp  where  John  Harveys  land  ends, 
running   E.S.E.   &c.    25    Sept.    1663,   p. 


426 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


94  (584).    Trans,  of  6  pers:    Wm.  Ed-  ton,    Tho.    Hill,    Giles    Wake,    Hugh 

monds,     Joseph     Gibson,     Robt.     Read,  Farthy,    Sar.  •  Helier,    Wm.    Brickenton, 

Rich.     Smith,     Samll.     Warren,     James  Jane       Doughting.      Marginal       Note: 

Bard.  "Carolina." 


THOMAS  SHERWOOD,  880  acs.  on 
the  North  side  of  Carolina  Riv.,  running 
N.W.  by  trees  of  Samll.  Davis,  then  E. 
by  N.  &c.  25  Sept.  1663,,  p.  94  (585). 
Trans,  of  18  pers:  Tho.  Davis,  Edward 
Sneath,  Wm.  Tanner,  Robt.  Wheeler, 
Henry  Weston,  Wm.  Lewis,  Tho.  Waad, 
Wm.  Badger,  Jno.  Gafer,  Eliz.  Waad, 
Lydia  How,  Rich.  Webb,  Abell  Jason, 
Sus.  Alcocke,  Sam.  Francis,  Wm. 
Glover,  Fr.  Glover. 

THOMAS  KEELY  (Keele),  800  acs. 
in  a  bay  of  Paspetanke  River,  25  Sept. 
1663,  p.  94  (585).  Trans,  of  16  pers: 
Wm.  Badger,  Jno.  Gaffer,  Danll. 
Merick,  Tho.  Joanes,  Ed.  Seare,  Margt. 
Williams,  Ann  Robinson,  Abell  Jason, 
Rich.  Bullock,  Tho.  Mann,  Rich.  Evans, 
Edward  Evans,  Robt.  Evans,  Jno. 
Sharpe,  Ja.  Fuller,  John  Corey  (or 
Carey).    Marginal  Note:    "Carolina." 

JOHN  BATTLE,  640  acs.  on  Wwd. 
side  of  Paspetanke  River,  beg.  on  a 
point  which  parts  this  &  land  of  Mrs. 
Fortsen,  running  S.W.  &c.  25  Sept. 
1663,  p.  94  (585).  Trans,  of  13  pers: 
John  Garey,  Ed.  Maurice,  Jno.  Curtain, 
Tho.  Cooly  (or  Ceely),  Tho.  Mory, 
Wm.  Crow,  Wm.  Hutton,  Samll. 
Cornix,  Abra.  Travers,  Wm.  Fowler, 
Jacob  Carew,  Wm.  Hughes,  Mary 
Stevens.    Marginal  Note:    "Carolina." 

TAMES  MURDAH,  420  acs.  on  W. 
side  of  Chowanoke  Riv.,  25  Sept.  1663, 
p.  95  (586).  Trans,  of  9  pers:  Josias 
Pew,  Jno.  Boyce,  Tho.  Crafford,  Wm. 
Morry,  Nath.  Bridges,  Wm.  Clarke, 
Hen.  Kent,  Ral.  Bowles.  Marginal 
Note:     "Carolina." 

MR.  JOHN  LAURENCE.  625  acs.  on 
W.  side  of  Chawanoke  Riv.,  running 
S.W.  along  land  of  Mr.  Robert  Lawrence 
&c.  to  land  lately  surveyed  by  James 
Murdah  &c.  25  Sept.  1663,  p.  95 
(586).  Trans.  of  13  pers:  Geo. 
Teague,  Kath.  Cornelius,  Wm.  Sharpe, 
Ann  Bleach,  Wm.  Hare,  Fen.  Nacking- 


MR.  THOMAS  STAMPE  &  JAMES 
NOAKES,  300  acs.  on  the  N.  side  of 
Carolina  River,  beg.  at  marked  trees 
deviding  this  &  land  of  Henry  White, 
running  E.  &c.  25  Sept.  1663,  p.  95 
(587).  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Hen.  Lea- 
nord,  Robt.  Flake,  Rich.  Baker,  Eliz. 
Hancoke,  Wm.  Preston,  Duncumb 
Pantwell. 

LT.  (or  St.)  MOUNT  WELLS,  600 
acs.  on  W.  side  of  Chowanoake  Riv., 
running  by  land  lately  surveyed  for 
James  Murdoh,  running  E.  &c.  25  Sept. 
1663,  p.  95  (587).  Trans,  of  12  pers: 
Tho.  Poore,  Jos.  Hill,  Ed.  Suckett,  Wm. 
Clarke,  Tho.  High,  James  White,  Jno. 
Giloe,  Tho.  Bayly,  Tho.  Wood,  Wm. 
Wood,  Jno.  Marly  (or  Marky),  Mary 
Fain. 

MR.  ROBERT  LAWRENCE,  Junr., 
625  acs.  on  W.  side  of  Chowanoke 
Riv.,  25  Sept.  1663,  p.  96  (587).  Trans, 
of  13  pers:  Wm.  Yelding,  Wm.  Hare, 
Jno.  Shaply,  Tho.  Turner,  Ed.  Morgan, 
Jno.  Goffe,  Ed.  Stephens,  Wm.  Chester, 
Mary  Cant,  Tho.  Stroud,  Ja.  Smith,  Ed. 
Hawly. 

KATHARINE  WOODWARD  & 
PHILARETE  WOODWARD,  her 
daughter,  750  acs.  on  W.  side  of  Paspe- 
tanke River,  beg.  at  a  point  above  the 
mouth  of  a  large  Cr.  falling  into  said 
river,  etc.  25  Sept.  1663,  p.  96  (588). 
Trans,  of  15  pers:  Fra.  Ost,  (?),  Jno. 
Garnell,  Mary  Well,  Alice  Jeffry,  Jno. 
Newton,  Christian  Grene,  Jno.  Barn- 
well, Mary  Taylor,  Robt.  Cox,  Ja.  John- 
son, Ja.  Corke  (or  Cocke),  Rich.  Har- 
man,  Tho.  West,  Jno.  Smith,  Tho. 
Turvell. 

ROBERT  PEELE.  350  acs.  on  S.W. 
side  of  Pasbetanke  River,  between  land 
of  Doctor  Relfe  &  John  Battle,  running 
S.W.  &c.  25  Sept.  1663,  p.  96  (588). 
Trans,  of  7  pers:  Wm.  Cornix,  Jno. 
Shard,  Mary  Carter,  Jno.  Sarmar,  Wm. 
Whiter,  Mary  Jones,  Jno.  Shalpe. 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


427 


MR.  WILLIAM  WEST,  2500  acs.  on 
the  E.  side  of  Pequimmin  River,  about 
6  or  7  miles  up  the  same,  beg.  on  a 
point  of  land  neere  the  great  Marsh 
nigh  an  Indian  feild,  running  N.E.  &c. 
to  the  mouth  of  a  small  creeke  called 
Curraticke  &  from  thence  up  the  said 
river  of  Pequemim.  25  Sept.  1663,  p. 
96  (589).  Trans,  of  50  pers:  Jno. 
Mison,  Tho.  Cox,  Wm.  Camp,  Wm. 
Jones,  Mary  Yong,  Tho.  Carew,  Ed. 
Frith,  Wm.  Stephens,  Jno.  Shans, 
Marke  Williams,,  Jno.  Sarson,  Tho. 
Cooly,  Mary  Karp,  Jno.  Sanders,  Wm. 
Fewell,  Marke  Lun,  Wm.  Capp,  Tho. 
Stone,  "&  32  more." 

SAMUELL  DAVIS,  950  acs.  on  the 
N.  side  of  Carolina  River,  beg.  at  the 
mouth  of  a  swamp,  running  N.  by  W. 
&c.  25  Sept.  1663,  p.  97  (589).  Trans, 
of  19  pers:  Robt.  Suite  (?),  Jno. 
Blete,  Oliv.  Williams,  Tho.  Soare, 
Eliz.  Jones,  Eliz.  Smith,  Eliz.  Willmson 
(Williamson),  Eliz.  Kitchin,  Wm. 
Turner,  Jane  Doughting,  Geo.  Oakely, 
Hen.  Henre,  Luke  Lunn,  Morg.  Wms., 
Edw.  Coll,  Robt.  Hughes,  Tho.  Holder, 
Ma.  Carr. 

MR.  THOMAS  RELFE,  750  acs.  on 
S.W.  side  of  Paspetanke  Riv.,  beg.  at 
the  mouth  of  a  swamp  &  running  by 
land  of  Thomas  Keele  &c.  by  Mr. 
Fortsons  marked  trees  &c.  25  Sept. 
1663,  p.  97  (590).  Trans,  of  15  pers: 
Jno.  Rouse,  twice,  Tho.  Rouse,  Steph. 
Harris,  Jno.  Shorebury,  Kath.  Dolbin, 
Percy  Whitty,  Ann  Maine,  Ann  Joanes, 
Mary  Bayly,  Tho.  Relfe,  Wm.  Blech, 
Mary  Belson,  Jos.  Rogers,  &  his  wife. 

MR.  JOHN  HARVEY,  600  acs.  in  a 
small  creeke  called  Carrawtucks,  falling 
into  the  river  of  Kecoughtanke,  which 
river  falls  into  Carolina  River.  25  Sept. 
1663,  p.  97  (590).  Trans,  of  12  pers: 
James  Harvy,  Hump.  Evans,  Ann 
Wombwell,  Jos.  Poole,  Seph.  Farrell, 
Tho.  Elmes,  Tho.  Poole,  Wm.  Basse, 
John  Davis,  Rich.  Blunt,  Sam.  Jnkins 
(or  Inkins),  Art.  Brown,  Cha. 
Sawe ?. 

ROGER  WILLIAMS,  350  acs.  on  N. 
side  of  Carolina  River,   25   Sept.   1663, 


p.  97  (590).  Trans,  of  7  pers:  Man. 
Rogers,  Thos.  Jones,  Tho.  Jeffries,  John 
Rosse,  Cha.  Seward,  Jno.  Daniell,  Jone 
Roper. 

WILLIAM  JENNINGS  (Jenings), 
550  acs.  in  New  begin  Cr.,  beg.  at  the 
mouth  of  a  great  swamp,  which  parts 
this  &  land  of  Robert  Lawry,  running 
up  the  Cr.  &c.  to  the  mouth  of  a  swamp 
which  parts  this  &  land  of  Phillip 
Evans  &c.  25  Sept.  1663,  p.  98  (591). 
Trans,  of  11  pers:  Samll.  Henricke, 
Steph.  Peirson,  Samll.  Moses,  Tho. 
Peram,  Tho.  Richmond,  Mich.  Parram, 
Peter  Janson,  Sarah  Marshall,  Eliz. 
Jenuer,  Peter  Dennis. 

MR.  JOHN  HARVEY,  250  acs.  on 
the  River  of  Carolina,  beg.  by  Roger 
Williams  land,  running  down  same  to 
the  miles  end  of  sd.  Williams  &c.  25 
Sept.  1663,  p.  98  (591).  Trans,  of  5 
pers:  Vergis  Smith,  Steph.  Johnsey, 
Geo.  Moore,  Jane  Parnell,  Tho.  Poole. 

ROBERT  LAWRY,  300  acs.  in  a  bay 
at  the  mouth  of  New  begin  Creek,  beg. 
at  the  mouth  of  a  small  swamp  which 
parts  this  &  land  of  Henry  Palin,  run- 
ning S.W.  &c.  up  the  said  Cr.  to  a 
marked  gum  in  the  midst  of  the  mouth 
of  a  great  swamp  which  parts  this  & 
land  of  Mr.  Jennings  &c.  25  Sept.  1663, 
p.  98  (591).  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Robt. 
Lawry,  Jno.  Maior,  Rich.  Woodart, 
Jude  Wilson,  Geo.  Preston,  Jno.  Turfe. 

THOMAS  WOODWARD,  Senior,  & 
THO.  WOODWARD,  Junr.,  his  sonn, 
2500  acs.  on  the  N.  side  of  Paspetanke 
River,  beg.  at  the  head  of  the  eastermost 
br.  of  Aranews  Cr.  &c.  towards  the 
head  of  the  North  River.  25  Sept. 
1663,  p.  98  (592).  Trans,  of  50  pers: 
Eliz.  Elaerton,  Xpher.  Davis,  Richard 
Marr,  Edw.  Rycroft,  Hen.  Greene,  Tho. 
Patman,  Jno.  Brathwite,  Tho.  Robinson, 

Morris, Hiliard,  Tho.  Oliver, 

Nich.  Woford,  Ja.  Charlton,  An.  Bring, 
Wm.  Lovet,  Mary  Spencer.  Jno.  Hol- 
lum.  Rich.  Wyatt,  Mohan  Hogan,  Kat. 
Kadlin,  Jno.  Rich,  Robt.  Chambers, 
Tho.  Hamton,  Ma.  Lenox,  Row.  Den- 
son,  Rob.  Shepard,  Sil.  Ward,  Jno. 
Barker,  Hum.  Chapman,  Tho.  Beffin.  Ja. 


428 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Murdah,  Geo.  Petit,  Tho.  Gilnett,  Leo. 
Hathorne,  Wm.  Thomas,  Rob.  Walters, 
Jno.  Simpson,  Jno.  Partridge,  Tho.  Car- 
ver, Jeff.  Mumford,  Mary  Cross,  Jno. 
Olton,  Rich.  Hamond,  Rich.  James, 
Mary  Simons,  Alex.  Frizell,  Wm. 
Hazlewood,  Wm.  Famill,  Tho.  Clement, 
Arspell  Forstive,  Dan.  Fenny. 

ANTHONY  STEPHENS,  Gent.,  400 
acs.  on  the  N.  side  of  Rappa.  River, 
opposite  New  Nimcoke,  in  the  freshes 
thereof,  &c.  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  99  (592). 
Granted  to  Major  Tho.  Goodrich,  16 
Mar.  1657,  &  assigned  to  sd.  Stephens. 

THOMAS  WARBURTON,  200  acs. 
James  Citty  Co.,  1  Feb.  1664,  p.  99 
(593).  On  N.  side  of  Poetan  Swamp, 
beg.  nere  the  Cart  way  from  the  Middle 
Plantation  to  James  Citty  in  my  Lady 
Lunsfords  lyne,  running  along  same  into 
the  Boyling  Spring  Swamp,  &c.  W.  by 
S.  to  George  Gilburts  corner  tree,  thence 
N.W.  to  Richard  Egglestons,  thence 
N.W.  by  N.  to  the  Cart  way  &c.  Trans, 
of  4  pers.* 

PHILLIP  EVANS,  300  acs.  in  New 
begin  Creeke,  beg.  at  the  mouth  of  a 
swamp  which  parts  this  &  land  of  Mr. 
Jenings  &c.  25  Sept.  1663,  p.  99  (593). 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Richard  Whitty, 
Henry  Catchmaid,  Dina  Fames,  Tony, 
Negro,  Jno.  Scott,  Mary  English. 

MRS.  MARY  FORTSON,  2000  acs. 
on  W.  side  of  Paspetanke  River,  beg.  at 
the  mouth  of  a  swamp  &o,  N.E.  by  land 
of  Thomas  Keele  &c.  25  Sept.  1663,  p. 
100  (594).  Trans,  of  20  pers:  Wm. 
Welldon,  Hen.  Benns,  Wm.  Carne,  Jno. 
Robinson,  Ed.  Hawley,  Geo.  Warter, 
Tho.  Roberts,  Amosse  Damsy,  Jno. 
Wright,  Tho.  Steward,  Tho.  Mountfort, 
Ben.  Perey,  Susan  Johnson,  Roger 
Stroake,  Mary  Adams,  Robt.  Melclaugh, 
Stephen  Brewer,  Edward  Barrett,  Mary 
Youn^,  John  Peeters,  Tho.  Starpe,  Wm. 
Frizell.  Tho.  Marmaid,  Thomas  Hawley, 
Edward  Moulson,  Sarah  Samwayes,  Wm. 
Howard,  Fra.  Chalke,  Tho.  Baxton, 
twice,  &  his  two  wives,  Tho.  Harper, 
Jane  Allen,  No  Brer  (?),  James  Percy, 
Eliz.  Steel,  Abiather  Flarrell,  Mary 
Thurloe,  &  Eliz.  Newcomb. 


THOMAS  WOODWARD,  Senr.  & 
THOMAS  WOODWARD,  Junr.,  2000 
acs.  on  W.  side  pf  Chawanoke  Riv.,  beg. 
50  poles  below  the  small  Creeke  which 
is  at  the  lower  part  of  the  old  Indian 
Towne,  running  W.S.W.  &c.  25  Sept. 
1663,  p.  100  (594).  Trans,  of  40  pers: 
Humph.  Pawle,  Tho.  Pryer,  Ann  Sutten, 
Robt.  Black,  Arth.  Holder,  Jacob 
Browne,  Symon  Prichard,  Ezekell  Wil- 
liams, Wm.  Miller,  Wm.  Holden,  Robt. 
Corner  (or  Corver),  John  Stevenson, 
Anth.  Wyn,  John  Hamlin,  Xpher. 
Woodward,  twice,  Tho.  Marshall,  John 
Bird,  Robt.  Hancoke,  Peter  Dennis, 
twice,  Eliz.  Jemer  (?),  Sarah  Marshall, 
Peter  Janson,  Ester  Ruke,  Mich.  Talin, 
Tho.  Richmond,  Tho.  Parin,  Samll. 
Moses,  Steph.  Persian,  &  Samll.  Henry. 

HENRY  WHITE,  Senr.,  250  acs.,  on 
N.  side  of  Carolina  River,  bounded  on 
W.  with  John  Harvies  line,  E.  with 
Thomas  Stamp  &  James  Noakes,  on  N. 
with  the  woods  &  S.  with  the  river. 
25  Sept.  1663,  p.  100  (595).  Trans,  of 
5  pers:  Ann  Donkaster,  Geo.  Jenkin, 
Edward  Barrett,  Danll.  Walker,  Ann 
Jeakin   (or  Jenkin). 

HENRY  WHITE,  Junr.,  750  acs.  in 
a  small  creek  called  Corawtucks  that 
falls  into  Kecoughtanke  River,  beg.  to- 
ward the  head  of  the  same,  running 
W.  N.  W.  &c.  25  Sept.  1663,  p.  101 
(595).  Trans.  of  14  pers:  Perry 
Greene,  Eliz.  Howson,  John  Brush  (or 
Bruch),  Richard  Roods  (or  Reeds), 
Dan  Walker,  Edward  Morgan,  Rich. 
Staples,  Ann  Daser,  Hester  Morgan, 
Eliz.  Emnes,  (?),  Edw.  Parrett,  Sarah 
Wadman,  Danll.  Walker,  John  Pine, 
James  Rudder. 

MR.  RICHARD  BULLER,  1200  lie- 
ing  in  New  begin  Creeke,  beg.  at  the 
mouth  of  Doctors  Cr.,  running  up  the 
first  mentioned  Cr.  &c,  together  with  a 
small  Island  against  the  mouth  of  Doc- 
tors Cr.  25  Sept.  1663,  p.  101  (595). 
Trans,  of  24  pers:  Math.  Smith,  Artick 
Slatter,  Joane  Risding,  Richard  Ward, 
John  Carey,  Hester  Sarkett,  Robt. 
Mason,  James  Cranedge,  Thomas  Home 
(or  Heme),  Robt.  Marson,  Henry  War- 
ner,   Thomas    Turvor,    John    Mathews, 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


429 


John  Pargetor,  Sence  Johnson,  And. 
Armestrong,  Dorothy  Bankes,  Tho. 
Rich,  Edward  Mosby,  Tho.  Read,  Mary 
Memorish,  Sarah  Read,  John  Tapt,  Wm. 
Sacum. 

THOMAS  PAINE,  600  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  101  (596).  Up- 
on S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  &  N.W.  side 
of  the  present  plantation  of  James  Bag- 
nail,  about  43  miles  up  the  river,  beg. 
upon  the  N.W.  side  of  the  Cr.  dividing 
this  &  land  of  John  Bagnall  &c.  Re- 
newal of  patent  dated  27  Jan.  1652. 

ROBERT  KING,  250  acs.N'umber- 
land  Co.,  4  Feb.  1662,  p.  102  (596). 
Bounded  Ely.  &  Sly.  by  a  br.  of  Wicco- 
comoco  Riv.,  which  devides  this  from 
the  land  of  James  Pope,  running  Nly. 
&c.  to  tree  which  cutteth  Machoticke 
horse  path  at  acute  angles,  ending  at 
the  head  of  a  valley  comeing  up  from 
branches  of  Moratico  Cr.  &c.  Trans,  of 
5  pers:  Tho.  Pryse,  Fra.  Osborne,  John 
Young,  John  Debford,  Timo.  Rosse. 

MR.  EDWARD  SANDERS,  2900 
acs.  in  the  forrest  between  the  Counties 
of  Lancaster  &  N'umberland,  5  Mar. 
1662,  p.  102  (597).  Beg.  on  a  br.  of 
Damarons  Cr.,  at  a  cor.  tree  of  300  acs. 
pattented  by  John  Hopper  &  sold  to  sd. 
Sanders,  thence  W.  to  the  head  of  Cora- 
toman  Riv.  &c,  Ewd.  from  Ma  Choticke 
foot  path  &c.  Trans,  of  58  pers:  Sam. 
Lunly,  Fran.  Weekes,  Fran.  Finch,  John 
Freel,  Wm.  Carbill,  Tho.  Brookes,  Abi- 
gail Sayer,  Ann  Elery,  Margtt.  Bassay, 
Francis  Rosse,  Mary  Evans,  Sumer.  (?) 
Addams,  Richard  Harverd,  Wm.  Willis, 
Edward  Peterson,  Elizabeth  Foy,  Mary 
Hunt,  Jno.  Bennett,  David  Jones,  Mary 
Crow,  Peter  Brookes,  Rich.  Foxon, 
Peter  Storie,  John  Goodwin,  Abraham 
Sanders,  John  Sanders,  Edwd.  Showdall, 
Tho.  Arnall,  Brown  Hundrex  (?), 
Simon  Groves,  Geo.  Edmunds,  Wm. 
Thomson,  Henry  Hunt,  Edward  Web, 
Edward  Parslv,  Hugh  Taylor,  Wm. 
Palmer,  John  Edger,  Wm.  Serch  (?), 
Mathew  a  boy. 

MARGARETT  &  MARY  WILLIAM- 
SON, 882  acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  11  Mar. 
1662,  p.  102.  (597).    Between  some  of 


the  head  branches  of  Pepetick  Cr.  & 
head  branches  of  Mr.  Popes  Cr.,  beg. 
nigh  Rappa.  path  &c.  to  the  head  of 
land  of  Silvester  Thatcher  &  Thomas 
Whitloke,  thence  N.W.  &c.  upon  land 
of  Tho.  Wright  &c.  Granted  to  Wil- 
liam Underwood,  Gent.,  10  Sept.  1658 
&  given  to  the  abovenamed  by  the  last 
will  of  said  Underwood. 

WILLIAM  UNDERWOOD,  sonn  & 
heire  of  Coll.  Wm.  Underwood,  2561^4 
acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  11  Mar.  1662,  p.  103 
(598).  Beg.  on  S.  side  of  a  small  Cr. 
deviding  this  from  land  of  Samuell 
Nicholls  &c.  to  cor.  tree  of  Roger  Rich- 
ardson &c.  to  cor.  tree  of  Capt.  Wash- 
ington &c.  to  land  of  Mr.  Nathan.  Pope. 
2784  granted  Coll.  Underwood  10  Sept. 
1658,  whereof  238  sold  to  Samuell 
Nicholls  &  15^4  acs.  now  adjoined 
Due  said  William  as  sonn  &  heire  of 
the  abovesaid. 

THOMAS  LUDWELL,  Esqr.,  961 
acs.,  1  furlong  &  26  perches,  being  an 
irregular  tract  known  by  the  name  of 
Timber  Slash,  Henrico  Co.,  16  June 
1663,  p.  103  (599).  Beg.  at  cor.  tree 
between  Mr.  Cocke  &  Mr.  Crewes,  hard 
by  a  Cart  path  &c,  E.  by  the  4  Mi.  Cr. 
&c.  W.  up  on  land  of  Thomas  Taylor, 
E.  by  land  of  Bryan  Smith  &c.  Trans, 
of  20  pers:  Phill.  Ludwell,  Wm.  Broad- 
rib,  Wm.  Drakeford,  Ann  Drakford 
Wm.  Hughlett,  Robt.  Jarrett,  Rich. 
Crome,  Rich.  Talbot,  2  Negroes;  Tho. 
Barton,  James  Duckett,  Roger  Heywood, 
Robt.  Ward,  John  Venne,  Dan.  Cor- 
macke,  Hugh  Berry,  Ralph  Parkson, 
Seth  Dobson. 

EDWARD  REVELL,  &  JONAH 
JACKSON,  1000  acs.  Accomacke  Co., 
23  Feb.  1663,  p.  104  (600).  Beg.  on 
S.  side  of  Watcheprege,  bounded  on  the 
E.  by  the  Seaboard,  N.  by  little  Matom- 
kin  Cr.  &  W.  into  the  woods.  Trans,  of 
20  pers:  Jno.  Elver,  Henry  Loyd,  Tho. 
Smith,  Nich.  Walbroke,  Thomas  Griffin, 
Mary  Thomas,  Christian  Morris,  Jos. 
Johnson,  Mary  Harwood,  Edwin  Wal- 
singham,  Mary  Sewell,  Ann  Heath,  Ja. 
Wellfleet,  Tho.  Lazingby,  Edw.  Griffith, 
Mary  Williams,  Wm.  Morgan,  Jeane 
Shelley,  Margt.  Powell,  Joane  Malford. 


430 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


FENLAW  MACKWILLIAM,  400 
acs.  Accomacke  Co.,  23  Feby.  1663,  p. 
104  (600).  At  Hunting  Cr.,  being  a 
necke  of  land  neere  &  the  next  necke 
unto  John  Lewis  called  Forke  Necke  in 
sd.  Creek.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  James 
Mullins,  Lewis  Herbert,  Jno.  Hartfort, 
Fra.  Harwood,  Jno.  Smith,  Tho.  Mudge, 
James  West,  Jenkin  Powell. 

JAMES  ATKINSON,  500  acs.  Acco- 
macke Co.,  23  Feb.  1663,  p.  104  (600). 
At  Hunting  Cr.,  next  above  land  of 
Wm.  Browne,  running  Sly.  toward 
Deepe  Cr.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Edw. 
Hepworth,  Jane  Mosely,  Tho.  Jenings, 
Ed.  Rawlings,  Wm.  Eping,  Anth.  Wyatt, 
Jeffry  Compton,  Ann  Morris,  Mary 
Joanes,  Ed.  Conaway. 

JOHN  SHARPE,  840  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  28  Nov.  1664,  p.  104  (601).  S. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  about  2  mi.  from 
the  plantation  of  Mr.  James  Bagnall. 
300  acs.  granted  to  Mr.  Rawleigh 
Travers,  9  Mar.  1653  &  by  him  assigned 
unto  sd.  Sharpe;  540  acs.  for  trans,  of 
11  pers:  Jno.  Fookes,  Anth.  Webb. 
Tho.  Mullen,  Peter  Foster,  James  Diap, 
Phil.  Young,  Mary  Wilkinson,  Jane 
Williams,  Tho.  Miles,  Dorothy  Ray, 
Martha  Thornton. 

SILVESTER  THATCHER,  1000  acs. 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  18  Mar.  1660 
p.  105  (601).  Beg.  at  a  little  Cr. 
which  devides  sd.  Thatcher  &  Wm. 
Yarratt,  running  N.  along  the  river  &c. 
to  land  of  Thomas  Whitlock  &c.  Re- 
newal of  pattent  dated  6  Oct.  1656. 

JOHN  MILLS,  562  acs.  Rappa.  Co, 
18  Nov.  1663,  p.  105  (602).  In  Sittng- 
borne  Parish,  on  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
nere  the  head  of  Tignors  Cr,  beg.  on  a 
point  of  land  on  the  lower  side  of  the 
Mills  floud  gates  &c.  running  nere  a 
path  that  goeth  from  the  said  Mills 
house  to  the  plantation  of  Jno.  Gellett 
&c.  250  acs.  granted  to  Andrew  Gilson 
in  a  patent  of  450  acs,  dated  22  Nov. 
1653  &  sold  to  John  Mills  &  312  acs. 
for  trans,  of  7  pers.* 

GEORGE  GILBERT  &  RICHARD 
SCRUDY,    1,000   acs.   James   City   Co, 


3  June  1663,  p.  106  (602).  On  N. 
side  of  the  Sw.  of  Chikahominy  Riv, 
adj.  land  of  sd.  Scrudy  &  Mr.  Charles 
Woodington,  running  N.N.E.  to  land 
of  Capt.  Richard  Barnehouse,  E.S.E. 
towards  Westover,  thence  to  land  of 
Mr.  Francis  Barnhouse  &c.  Trans,  of 
20  pers:  Tho.  Batt,  Tho.  Crenson,  Edw. 
Markham,  Mary  Wood,  Hen.  Dennis, 
Hen.  Wood,  Rich.  Steed,  Jno.  Stroud, 
Wm.  Crensher,  Jno.  Owin,  Geo.  Stanly, 
Wm.  Carloe,  Geo.  Brigg,  Kath.  Jones, 
Wm.  More,  Mary  Hart,  Edw.  Malin, 
Jno.  Shaw,  Wm.  Tarp,  Jno.  Wood. 

MR.  RICHARD  WEBLEY,  ROBT. 
DAVIS  &  THOMAS  FRESHWATER, 
7221  acs.  in  Rappa.  &  N'umberland  Co, 
24  Aug.  1664,  p.  106  (603).  Beg.  up- 
on Eastermost  br.  of  Totascay  (Cr.) 
bounding  upon  land  of  Dennis  Swell- 
fent  &  Henry  Corbin,  Esqr,  Mr.  Tingey 
&  Mr.  Jno.  Hull.  Trans,  of  145  pers: 
Alex  Puly,  Francis  Courtman,  James 
Bayly,  Cornelius  Clifton,  Sam.  Dela- 
ware, Jonathan  Culverton,  Elnathan 
Bray,  Thomas  Jennings,  Fritzwith  Pars- 
ly,  Ann  Parsly,  Robt.  Culpepper,  Rich- 
ard Welch,  Elizabeth  Dew,  Samuell 
Huckett,  Joseph  Frith,  Robt.  Catfeild, 
Sivillius  Orange,  Samll.  Sparke,  Jno. 
Dubb,  James  Temple,  Fran.  Potts, 
Wm.  Sabin  (or  Salin),  Peter  Cramp, 
Joseph  Cranfeild,  Xtopr.  Holmes,  Wm. 
Hunter,  Jno.  Swan,  Rich.  Foster,  El- 
nathan Tart,  Jo.  Cogginton,  Peter 
Palmer,  Ma.  Hopewell,  Wm.  Hartwell, 
Hen.  Wms.  (Williams),  James  Willis, 
Saml.  Furton,  Barnab.  Wartrop,  Elias 
Gurtfurd,  Phillip  Shotower,  Tho. 
Parker,  Rich.  Dodford,  Wm.  Burton, 
Mary  Painter,  Jane  Gouge,  Sarah  Smith, 
Eliz.  Whitfeild,  Susan  Parrott,  Rebecca 
Wotton,  Dorothy  Tortrutt,  Mary  Fristo, 
Prudence  Bishop,  Sarah  Bishop,  Alice 
Baker,  Fran.  Webb,  Katharine  Simpson, 
Henry  Frith,  Jno.  Finch,  Tho.  West, 
Rich.  Bateman,  Peter  Cottle,  Jno.  Cottle, 
Ralph  Cottle,  Marmaduke  Waterford, 
Jno.  Prince,  Wm.  Carpenter,  Fran. 
Marsh,  Martyn  Jones,  Jenken  Powell, 
Harman  Ruddock,  Wm.  Elder,  Jno. 
Youngman  Dennis  Culpepper.  Leo. 
Clemson,  Stephen  Wickes,  Fardinando 
Dew,  Robt.  Hopkins,  James  Simproot, 
Tho.    Hodkins,    Hen.    Mansfeild,    Jno. 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


431 


Clifton,  Peter  Chinly,  Edw.  Smith,  An. 
Borne,  Thomas  Brodhurst,  Fran.  Price, 
Rowland  Walton,  David  Gressum,  Jes- 
per  Wright,  Rich.  Hampshire,  Judeth 
Hampshire,  Morrice  Vaughan,  Peter 
Bagshaw  (or  Bashaw),  Rich.  Lowdy, 
Jno.  Goodtry,  Robt.  Stephens,  Anth. 
Hudson,  Saml.  Meader,  Peter  Sca- 
broocke,  James  Tarpley,  Martin  Baxter, 
Wm.  Thatcher,  Sylvester  Eales  (or 
Eccles),  Xtor.  Colly,  Luke  Stoakes, 
Wm.  Nicholls,  Arthur  Dawsey,  Geo. 
Lane,  Rich.  Saffin,  Jno.  Turner,  Miles 
Hobbs,  Fran.  Taslett,  James  Saunders, 
Peter  Upton,  Martin  Hunt,  Rich. 
Grandinson,  Fran.  Posnett,  Mary  Paine, 
Jane  Goose,  Charles  Bryant,  Sam. 
Pomphrett,  Hannah  Bacon,  Susannah 
Martin,  Constance  Pullin,  Frizyth  Col- 
lins, Thomas  Hope,  John  Downes, 
James  Parker,  Mary  Parker,  Francis 
Parker,  Em.  Puddyford,  Jno.  Prator 
(?),  Robt.  Tompson,  Luke  Manton, 
Saml.  Jackman,  Mary  Sherlark,  Jno. 
Griffin,  Rich.  Bullett,  Jona.  Colewright, 
Francis  Palmer,  Tymothy  Forecaster, 
Jno.  Bearin,  Tho.  Casse,  Mary  Cutfull, 
John  Ellott,  Silvester  Cartbolde,  Tymo- 
thy Overcott,  Eliz.  Salum,  Jane  Cullum, 
John  Helson,  Moses  Buffolke,  Rich. 
Howson,  John  Armestrong,  Jo.  Peterson, 
Tho.  Gardworth,  Symon  Culberton  (or 
Cubberton). 

JOHN  JENNINGS,  300  acs.,  (being 
part  of  600  acs.  granted  to  Mr.  Thomas 
Lucas),  11  Mar.  1662,  p.  107  (603). 
N.E.  from  Pepetick  Cr.  &c.  to  land  of 
Thomas  Ervin,  his  being  also  a  part  of 
said  600  acs.  Granted  to  Henry  Berry, 
by  order  of  Court,  3  June  1657  &  by 
him  sold  to  sd.  Jennings. 

ROBERT  DAVIS,  448  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  22  Sept.  1664,  p.  107  (604).  On 
S.  side  of  Puscaticon  Cr.,  adj.  Easter- 
most  tree  of  Francis  Browne,  marked 
trees  deviding  this  &  land  of  Thomas 
Harper,  thence  along  land  of  Samuell 
Perry  &c.  Granted  to  Jno.  Burrett  (or 
Barrett),  &  James  Fullerton,  by  them 
deserted  &  now  granted  unto  said  Davis. 

JOHN  SMITH,  of  Rappa.  Co.,  473 
acs.  in  Sittingborne  Parish,  in  said  Co., 
19  Nov.   1663,   p.   107    (604).    On  S. 


side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  at  a  branch 
deviding  this  &  land  of  James  Merriot, 
running  S.  by  E.  &c.  by  land  of  Mr. 
Andrew  Gilson,  thence  N.  &c.  Trans, 
of  10  pers:  Jno.  Irish,  Nich.  Corman, 
Wm.  Mackinny,  Watkin  James,  Arthur 
Cox,  Jane  Crillig,  Jno.  Martin,  Jno. 
Carter  Michaell  Flanders,  Alice  Fletcher. 

JOHN  BARRROW,  943  acs.  &  134 
perches,  13  Nov.  1662,  p.  108  (605). 
643  acs.  &  134  per.  beg.  on  the  W. 
side  of  a  gutt  &  running  on  the  N.W. 
side  of  Colemans  thickett  &c;  300  acs. 
being  marsh  land  lying  before  &  adj. 
said  tract.  The  first  mentioned  tract 
granted  to  Walter  Dickenson,  6  Sept. 
1654  &  sold  to  Alexander  Fleming,  who 
assigned  to  sd.  Barrow;  600  acs.  due 
for  trans,  of  6  pers:  Edwd.  Gooch, 
Mary  Powell,  Ann  Wms.,  Tho.  Carew, 
Jno.  Martin,  Edwd.  Fouch. 

JOHN  WEIR,  Gent.,  of  Rappa.  Co., 
Sittingborne  Parish,  1302  acs.  &  32  per., 
in  sd.  Co.,  26  June  1663,  p.  108  (606). 
In  the  forrest  (between)  Rappa.  & 
Potomack,  beg.  at  cor.  tree  of  land  hee 
now  lives  upon  &  land  of  James 
Mathews,  running  E.  by  N.  &c.  to  land 
of  Mr.  Robt.  Tomlin,  S.  by  W.  &c.  to 
land  of  Mr.  George  Taylour  &c.  Trans, 
of  26  pers.* 

THOMAS  RASON,  518  acs.  &  4 
per.,  Rappa.  Co.,  on  S.  side  of  sd.  Riv., 
18  Nov.  1663,  p.  109  (606).  On  the 
head  of  Tignors  Cr.,  beg.  at  John  Mills 
nere  floud  gates  &c.  200  acs.  granted  to 
Andrew  Gilson,  being  part  of  a  pattent 
dated  22  Nov.  1653;  318  acs.  for  trans, 
of  7  pers:  Tno.  Smith,  Tho.  Smith, 
Richd.  Dorefeild,  Elia.  Smith,  Eliz. 
Smith,  Henry  Horton,  Tho.  Stone. 

WILLIAM  MOSELEY  (Mosely— 
Moselye),  1157  acs.  on  S.  side  of  Rap- 
pa. Riv.  in  Sittingborne  Parish,  18  Nov. 
1663,  p.  109  (607).  Beg.  at  a  poynt 
between  two  creeks  by  the  W.  Cr.  &c, 
together  with  150  acs.  of  marsh  on 
both  sides  the  Cr.  that  runneth  to  sd. 
Moselyes  house  from  the  miles  end  of 
land  granted  to  Epaphroditus  Lawson 
Sec.  Trans,  of  27  pers:  Jno.  Richards, 
James  Cooper,  Wm.  Lee,  Jno.  Andrews, 


432 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Joseph  Doemy,  Wm.  Cross,  James  Read, 
Geo.  Humphries,  Richard  Granger,  Wm. 
Hickes,  Tho.  Powell,  Dorothy  Wms., 
Ralph  Hunt,  Alex.  Dale,  Mary  Searle, 
Humphry  Gibbons,  James  Sanders, 
Roger  Dale,  Thomas  King,  Wm.  Gadd, 
Tho.  Strang,  Humphry  Gressam,  James 
Arnold. 

MR.  JOHN  BEAUCHAMP,  65  acs. 
Henrico  Co.,  9  Mar.  1664,  p.  110 
(607).  N.  side  of  James  Riv.,  bet.  land 
of  Thomas  Markham  &  land  formerly 
belonging  to  Edward  Ballhash,  E.  on 
land  of  Mr.  Cocke  &  S.  on  his  own 
land.  The  following  names  appear  un- 
der this  record:  Anthony  Bridgman, 
Wm.  Tomkins. 

JOHN  PAINE,  406  acs.  N'umberland 
Co.,  1  June  1664,  p.  110  (608).  Beg. 
on  the  head  of  a  small  Cr.  of  Machotick 
Riv.,  bounding  on  E.  with  land  of  Coll. 
Lee,  Esqr.,  S.S.W.  &c.  to  land  of  Wal- 
ter English.  300  acs.  purchased  of 
James  Hawley  &  100  acs.  for  trans,  of 
2  pers:    Wm.  Young,  Jno.  Forby. 

HENRY  CORBIN  (Corbyn),  Esqr., 
3000  acs.  in  Potomack  freshes,  between 
the  two  main  branches,  towards  Home 
Island,  27  Nov.  1663,  p.  110  (608). 
Granted  said  Corbin  &  Gerrard  Fowke, 
15  Mar.  1658;  Fowke  relinquished  his 
tytle  &  now  due  by  order  &c.  &  for 
trans,  of  60  pers.* 

EDWARD  BOSEWELL,  (Boswell), 
200  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  10  Dec.  1663,  p. 
Ill  (609).  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  & 
S.  side  of  Burnham  Cr.  or  Sunderland 
Cr.,  lying  at  the  head  of  his  own  land, 
W.  by  N.  upon  land  of  Evan  Davis  & 
Dennis  Conier,  S.  &  E.  Sly.  upon  his 
own  land.  Granted  to  John  Phipps,  22 
Sept.  1652  (or)  1662,  &  assigned  to 
the  abovenamed.  Note:  This  with  the 
pattent  underneath  joyned  in  one,  29 
July  1666. 

SAME.  200  acs.,  same  location  & 
pages;  2  Dec.  1663.  Granted  to  Bertram 
Obert,  2  Oct.  1649  &  assigned  to  sd. 
Boswell. 

HENRY  CORBIN  (Corbyn),  Esqr., 
900  acs.,  26  Mar.  1664,  p.  Ill   (610). 


Beg.  on  Ewd.  side  of  Machoatick  Cr., 
along  Potomack  Riv.  to  W.  side  of 
Jarnews  Cr.  &c.  Granted  to  Nicholas 
Jarnew,  18  Nov.  1650,  by  him  assigned 

6  now  due  for  trans,  of  18  pers:  Wm. 
Gantlet,  Jno.  Young,  Mary  Farmer, 
Tho.  Jones,  Wm.  Hardish,  Fra.  Parker, 
Tho.  Tanco  (?),  Jacob  Cotteen,  Em. 
Frisby,  Nath.  Frisby,  Rich.  Baldin,  Rich. 
Partner,  Jacob  Leech,  Geo.  White, 
Richard  Martin,  Tho.  Wilkinson,  Mary 
Fuell,  Simon  Sanders. 

GEORG  MARISH,  420  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  19  Aug. 
1664,  p.  112  (610).  Backing  land  of 
Coll.  Richard  Lee  &  Anthony  Jackman 
&c.  Trans,  of  9  pers:  Rachaell  Collins, 
Jno.  Connagen,  Ed.  Overy,  Do.  Plum- 
mer,  Hen.  Pulman,  Wm.  Potter,  Arthur 
Symons,    Jno.   Vaughan,    George   Price. 

WILLIAM  CARDWELL  (Cordwell), 
330  acs.  Stafford  Co.,  23  Mar.  1664,  p. 
112.  (611).  N.E.  with  land  of  Col. 
Gerrard  Fowke  &  Mr.  Richard  Heaberd, 
S.E.  with  the  Doegs  Cr.  &c.    Trans,  of 

7  pers:  Wm.  Cordwell,  Senr.,  Margarett 
Cordwell,  Wm.  Cardwell,  Junr.,  Grace 
Cardwell,  Henry  Saynes,  Jno.  Ozzett, 
Jno.  Twiggs. 

GEORGE  WEADING  (Wading), 
600  acs.  W'moreland  Co.,  23  Mar.  1664, 
p.  113,  (611).  Running  S.  W.  to  land  of 
Wm.  Courts,  E.  by  S.  &c.  to  Francis 
Grays  line  &c.  to  E.  side  of  upper 
Machoatick  Riv.  &c.  Trans,  of  12  pers: 
John  Watts,  John  Carpenter,  John 
Hayle,  Joane  Charles,  Tho.  Floyd,  Joane 
Powell,  Sibill  Press,  Mary  Smith,  John 
Green,  John  Daby,  Tho.  Biggs,  Martin 
Fisher. 

THOMAS  BUTLER  (Buttler),  391 
acs.  W'moreland  Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Ap- 
pomattock  Cr.,  23  Mar.  1664,  p.  113, 
(612).  N.E.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Thomas 
&  James  Boldridge,  S.E.  upon  land  of 
Daniell  Kisson,  &  N.W.  to  land  "some- 
tyme"  in  possession  of  Mr.  Johnson  & 
the  land  of  Mr.  Alex.  Benum.  175  acs. 
by  a  former  patent  &  216  acs.  for  trans, 
of  5  pers:  Wm.  Cymber,  Jno.  Vincent, 
Tymothy  Benett,  Mary  Blackman, 
Daniell  Atway. 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


433 


ROBERT  BAYLY,  250  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,   on  N.  side   of  sd.  Riv.,    18  Mar. 

1663,  p.  113,  (612).  Beg.  upon  Rich- 
ards Cr.  which  devides  this  &  land  of 
Luke  Bullington  &c.  to  John  Edgcoms 
line  &c.  to  Mr.  Booths  land  &c.  Trans, 
of  5  pers:  Sarah  Gunny,  Jno.  Smith, 
Rich.  Reekes,  Henry  Michaell,  Jno. 
Willis. 

COLL.  ROBERT  PITT  &  MR. 
WILLIAM  BURGH,  1200  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  18  Feb.  1664,  p.  114, 
(613).  On  one  of  the  br.  of  the  Black 
Water,  beg.  at  the  mouth  of  a  small 
valley  &c.  Trans,  of  24  pers:  Henry 
Cray,  &  his  wife,  Jno.  &  Richard,  his 
children,  George  Edwards,  Jno.  Carrell, 
Eliz.  his  wife,  Richard  Carrell,  Jno. 
Carrell,  Mary  Carrell,  Mary  Solitree, 
Richard  Wood,  Wm.  Bullock,  Ema. 
Merchant,  Abrose  Boseman,  John  Watts, 
Roger  Tarlton,  Tho.  Aladry,  Jeremy 
Edmonds,  Henry  Course,  Wm.  Poope, 
twice,  &  his  wife,  Edw.  Tanner. 

SAME.  1800  acs.  Same  location  & 
pages;  28  Feb.  1664.  1200  acs.  due  by 
above  noted  patent  &  600  acs.  for  trans. 
of  12  pers:  Barnsby  Witwell,  John 
Williams,  Robt.  Weir,  Rich.  Finch, 
Henry  Clerke,  Wm.  Ford,  Jno.  Bond, 
Wm.  Willard,  Rich.  Home,  John  Clarke, 
Rob.  Floyd,  Jno.  Powell,  Paul  Bayly, 
Wm.  Phillips,  Henry  Jones,  James 
Haines,  Math.  Culland,  Francis  Sib- 
throp,  Thomas  Hall,  Robt.  Lewis,  Tho- 
mas Forerast,  Tho.  Clerke,  Joane  Jayes, 
Georg  Wastell. 

COLL.  ROBERT  PITT,  CAPT. 
JOSEPH  BRIDGER  &  MR.  WILLIAM 
BURGH,  3000  acs.  Isle  of  Wight  Co., 
upon    br.    of   the   Blackwater,    21    Mar. 

1664,  p.  115,  (614).  1200  &  600  acres 
granted  sd.  Pitt  &  Burgh  by  two  former 
patents  (above)  &  1200  acs.  due  for 
trans,  of  24  pers:  Thomas  Forrast, 
Joyce  Jayes,  Robt.  Hewitt,  Jane  Poult- 
ney,  Mathew  Culmer,  Richard  Westray, 
Thomas  Clerke,  Wm.  Phillips,  Henry 
Jones,  Sarah  Paine,  Wm.  Thomas,  Mary 
Clerke,  Barneby  Whitwell,  Jno.  Wil- 
liams, Robt.  Wyatt,  Richard  Finch, 
Henry  Clerke,  Wm.  Ford,  John  Bond, 
Wm.  Milliard,  Richard  Home,  John 
Clerke,  Robt.  Floyd,  John  Powell. 


JAMES  SAMFORD,  400  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  on  S.E.  side  of  Totoskey  Cr.,  18 
Mar.  1663/4,  p.  115,  (615).  Opposite 
land  of  Thomas  Robinson,  running  S. 
by  E.  &c.  to  the  folly  land,  unto  an 
Indian  feild,  towards  a  br.  of  Richards 
Cr.  &c,  opposite  the  now  plantation  of 
Geo.  Haselock.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Mary 
Broder,  Francis  Scott,  Jno.  Multis,  A 
Malaton  (?),  James  Felton,  Geo  (a) 
Scotchman,  Symon  Richardson,  Mary 
Hamon. 

MILES  REILY,  200  acs.  Rappa.  Co., 
on  W.  side  of  the  N.  br.  of  Totaskey 
Cr.,  18  Mar.  1663,  p.  116,  (615).  Adj. 
land  of  Robert  Sisson,  running  N.N.E. 
&c.  to  to  land  of  Tho.  Robinson,  thence 
S.W.  &c.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Jno. 
Fletcher,  Ed.  Cannon,  Edw.  Birke,  Wm. 
Ockford. 

THOMAS  KIDD,  194  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  7  Apr.  1664,  p.  116,  (616).  At 
the  head  of  Burnhams  alias  Sunderland 
Cr.,  upon  a  br.  of  Peanketanke  Sw. 
called  White  oake  br.,  beg.  on  Matta- 
pony  upper  path,  running  N.E.  &c.  to 
land  of  Robt.  Chowning  &  Tho.  Patti- 
son,  thence  S.  &c.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
Wm.  Bennett,  Robt.  Hooper,  Robt. 
Sansnery,  Samll.  Peachy. 

EDWARD  HARRIS,  730  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  19  Dec.  1664,  p.  117,  (616). 
On  S.W.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.  By  land 
of  George  Smith,  by  tankes  Pasbehaies 
to  Cattaile  Sw.  &  adj.  Edmonds  land. 
Granted  to  Charles  Edmonds,  29  June 
1657,  by  him  deserted  &  granted  by 
order  of  court  &c,  30  Sept.  1663  &  due 
for  trans,  of  15  pers.* 

WILLIAM  BROCH,  420  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  25  Feb.  1664,  p.  117,  (617). 
320  acs.  upon  the  great  fresh  pond  &c, 
and  100  acs.  being  the  S.  part  of  an 
Hand,  butting  N.  upon  Owen  Hayes  & 
bounded  round  with  the  ponds.  Trans, 
of  9  pers:  Dennis  Cragh,  John  Ber- 
wick, John  Keene,  Owen  Kene,  Darby 
Kenland,  John  Codall,  Wm.  Edwards, 
Denis  Denby  (or  Denly),  Edmond 
Power. 

SAME.  100  acs.,  same  Co.,  date  & 
page  (618).  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Denis 
Macragh,  Alice  Morton. 


434 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


MR.  WILLIAM  BASNETT,  510  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  10  Sept.  1664,  p.  118 
(618).  Upon  the  N.  br.  of  Curratuck, 
known  by  the  name  of  Colchester,  run- 
ning up  the  same  W.,  over  a  small  gutt, 
including  a  neck  of  land  called  George 
Indian  quarter,  N.  along  the  Cr.  to  a 
gr.  White  marsh,  thence  E.  including 
a  small  neck  divding  this  from  land  of 
Richard  Selby.  Trans,  of  11  pers: 
Robert,  Powes,  Sr.,  Robert  Powes,  Jr., 
Mary  Budman,  Richard  Hopham,  Wm. 
Jeremie,  John  Wartan,  Martha  Fennell, 
Penelope  Burk,  Wm.  Basnetts  wife, 
James  Miller,  Will.  Griffin. 

JOHN  PORE,  400  acs.  Low.  Norf. 
Co.,  25  Feb.  1664,  p.  118,  (619).  To 
the  Swd.  of  Roede,  beg.  at  the  side  of 
a  white  marsh,  N.E.  upon  land  of  Owen 
Hayes,  S.W.  to  the  Cypress  Sw.  &c. 
along  marked  trees  seperating  this  from 
land  of  Wm.  Broch.  Trans,  of  8  pers: 
Alice  Morton,  Alice  Yong,  Gilbert 
Lewes,  Mary  Shoot,  Jane  Maxwell, 
Will  Mercer,  Elizabeth  Blake,  Isabell 
Peake. 

OWEN  HAYES,  500  acs.  Low.  Norf. 
Co.,  25  Feb.  1664,  p.  118,  (619).  To 
the  Swd.  of  Roede,  comonly  called  Batts 
quarter  &c.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Joseph 
Milboe,  James  Boy,  Rich.  Wright,  and 
one  Zambo,  John  Hewes,  George  Ben- 
ton, Will.  Ruffell,  Jane  Greenfeild,  Jone 
Addison,  Mary  Holyday. 

MR.  JOHN  CUSTIS,  400  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  1  Oct.  1664,  p.  119,  (620). 
At  the  bay  side,  on  S.  side  of  Bolemans 
Br.  &c,  a  cor.  tree  dividing  this  &  land 
of  Jno.  Trotman  &c.  Trans,  of  8  pers: 
Mary  Knight,  Jno.  Norgood,  Jane  (a) 
Negro,  Jno.  Abram,  Wm.  Biggs,  Tho. 
Somersett,  Jno.  Watts,  Tho.  Coleman. 
(Note:  This  name  is  also  spelt  "Curtis." 

COLL.  PETER  ASHTON,  2550  acs. 
Stafford  Co.,  27  Mar.  1665,  p.  119, 
(620).  Beg.  on  the  W.  side  of  a  Sw. 
on  the  W.  side  of  the  Taylors  feild,  adj. 
land  formerly  in  possession  of  the  King 
of  Potomack,  E.  to  a  br.  of  Potomack 
Riv.,  running  S.  to  line  deviding  this 
&  land  of  Mr.  James  Gaylor  &c.  to  land 
of  Mr.  Robert  Osborne,  crossing  Macho- 
tick  dams  &c.    550  acs.  granted  to  Wm. 


Parry,  11  Nov.  1651,  by  him  assigned 
unto  Thomas  Coniers  &  ordered  to  be 
pattented  in  his  name,  'by  order  of  the 
Quarter  Ct.,  8  June  1654,  renewed  in 
his  name  8  June  1657  &  by  him  sold  to 
sd.  Coll.  Ashton  &  granted  to  him  13 
Mar.  1657;  2000  acs.  granted  sd.  Ashton 
20  Aug.  1651,  joyned  into  one  pattern 
&  renewed  26  Mar.  1661. 

LT.  COLL.  WILLIAM  KENDALL, 
600  acs.  according  to  the  ancient  lawful! 
bounds,  N'ampton  Co.,  11  Sept.  1663, 
p.  120,  (621).  Formerly  belonging  to 
Capt.  Jno.  How,  dec'd.,  &  lately  found 
to  escheat  to  his  Majesty,  as  by  an  in- 
quisition recorded  in  the  Secretaries 
office  under  the  hands  &  seales  of  the 
Jury  sworne  before  Lt.  Coll.  Jno.  Strin- 
ger, Depty.  Escheator  for  sd.  county, 
dated  30  Sept.  1662  &c. 

MARY  KENDALL,  Daughter  of  Lt. 
Coll.  Wm.  Kendall,  300  acs.  Accomacke 
Co.,  23  Sept.  1663,  p.  120,  (622). 
Bounded  S.  E.  on  the  pattent  land  of 
Goulden  Quarter,  thence  N.E.  &c. 
Granted  to  sd.  William  Kendall,  by  him 
deserted  &  now  granted  by  order  of 
Court,  dated  herewith.  Note:  The  fol- 
lowing names  appear  under  this  record: 
Henry  Alexander,  Wm.  Millett,  Robt. 
Stedman,  Tho.  Wilson,  Mary  Callaway, 
Susan  Bennett. 

LT.   COLL.   WILLIAM   KENDALL, 

900  acs.  between  two  branches  of 
Cherristones  Cr.,  N'ampton  Co.,  28 
Sept.  1664,  p.  120,  (622).  Bounded  on 
N.  by  the  Otterdam  br.  which  is  by 
some  called  Newports  Cr.,  &  part  of 
Dolbyes  br.,  which  branches  part  this 
from  land  of  Mr.  Jno.  How,  W.  up 
Cherristones  Cr.  &  part  by  Troublesome 
br.,  parting  this  from  land  of  Mrs. 
Powell  &  Mr.  Jno.  Robins,  E.  &c.  to  a 
Dyall  sett  up  at  the  horse  path  &c.  to 
the  Swd.  of  the  Negroes  br.  500  acs. 
purchased  of  Thomas  Taylour,  heire  to 
Capt.  Phillip  Taylour;  300  acs.  pur- 
chased of  Edw.  Dolbey,  heire  to  Mr, 
Edward  Drue  &  100  acs.  purchased  of 
Mr.  John  Robins. 

SAME.  300  acs.  in  same  Co.  1 
Sept.  1664,  p.  121,  (623).  At  the 
head    of   Cherristones    Cr.,    W.    on   his 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


435 


own  &  land  of  Francis  Pettit,  N.  on 
land  of  John  Savidge,  E.  on  Capt. 
Phillip  Taylour,  deed.,  &  S.  on  lands 
of  Major  Wm.  Andrews  &  former 
pattern  of  Coll.  Obed.  Robins,  dated  20 
Mar.  1643.  Granted  to  sd.  Andrews, 
15  Oct.  1660,  by  him  deserted  &  upon 
petiton  of  sd.  Kendall  granted  to  him 
by  order  &c.  &  due  for  trans,  of  6 
pers:  John  Abraham,  Tanaka  Bastiam, 
Peter  Franke,  Wm.  Middleton,  James 
Cuningham,  Robert  Raddocke. 

WILLIAM  STROUDER,  Cooper,  of 
Nomany,  500  acs.  W'moreland  Co.,  18 
Mar.  1662,  p.  121,  (623).  On  Swd. 
side  of  Herring  Cr.,  by  some  called 
Nomeny  Riv.,  beg.  at  the  mouth,  run- 
ning Wly.  along  a  br.  by  the  old  pattent 
called  Nomany  River  &c,  where  Mr. 
Wm.  Peirce  his  land  begins  &c.  to  an 
Indian  feild,  deviding  this  from  land 
of  sd.  Peirce  &c,  being  opposite  Mrs. 
Youell  her  plantation.  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  27  Apr.   1658. 

JOHN  CANNIDA,  200  acs.  on  S. 
side  of  Totoskey  Cr.,  Rappa.  Co.,  18 
Mar.  1663/4,  p.  121,  (624).  Adj.  land 
of  James  Samford,  opposite  the  new 
plantation  of  George  Haselocke  &c. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  Jno.  Golding,  Ed. 
Reeves,  Ann  Blandon,  Wm.  Griffin. 

WILLIAM  MELLING,  Gent.,  450 
acs.  N'ampton  Co.,  30  May  1663,  p. 
122,  (624).  Adj.  two  devidents  granted 
to  him,  one  dated  20  June  1636  lying 
on  the  head  of  the  old  Plantation  Cr.; 
the  other,  dated  4  July  1653,  on  the 
head  of  Kings  Cr.,  running  Ely.  with  a 
small  Slippett  between  sd.  devdts.  to 
the  heads,  thence  Sly.  to  the  head  of 
the  old  plantation  devdt.  to  the  land 
late  Thomas  Strattons,  Nly.  &c.  to  land 
of  Coll.  Obedience  Robbins  &c.  Trans. 
of  9  pers:  Fran.  Lewis  (?),  Phill. 
Watkins,  Wm.  Starling,  Timothy  Tral- 
lop,  Alex.  Wignall,  Tho.  Wignall,  Wm. 
Smart,    Roger   Barron,   Eliza,   a   Negro. 

JOHN  PRITTIMAN,  200  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  4  Sept.  1664,  p.  122,  (625). 
Being  a  neck  of  land  nere  the  Seaboard 
side,  bounded  on  W.  by  a  br.  parting 
this  from   land   of  Major  John  Tilney, 


on  the  S.  by  another  br.  parting  this 
from  land  of  Thomas  Bacon  &c.  Trans, 
of  4  pers:  Edward  Kinastone,  Joan 
Shaw,  George  Weld,  Thomas  Rock. 

WILLIAM  TAYLOUR,  600  acs. 
Accomack  Co.,  12  Sept.  1664,  p.  122, 
(625).  Bounded  on  the  E.  with  the 
Seaboard,  N.  by  land  of  Coll.  John 
Stringer,  on  the  S.  &  W.  by  Corratta- 
women  Cr.  &  br.  Trans,  of  12  pers: 
Wm.  Weally,  Jno.  Wichkam,  Phill, 
Harcourt,  Walter  Cane  (or  Cance), 
John  Lamb,  John  White,  Fran.  Mack- 
worth,  Edw.  Faulkner,  Frederick  Thinn, 
Wm.  Owen,  Rich.  Otley,  Mary  Scriven. 

MR.  DAVID  FOX,  800  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  44  mi.  up  the  S.  side  of  sd.  river, 
20  Mar.  1662,  p.  123,  (626).  Bounded 
on  S.E.  with  land  of  Mr.  Soanes  &  on 
N.W.  with  Piscaticon  Cr.  Granted  to 
sd.  Fox  7  June,  1656,  by  him  sold  to 
John  Richards  (since  dee'd.)  &  by 
Francis  Overton  &  Mary,  his  wife, 
Exix.  of  sd.  Richards,  reassigned  to  sd. 
Fox. 

MR.  JOHN  APPLETON,  400  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  in  the  freshes  of  Rappa. 
Riv.  &  about  14  mi.  above  Nanzemon 
towne,  2  June  1664,  p.  123,  (626). 
Beg.  at  a  Cr.  divding  this  &  land  of 
Mr.  John  Batts  &  John  Phillips  &c. 
Granted  to  John  Sharpe,  14  June  1655, 
but  never  seated  &  by  him  deserted; 
granted  sd.  Appleton  by  order  &c, 
dated  29  Mar.  1664.  Note:  The  fol- 
lowing names  appear  under  this  record: 
Richard  West,  Eliz.  Wright,  Ed.  Per- 
kenson,  Geo.  Peirce,  Mathew  White, 
Margett  Would,  Eliz.  Paine,  Rich. 
Hanson. 

MR.  ROBERT  JONES,  400  acs.  N. 
side  of  Lancaster  Co.,  8  June  1664,  p. 
123,  (627).  Bounding  on  land  of  Wm. 
Ironmonger,  Tho.  Chettwood  &  Wm. 
Thatcher.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Tho. 
Richman,  Jeffry  Chapman,  Jane  Thomas, 
Jane  Bateman,  James  Mathewes,  Robt. 
Jones,  Wm.  Lett,  Jno.  Smith. 

WILLIAM  THATCHER  &  WIL- 
LIAM HUTCHESON,  500  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co.,   4  Mar.    1662,   p.   123,    (627). 


436 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Upon  Coratoman,  beg.  upon  Eastermost 
side  of  a  small  Cr.,  S.  by  E.  upon  land 
of  John  Cusney  &  Tho.  Stead  &c.  Trans, 
of  10  pers:  Jno.  More,  Jno.  Ladmore, 
Wm.  West,  Tho.  Carr,  Fran.  Clerke, 
Lawrence  Batman,  Henry  Hudsoll,  Wm. 
Batts,  Rich.  Lee,  Mary  White. 

HUGH  BRENT,  200  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  on  Hadawaies  Cr.  &  Corotoman 
Cr.  in  Fleets  bay,  6  May  1664,  p.  124, 
(627).  Said  land  formerly  joyned  to  a 
patent  of  400  acs.  in  the  names  of  sd. 
Brent  &  Eppha.  Bonison,  dated  10  Mar. 
1662,  &  this  200  acs.  being  his  part  of 
sd.  pattent.  Marginal  Note:  This 
pattent  with  the  other  two  underneath 
all  passed  in  one,  29  June  1666. 

SAME.  100  acs.  in  same  location. 
10  July  1663,  p.  124,  (628).  Trans,  of 
2  pers:  Wm.  Lumpton,  Thomas  Brom- 
stead. 

HUGH  BRENT  &  TOBY  HORTON, 

200  acs.,  same  location,  6  May  1664,  p. 
124,  (628).  Part  of  pattent  granted  sd. 
Brent  &  Eppha.  Bonison  &  by  the  latter 
assigned  to  sd.  Brent  &  sd.  Horton,  8 
Sept.  1662. 

JOHN  WELLS,  200  acs.  N.  side  of 
Lancaster  Co.,  18  July  1662,  p.  125, 
(629).  100  acs.  due  for  trans,  of  2 
pers.*  and  100  acs.  granted  to  Jno. 
Phillips,  23  July  1653  &  by  him  as- 
signed to  sd.  Phillips. 

WILLIAM  COOKE,  TOHN  POT- 
TER. FDWARD  KING  &  SAMUELL 
GOUGH,  450  acs.  on  Eastermost  br.  of 
Corrotoman  Riv.,  Lancaster  Co.,  12 
Dec.  1663,  p.  125,  (629).  Bounded 
upon  land  of  Thomas  Chetwood. 
Granted  to  Coll.  John  Carter,  Esar.,  25 
Sept.  1661,  by  him  assigned  to  Thomas 
Marshall  14  May  1662,  who  assigned 
one  moiety  to  sd.  Cooke  &  Potter;  the 
other  half  assigned  to  Wm.  Hutchins, 
who  assigned  to  sd.  King  &  Gooch. 

( 

TOHN  CHINN,  100  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  24  Aug.  1664,  p.  125,  (630). 
Upon  Morrattico  Cr.,  adj.  his  own  & 
land  of  Henry  Davis.  Trans,  of  2  pers: 
James  Potter,  Thomas  Coate. 


WILLIAM  THOMAS,  100  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  on  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
11  Feb  .1663,  p.  126,  (630).  Beg.  on 
the  head  of  Powells  Cr.  Renewal  of 
pattent  dated  13  July  1653.  (Marginal 
note  gives  this  name  as  Wm.  Thomas, 
Junior). 

WILLIAM  THOMAS,  Senior,  150 
acs.  on  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  Lancaster 
Co.,  10  July  1663,  p.  126,  (631).  On 
the  head  of  Powells  Cr.  Trans,  of  3 
pers:  Kath.  Jones,  Jno.  Brunstell,  Ann 
Hyne. 

JOHN  RAYNEY,  171  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  on  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  16  Dec. 
1663,  p.  126,  (631).  Beg.  at  the  head 
of  land  of  Rawleigh  Travers,  extending 
from  W.  side  of  a  Cr.  deviding  this  & 
land  of  Tho.  Powell,  running  E.  by  N. 
&c.  Said  land  granted  to  Alexander 
Portus  &  Tho.  Williams,  20  Nov.  1654; 
sd.  Williams  assigned  his  interest  to  sd. 
Portus,  who  assigned  same  to  Ben. 
Whiscomb  &  Joseph  Allen,  by  whom  it 
was  assigned  to  sd.  Rayney. 

JOHN  CABLE,  250  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  &  on  the 
side  of  Coxes  Cr.,  20  June  1664,  p. 
127,  (631).  Beg.  at  upper  side  of  150 
acs.  surveyed  for  Daniell  Batts,  running 
by  the  side  of  a  Cr.,  deviding  this  & 
land  of  Ralph  Payne,  S.  S.  W.  &c.  Re- 
newal of  his  pattent  dated  9  Oct.  1653. 

THOMAS  HARRIS,  600  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  127,  (632). 
Bounding  N.  E.  upon  a  br.  of  Coroto- 
man River  &  upon  land  of  one  Hawkes, 
S.E.  upon  land  of  Wm.  Thatcher  &c. 
Granted  to  Gervase  Dodson  4  June 
1655  &  by  him  sold  to  sd.  Harris. 

TOHN  PHILLIPS,  250  acs.  on  N. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p. 
127,  (632).  Beg.  at  the  N.N.W.  side 
of  a  pond  of  water  deviding  this  &  land 
of  Mr.  George  Eaton,  N.N.W.  along 
the  river  &c.  Renewal  of  his  pattent 
dated  2  Mar.  1652. 

RICHARD  HACKER,  200  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  15  Dec.  1663,  p.  127,  (633). 
On  the  W.N.W.  side  of  a  br.  deviding 


Patent  Book  No.  4 


437 


this  &  Blands  Cr.  &  Pyancketanck  Riv. 
deviding  this  &  other  land  of  sd.  Hacke, 
assigned  by  Thomas  Browne,  &  N.N.E. 
into  the  woods.  Renewal  of  pattern 
dated  26  Feb.  1653. 

HUGH  BRENT,  200  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  128,  (633).  In 
Fleets  bay,  S.  upon  Haddawayes  Cr., 
W.  upon  sd.  Cr.,  including  three  Indian 
Cabbins.  Granted  Capt.  Henry  Fleet,  1 
Aug.  1652,  assigned  unto  John  Sharpe, 
who  sold  to  sd.  Brent. 

CHARLES  HILL,  590  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  26  Jan. 
1663,  p.  128,  (624).  450  acs.  bounded 
on  the  N.N.W.  side  with  land  of  Wm. 
Tidner,  on  the  E.N.E.  with  Thomas 
Dale  &  S.S.E.  with  a  br.  of  Bonners 
Cr;  140  acs.  with  a  br.  of  Bonners  Cr. 
&c.  Renewal  of  his  pattent  dated  6 
Mar.  1655. 

TOBIAS  HORTON,  600  acs.  Cum- 
berland Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  128, 
(634).  Upon  the  N.  part  of  Fleets 
bay,  about  half  a  mile  up  Haddawayes 
Cr.  Granted  to  Thomas  Humphries,  1 
Sept.    1654  &  assigned  to  sd.  Horton. 

JOHN  TAYLOR  (Taylour),  100  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  129, 
(634).  E.  upon  a  Cr.  of  Fleets  bay,  S. 
towards  his  own  plantation  &c.  Renewal 
of  pattent  dated  17  Nov.  1652. 

SAME.  400  acs.,  same  Co.,  date  & 
page,  (635).  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv. 
upon  the  head  of  Fleets  neck  Renewal 
of  pattent  dated  29  Nov.  1652. 

SAME.  450  acs.,  same  Co.  &  date. 
Page  129,  (635).  S.W.  upon  a  main 
Cr.  of  Fleets  bay  &  N.W.  upon  the 
path  between  Wiccocomico  &  Corroto- 
man.  Renewal  of  his  pattent  dated  17 
Nov.   1652. 

WILLIAM  IRONMONGER,  700  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  12  Dec.  1663,  p.  129, 
(635).  Upon  the  head  of  the  Easter- 
most  br.  of  Corrotoman  Riv.,  N.E.  by 
N.  to  a  path  nere  the  mouth  of  a 
swamp,  which  is  knowne  by  the  name 
of  Morratico  &  Wiccomcomico  Path  &c. 


Granted  to  Thomas  Graves,  20  Mar. 
1661,  made  over  to  John  Edwards  by 
bill  of  sale  dated  14  May  1662,  who 
assigned  to  sd.  Ironmonger. 

MR.  JOHN  APPLETON,  1000  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
15  May  1661,  p.  130,  (636).  On  the 
N.  side  of  the  great  Swamp  lying  Wly. 
from  land  of  John  Heyward  &  E.  to- 
wards the  Bay  of  Clifts.  Granted  to 
Miles  Dixon,  Gent.,  8  Dec.  1656  &  now 
relapsed  for  want  of  seating;  granted 
sd.  Appleton  by  order  &c.  due  for  trans. 
of  20  pers.* 

TOBIAS  HORTON,  1200  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  16  June  1662,  p.  130,  (635). 
(By  Francis  Moryson.)  Between  Tabb 
Cr.  &  Nanty  poyson  Cr.,  issuing  out  of 
Fleets  bay  &c.  Trans,  of  24  pers: 
Richard  Tanner,  Jno.  Coller,  2  Negroes; 
Hen.  Parker,  John  (a)  Frenchman,  Hen. 
Tailor,  Jacob  Tonie,  Jno.  Ayres,  John 
Cartar,  Jno.  Gidin,  Tho.  Reynolds, 
Joseph  Baker,  John  King,  Tho.  Stephens, 
Hen.  Reynolds,  Jno.  Coane,  Jno.  Bolton, 
Jno.  Pricket;  &  7  Rights  being  for  a 
relinquished  pattent  dated  5  Feb.  1663. 

WILLIAM  MICHAELL,  50  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  on  the  N.W.  side  of  Corro- 
toman Riv.,  18  July  1663,  p.  131,  (637). 
Beg.  upon  N.E.  side  of  land  formerly 
in  the  occupation  of  Nicholas  George. 
Trans,  of:    Jno.  Stone. 

JOSEPH  SMITH  &  HUMPHRY 
JONES,  300  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  16  Feb. 
1663,  p.  131,  (637).  Beg.  upon  a  br. 
of  Powells  Cr.,  running  Ely.  &c.  to  land 
of  Robt.  Kemp,  thence  due  S.S.W.  &c. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Mary  Wise,  Ann 
Hart,  Wm.  Broughton,  Stephen  Goodlad 
&  2  Negroes. 

EPPY.  BONISON  (Bonyson),  400 
acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  17  Aug.  1664,  p. 
131,  (638).  On  S.W.  side  of  a  maine 
Cr.  of  Fleets  bay,  dividing  this  from 
land  of  Toby  Horton  &  John  Taylour, 
S.  upon  a  small  br.  of  sd.  crrek  next  to 
land  seated  by  Thomas  Salisbury,  but 
now  Capt.  Fleets  people  are  there, 
thence  S.W.  &c.  Renewal  of  former 
pattent,  by  order  &c. 


438 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


OLIVER  SEGAR  (Seger)  &  FRAN- 
CIS BROWNE,  200  acs.  Lancaster  Co., 
18  Mar.  1662,  p.  131,  (638).  Beg.  by 
the  river  side,  running  W.S.W.  &c.  to 
land  of  John  Moore,  by  the  maine  river 
to  Sandy  poynt  Cr.  &c.  Renewal  of 
pattern  dated  31  Jan.  1653. 

ROWLAND  LAWSON,  1000  acs. 
on  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  18  Mar. 
1662,  p.  132,  (639).  Beg.  on  the  E. 
side  of  Cherry  poynt  Cr.,  N.N.E.  &c.  to 
S.  side  of  a  br.  of  a  Cr.  issuing  into  the 
bay  behind  Capt.  Fleets  land,  thence 
S.E.  by  E.  &c.  to  land  of  Bonyson  &c. 
Being  part  of  pattern  of  1300  acs.,  the 
rest  being  cut  off  by  pattern  of  sd.  Bony- 
son,  first  granted  to  Rice  Jones.  Trans, 
of  20  pers.* 

DANIEL  WELCH,  600  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co.,  15  Dec.  1663,  p.  132,  (639). 
S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  upon  the 
head  of  Parretts  Cr.,  S.S.E.  along  land 
of  Mr.  David  Fox  to  another  Cr.  op- 
posite &  dividing  this  &  land  of  Rich- 
ard Lewis,  thence  W.  by  S.  &c.  Renewal 
of  pattern  dated  9  Aug.  1652. 

JOHN  BEAUFORD  &  FRANCIS 
BROUGHTON,  300  acs.  Lancaster  Co., 
17  Mar.  1663/4,  p.  133,  (640).  On  S. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  adj.  land  of  Rich- 
ard Lewis.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Wm. 
Linton,  Jane  Flod,  Robt.  Foard,  Robt. 
Napes,  Mary  Coleman,  Jonathan 
Marrow. 

ROBERT  GRIGGS,  250  acs.  in  Win- 
ter Harbour,  beg.  on  the  bay  side,  run- 
ning W.  up  the  Cr.  &c.  to  marked  trees 
dividing  this  &  his  own  land  &c.  to 
land  of  Charles  Sallace  (or  Sallard), 
thence  S.E.  &c.  Granted  to  Walter 
Prichard,  1  June  1654  &  assigned  to  sd. 
Griggs. 

JOHN  SIMPSON,  600  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  28  July  1662,  p.  133,  (641).  On 
S.S.E.  side  of  Moratticon  Cr.  &c,  W. 
S.S.  upon  land  of  Lambert  Lamberton 
&  Richard  Hatton.  Renewal  of  pattern 
dated  6  Oct.  1656. 


WILLIAM  SMART,  450  acs.  in 
Winter  Harbour,  20  Nov.  1661,  p.  133, 
(641).  Beg.  at  John  Smiths  land. 
Granted  to  Thomas  Todd,  27  Oct.  1652 
&  by  him  assigned  to  sd.  Smart. 

MR.  RICE  JONES,  700  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  on  S.  side  of  sd.  River,  19  Sept. 
1664,  p.  134,  (641).  Beg.  on  N.  side 
of  a  great  swamp  running  into  Peancke- 
tanck  Riv.,  thence  N.Ely.  &c.  520  acs. 
due  in  tenure  with  Mr.  Anthony  Jack- 
man  by  pattern  dated  17  May  1658  & 
renewed  13  Jan.  1661,  &  now  by  con- 
sent equally  divided.  The  residue  for 
trans,  of  4  pers:  Nich.  Cartwell,  Fra. 
Webbs,  Jeremiah  Griffith,  Jacob  (a) 
Negro. 

WILLIAM  PRISE,,  356  acs.  on  S. 
side  of  Rappa.  Co.,  6  May  1664,  p.  134, 
(642).  Adj.  land  of  Mr.  Jones,  Jack- 
man  &  Mr.  Marish.  Trans,  of  7  pers: 
Grace  Hill,  Geo.  Cladwite  (?),  Joane 
Est,  Garrett  Chresty,  (or  Cheesly),  Wm. 
Gilbert,  Nich.  Sherly,  Jno.  Normington. 

MR.  JOHN  APPLETON,  1000  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  3  Oct.  1664,  p.  135, 
(642).  On  N.  side  of  Peancketanck 
Riv.,  below  the  Horse  poynt  nere  a 
small  branch  &c.  to  line  parting  this  & 
land  of  Capt.  Brocas'  Timber  necke, 
thence  S.W.  &c.  to  land  of  John  Jack- 
son &c.  528  acs.  purchased  of  Mr.  Cut- 
bert  Potter,  who  purchased  of  Dennis 
Coniers;  &  472  acres  for  trans,  of  10 
pers:  Jno.  Read,  Rich.  Appleby,  Wm. 
Blackford,  Rich.  Collins,  James  Tomp- 
son,  Henry  Piatt,  Stephen  Canon  (or 
Canow),  Rich.  Pert,  Isa.  Howell,  Margt. 
Davis. 

GEORG  VEZEY  &  NATHANIELL 
BROWNE,  300  acs.  upon  N.  side  of 
Lancaster  Co.,  10  July  1663,  p.  135, 
(643).  From  Wiccocomico  path  E.  & 
by  N.  &c.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Jno. 
Harris,  Susan  Harris,  Mary  Browne, 
Wm.  Jones,  Thomas  Jones,  Anthony 
Tinch. 


Patent  Book  No  5 


By  Sir  William  Berkeley 


THOMAS  PINCKEMAN,  125  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,  28  Jan.  1662,  p.  135,  (l). 
80  acs.  on  E.  side  of  a  swamp  dividing 
this  &  land  of  Wm.  Graves,  N.W.  to 
Skimino  upon  land  of  Wm.  Gantlett, 
S.E.  upon  land  of  Stephen  Taylor,  deed., 
now  in  possession  of  Wm.  Harwood  & 
sd.  Pinckeman;  45  acs.  upon  S.  side  of 
Yorke  Riv.  upon  Skimino  Cr.,  running 
&c.  opposite  Mr.  Dipnells  Landing.  80 
acs.  by  patent  dated  24  July,  1654  &  45 
acs.  for  trans,  of  1  per.* 

MR.  NICHOLAS  &  MURICE 
(Maurice)  COCKE,  600  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  25  Aug.  1663,  p.  136,  (l).  300 
acs.  on  S.  side  Rappa.  Riv.  bounded 
S.  E.  with  Sandy  Poynt  Cr.  &  300  acs. 
on  S.  side  sd.  Riv.,  bounding  on  500 
acs.  granted  to  Randolph  Camlett,  now 
in  possession  of  Jno.  Jadwin.  300  acs. 
granted  to  Francis  Browne  1  June  1652 
&  sold  to  sd.  Nicholas  &  300  acs.  for 
trans,  of  6  pers:  Wm.  Peche,  Jno.  Ran- 
dall, Jane  Allan,  Ann  Swillevant,  Tho- 
mas Cicell  (?),  Thomas  Colcott. 

WM.  WROUGHTON,  440  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  2  Mar.  1662,  p.  136,  (2). 
390  acs.  as  follows:  Quiacomico  neck 
containing  150  acs.  at  the  mouth  of 
Corrotoman  Riv.,  from  Grimes  poynt 
spring  branch  or  cove  &c.  to  a  branch 
coming  out  of  Island  Neck  Cr.  &c.  240 
acs.  upon  W.  side  of  sd.  Riv.,  N.  upon 
land  of  David  Fox,  E.  upon  land 
formerly  in  possession  of  Edward 
Grimes  &  S.S.W.  upon  a  creek  dividing 
this  &  land  of  Thomas  Harwood;  50 
acs.  Ely.  upon  sd.  Riv.,  Sly  upon  sd. 
cove  or  branch  called  Spring  branch, 
N.N.E.  upon  a  seate  of  80  acs.  granted 
to  Edward  Grimes,  dee'd.  &  N.Wly. 
upon  the  other  two  tracts.  390  acs. 
granted  to  sd.  Grimes  15  June  1657  & 
afterwards    left   the   sd.   Wroughton   by 


will  &  50  acs.  granted  to  Thomas  Rootes 
15  June  1655  &  by  him  sold  to  sd. 
Wroughton. 

MR.  ROBERT  GRIGGS,  640  acs.  on 
N.  side  of  Lancaster  Co.,  24  Mar.  1664, 
p.  137,  (3).  Beg.  at  a  branch  issuing 
out  of  Col.  Carter's  Cr.  &c.  Trans,  of 
13  pers:  Richard  Dace  (?),  Susan 
Drury,  Daniell  Monroe,  Mat.  Borroughs, 
Daniell  Long,  Thomas  Martin,  Thomas 
Taylor,  Thomas  Delahay,  Richard  Hues, 
Xtopher  Lucas,  Jane  Lucas,  Rich.  Stock- 
dale,  A  Negro. 

MR.  JOHN  SEWARD,  1500  acs. 
named  New  Hemington,  Is.  of  Wight 
Co.,  1  Apr.  1665,  p.  137,  (3).  Upon 
br.  of  the  lower  bay  called  Sewards  Cr., 
adj.  land  of  Wm.  Yarrett,  running  to 
head     of    Goose    Hill    Cr.    1300    acs. 

granted  to  (John)   Seward,  dee'd., 

his  father,  1  Apr.  1641  &  200  acs.  be- 
ing found  upon  new  survey  within  sd. 
bounds.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  William 
Brotts,  John  Gamball,  Robert  Martin, 
William  Thatcher. 

MR.  THOMAS  GAGECOMB,  150 
A.  6  pers.,  Henrico  Co.,  30  Jan.  1664, 
p.  138,  (4).  Beg.  at  the  river  side  by 
an  oven  at  the  hundred  poynt,  running 
W.  into  the  woods  320  po.  to  the  Court 
Swamp,  S.S.E.  along  same  40  po.,  S.E. 
E.  112  po.  to  Church  Yard,  then  S.S.E. 
38  po.  to  Paces  Swamp,  S.  by  E.  along 
same  to  Riv.  76  po.,  N.  E.  from  sd. 
swamp  to  Paces  poynt  along  Riv.  50 
po.,  N.  by  E.  from  sd.  poynt  10  po., 
N.N.E.  58  po.,  then  N.E.  N.  88  po.  to 
beg.  Part  of  patent  dated  24  July  1645 
granted  to  Michael  Martin,  who  assigned 
to  William  Edes  "wch  Edes  dyeing  fell 
to  his  Daughter  Martha  Edes"  who  sold 
to  Major  William  Harris,  who  sold  to 
sd.  Gagecomb  5  Mar.  1663. 


440 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


JOHN  PHIPPS,  600  acs.  on  S.  side 
&  in  the  freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  15 
June  1665,  p.  138,  (4).  Beg.  at  S.E. 
limit  of  land  of  Clement  Herbert,  cross- 
ing Puamunaremo  (?)  Cr.  Granted  to 
Henry  Berry,  by  him  deserted  &  now- 
granted  by  Genl.  Ct.  28  Nov.  1663  & 
further  due  for  trans,  of  12  pers:  Wm. 
Rosse  (or  Roffe),  Jno.  Jobson,  Fenet 
Williams,  Francis  Newman,  Jno.  Hey- 
ward,  Jno.  Henrick,  Robt.  Stone,  Mary 
Stone,  Jno.  Barnett  (or  Burnett), 
Samll.  Emmett,  Susan  Hunt,  Ann 
Plaistor. 

JOHN  PROSSIER,  260  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  21  Feb.  1663,  p.  139,  (5) 
Upon  Tomacorecon  &  Powakei  Swamps 
beg.  by  an  Indian  feild  &c,  joyning  up 
on  land  formerly  William  Goffs.  Trans 
of  5  pers:  Wm.  Mosse,  Wm.  Falim 
Jno.  Scott,  Mary  Scott,  Tho.  Cruze,  Wm 
Bead,  Tho.  Morris,  Fra.  Carpenter. 

JOHN  ALFORD,  40  acs.  Warwicke 
Co..  5  Apr.  1664,  p.  139,  (5).  Beg.  at 
E.  bounds  of  land  of  Tho.  Hayles  &c. 
to  N.  side  of  the  horse  path  &  adj.  land 
of  John  Williams,  Sr.  Trans,  of  Ann 
Parry. 

THOMAS  LIGGON,  800  acs.  at 
Powells  Cr.,  next  to  land  of  Thomas 
Jones,  W.S.W.  towards  Sisemores  & 
S.S.E.  upon  the  Riv.  5  Apr.  1664,  p. 
139,  (6).  Trans,  of:  Capt.  Upton,  Wm. 
Prowting,  Phugh  Turke,  Joseph  Birk- 
head,  Jno.  Plinton,  Thomas  Williams, 
Thomas  Ayres,  Giles  Dement,  Wm. 
Cooper,  Wm.  Grigg,  Tho.  Coper,  Tho. 
Palmer,  Tho.  Gundry,  Mary  Haines, 
Malhote  Turke,  Jno.  Phillips. 

GYLES  CURTIS,  300  acs.  called 
Turkey  Necke,  Lancaster  Co.,  on  S.  side 
of  Rappa.  Riv.,  18  Nov.  1664,  p.  139, 
(6).  Bet.  branches  of  Mr.  Parrotts  Cr. 
Tr^ns.  of  6  pers:  Tho.  Maw  (or  Man), 
Edw.  Barnett.  Wm.  Angle,  Rich. 
Dobins,  Robt.  Morton,  Abra.  Patermastr. 

MILES  REYLY,    (Rely— Reily),  400 

acs.  on  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  Ewd. 
side  of  Totoskey  Cr.,  beg.  on  S.  side  of 
Crosse  Cr..  being  an  Eastermost  br.  of 
Totoskey   Cr.,    adj.   land   held   in    joynt 


tenture  by  Tho.  Robinson  &  Quintaine 
Sherman,  running  to  land  of  Edward 
Lewis  &c.  3  Nov.  1664,  p.  140,  (6). 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  Hen.  Nicholls,  Alice 
Aldwin,  David  Geo:  (George  ?),  Wm. 
Clarke,  Tho.  Fisher,  Peter  Bennet,  Robt. 
Merce,  Jane  Tompson. 

MR.  THO.  GLASCOCKE,  280  acs. 
upon  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Co.,  9  Jan. 
1662,  p.  140,  (7).  Upon  head  of 
Morattico  Cr.,  bounding  upon  land  of 
Nich.  Farmer,  Mr.  Tho.  Stephens,  &  the 
land  he  now  lives  on.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
Jno.  Randall,  Ann  Scarton,  Rich.  Gares, 
Jno.  Alexander,  Patrick  (a)  Highlander, 
Ann  Rowse  (or  Rowze). 

THO.  MEEKINS,  125  A.  4  chs.  & 
25  decimal  parts,  20  Mar.  1662,  p.  140, 
(7).  On  N.E.  side  of  the  main  branch 
of  Mill  Swamp  &c.  to  N.E.  side  of 
Rickahock  path  from  Queens  Cr.  &c.  to 
fork  of  the  run  belonging  to  Wild  & 
Alexander  Walker.  Formerly  sold  by 
Major  Joseph  Croshaw  to  James  Harris, 
who  assigned  to  sd.  Meekins. 

PAUL  WOODBRIDGE,  800  acs. 
Rappa.  Co.,  19  Sept.  1664,  p.  141,  (8). 
On  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  bet.  Moratti- 
co &  Farnham  Creeks,  beg.  at  head  & 
bet.  land  now  in  possession  of  sd. 
Woodbridge  &  John  Gladstone,  N.W. 
by  same  &  lands  of  Henry  Wilson  & 
the  orphant  of  Tho.  Stephens,  on  N.  by 
sd.  Willson  &  land  of  Tho.  Griffith, 
Sly.  by  Thomas  Bryant  &  Stephens' 
Orphant  &  Wwd.  along  line  of  Mich. 
Fornham  to  land  of  Tho.  Glascock,  etc. 
Due  to  sd.  Newman  &  Woodbridge  for 
trans,  of  16  pers:  Jno.  Marshall,  Wm. 
Marshall,  Edw.  Carman,  Tho.  Mull,  Tho. 
Carl,  Mary  Young,  Tho.  Peters,  laco 
Carr,  Wm.  Mullett,  Tho.  Tarp,  Math. 
Youl,  Tho.  ?,  Edw.  Farr,  Fra.  Scott, 
Samll.  Jackson,  Sail.  Sollis.  (No  men- 
tion previously  made  of  Newman.) 

RICHARD  BRIDGER  (Bredgar),  428 
acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  19  Sept.  1664,  p.  141, 
(8).  On  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  &  N. 
side  of  a  great  swamp  running  into 
Peanketanke  Riv.,  adj.  land  of  Anthony 
Jackman  &  Mr.  George  Marsh.  Trans, 
of  9  pers.* 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


441 


RICHARD  LAURENCE,  1000  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  24  Sept.  1664,  p.  141, 
(9).  On  the  head  of  Fishing  Cr.  of 
Coratoman  Riv.,  Nly.  by  land  of  Mr. 
Edwin  Connaway,  Ely.  by  Morattico 
path,  Sly.  by  land  of  Tho.  Chetwood, 
Tho.  Marshall  &  Edward  King.  Trans. 
of  20  pers.*  NOTE:  The  rights  for 
this  land  is  by  vertue  of  a  relinquished 
pattent  for  1000  acres  granted  to  the  sd. 
Lawrence  &  Leanord  Jones. 

ROBERT  PRICHARD,  136  acs.  beg. 
at  the  head  of  Mungars  Cr.,  issuing  out 
of  S.W.  side  of  Coratoman  Cr.,  bounded 
by  land  of  John  Phillipps,  now  in 
possession  of  Robt.  Pollard,  &  land  of 
Jno.  Mounger,  now  in  possession  of 
Henry  Davis.  10  Feb.  1662,  p.  142, 
(9).  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Alice  Browne, 
Stephen  Wells,  Henry  Herse. 

WILLIAM  WILLIAMSON,  200  acs. 
Rappa.  Co.,  18  Mar.  1663,  p.  142,  (10). 
On  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  near  land 
taken  up  for  Robt.  Armestrong,  on  a 
branch  of  Ralphs  Cr.  running  into 
Piscaticon.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Jno. 
Snart,  (or  Suart),  Ralph  Mazon,  Wm. 
Stamp,  Mary  Curtis. 

THOMAS  GRIFFITH,  350  acs.  Rap- 
pa. Co.,  on  N.  side  of  sd.  Riv.,  15  Apr. 
1664,  p.  142,  (10).  At  the  head  of 
Farneham  Cr.,  beg.  near  an  Indian  feild, 
adj.  land  of  Samll.  Griffin,  extending  S. 
to  branch  of  Moratticoe  Cr.  Trans,  of 
7  pers:*  Assigned  by  Mr.  Geo.  Marsh 
to  sd.  Griffith. 

GEORGE  BRYER  &  RICHARD 
LAWRENCE,  1300  acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  on 
N.  side  of  sd.  Riv.  &  Ewd.  side  of 
Rappa.  Cr.,  18  Mar.  1663,  p.  143,  (11). 
Adj.  land  of  Charles  Grymes,  Clarke, 
dec'd.  Trans,  of  26  pers:  Ed.  Kemp, 
Jero.  (or  Jno.)  Williams,  Rich.  Clack, 
Robt.  Morton,  Anth.  French,  Jno.  Henes- 
ty,  Ann  Eldon,  Eliz.  Crosse,  Rose  White, 
Mary  Jones,  Jno.  Kemp,  Fra.  Parham, 
Anth.  Mann,  James  Nazareth,  Guy 
Parry,  Abra.  Newton,  Ann  Nash,  Mich. 
Elfe,  Jno.  Jones,  Harry  Lowe,  Nich. 
Smith,  3  Negroes,  David  Marren. 

JOHN  CHINLY,  200  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,   on  Morattico  Cr.,   24  Aug.    1664, 


P.  143,  (11).  Bounding  upon  land  of 
Mary  Stephens  &  Mr.  Grymes.  Trans. 
of  4  pers:  Peter  Peterson,  David  War- 
ren,   Tho.    OfTeild    (?),   Roger   Bracks. 

RICHARD  COCKE,  180  acs.,  beg.  at 
mouth  of  S.E.  branch  of  Chickacone 
Riv.,  24  Aug.  1664,  p.  143,  (12). 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  Tho.  Kendall,  Tho 
Knight,  Joshua  Colbeck,  Grace  Wilson 

TOBIAS  HORTON,  200  acs.  on  N 
side  of  Lancaster  Co.,  27  May,  1664,  p 

143,  (12).  Beg.  at  mouth  of  Nantypoy 
son  Cr.,  N.  E.  upon  Fleets  bay.  Trans 
of  4  pers:  Walter  Collings,  Tho.  Bun- 
bury,  John  Snoke,  Alice  Miller. 

SAMLL.  GRIFFIN,  766  acs.,  adj. 
land  of  Tho.  Griffin.    24  May  1664,  p. 

144,  (12).  Trans,  of  15  pers:  Bagnall 
Vincent  Danll.  Griffin,  Wm.  Benamin, 
Ed.  Northerborne,  Amb.  Clare,  Wm. 
Panter,  Tho.  Bell,  Lewis  Buttler,  Wm. 
Feild,  Henry  Margaret,  Alice  Arsly, 
Ellen  Meredith,  Jno.  Back,  Robt.  San- 
ders, Roger  Barber,  Rich.  Hartees. 

GEO.  BROYER  (BRYER),  320  acs. 
on  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Co.,  24  Aug.  1664, 
p.  144,  (13).  Along  trees  of  Mr.  Ryles. 
Trans,  of  7  pers:  Emll.  Conserves, 
Rich.  Apleby,  Edw.  Frankling,  Tho. 
Simons,  Rich.  Collings,  Rice  Coleman, 
Tho.  a  Negro. 

MAJOR    ANDREW    GILSON,    516 

acs.  &  300  acs.  of  marsh  ground  adj. 
same,  beg.  at  mouth  of  Gilsons  Cr., 
running  by  trees  of  Bartho.  Hoskins  & 
bounding  on  land  of  John  Green.  5 
Aug.  1664,  p.  144,  (13).  Trans,  of: 
Jno.  Sharpe,  Ralph  Tyboll,  Samll.  John- 
son, Wm.  Phillips,  James  Palmer, 
Judith  Mackman,  Robt.  Thompson, 
Jno.  Sweeting,  Mary  Harper,  Eliz. 
Farmer,  Kath.  Motly,  Samll.  Dew,  Jno. 
Dew,  Eliz.  Dew,  Phill.  Sheffeild,  Danll. 
Curtis. 

RICHARD  SEARLES,  150  acs. 
Northumberland  Co.,   10  Apr.   1665,  p. 

145,  (14).  On  E.  side  of  Nomany  Riv., 
E.N.E.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Rice  Maddocks, 
W.S.W.  upon  a  small  creek  dividing  it 
from  land  of  Goodman  Tasker.  Granted 
unto  Jno.  Bennett  1  Aug.  1653  &  by  sd. 


442 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


John  &  Elizabeth,  his  wife,  assigned  to 
Wm.  Spencer  19  Feb.  1658,  who  as- 
signed to  sd.  Searles  27  Nov.  1660. 

RICHARD  BUSHROD,  2000  acs. 
Westmoreland   Co.,    10    Apr.    1665,    p. 

145,  (14).  In  Potomack  Riv.  opposite 
against  the  Miompses  Island,  commonly 
called  the  Doegs  Island,  bounding  S. 
on  a  great  marsh.  Granted  sd.  Bushrod 
15  Oct.  1660  &  upon  his  reasonable 
petition  order  was  granted  for  renewing 
sd.  pattent  by  a  new  grant;  order  dated 
24  Mar.  1662. 

RICHARD  BUSHROD  &  THOMAS 
BUSHROD,  300  acs.  Northumberland 
Co.,  10  Apr.  1665,  p.  145,  (15).  S. 
side  Potomack  Riv.,  Wly.  upon  Nomeny 
bay,  N.  upon  Cr.  dividing  this  from 
land  of  Jno.  Armsby.  Granted  unto 
Thomas  Youell  16  Sept.  1651,  assigned 
to  Rice  Maddocks,  who  assigned  to 
Ralph  Horsly,  who  reassigned  to  sd. 
Maddocks,  who  sold  to  George  Durant, 
by  whom  it  was  sold  unto  sd.  Bushrod. 

THOMAS  CHETWOOD,  500  acs. 
on  N.  side  of  Lancaster  Co.,  9  July, 
1663,  p.  145,  (15).  Trans,  of  10  pers: 
John  Lawrence,  Geo.  Spell,  Andrew 
Rayney,  Wm.  Corderoy,  Thomas  Ard- 
ington,  Edward  Jenings,  John  Mumford, 
Wm.  Edwards,  Jno.  Taylor. 

WM.  DENBY,  400  acs.  Rappa.  Co. 
on  N.  side  of  sd.  Riv.,  3  Dec.  1663,  p. 

146,  (15).  Beg.  at  miles  end  of  land 
of  Mr.  James  Williamson.  Granted  to 
George  Bryar  16  Mar.  1657,  by  him 
deserted  &  granted  to  Richard  James  by 
order  of  court  24  Mar.  1661,  who  sold 
to  sd.  Denby. 

JOHN  INGRAM  &  WM.  BARBER, 
506  acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  21  June  1664,  p. 
146,  (16).  Upon  the  head  of  Totoskey 
Cr.  Trans,  of  11  pers:  Mary  Fisher 
Ann  Kingstone,  Wm.  Herbert,  Robt 
Comton,  (or  Antom),  Wm.  Grafton 
Mary  Norman,  Robt.  Dory,  Wm.  Floy 
ton,  Maudlin  Vaughan,  Edw.  Jory  (?) 

THOMAS  HARPER  &  THOMAS 
COOPER,  207  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  7 
June    1664,   p.    146,    (16).    S.    side   of 


Coxes  Cr.,  bounded  on  S.  by  land  of 
Francis  Browne,  extending  to  trees  of 
Oliver  Segar.  Granted  to  Francis 
Browne  10  May  1654,  &  by  him  as- 
signed to  sd.  Harper  &  Cooper,  5  May 
1659. 

JOHN  GIBBS,  250  acs.  Rappa.  Co., 
5  Apr.  1664,  p.  147,  (17).  S.  side 
Rappa.  Riv.,  about  2  mi.  into  woods  adj. 
branches  of  Pascataway  Cr.,  beg.  in  N. 
by  E.  lyne  of  Evan  Davis,  running  their 
lines  N.  by  E.  11  po.  &c.  to  land  of  Mr. 
Perry  &c.  Trans,  of  5  pers:  Robt. 
Franck,  Eliz.  Woodbridge,  Giles  Salem, 
John  Patrack,  Jno.  Guy. 

HENRY  BERRY,  600  acs.  upon  S. 
side  &  in  the  freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  8 
Apr.  1664,  p.  147,  (17).  Beg.  at  S.E. 
limit  of  land  of  Clement  Herbert,  ex- 
tending nigh  the  Riv.,  crossing  Puamun- 
vein  (?)  Cr.  &c.  Trans,  of  12  pers: 
Jno.  Berry,  Hump.  Tabb,  Wm.  Cole, 
Mary  Jones,  Arthur  Wise,  Rich.  Wright, 
A  Negro,  Wm.  Stevens,  Peter  Newell, 
Mary  Wms  (Williams),  Susan  Stone, 
Peter  Gill. 

JOHN  GREEN,  the  son  of  Jno. 
Green,  late  of  Rappa.  Co.,  dec'd.,  200 
acs.  in  sd.  Co.,  10  Sept.  1663,  p.  147, 
(18).  S.  side  Rappa.  Riv.  &  S.W.  side 
of  Gillsons  Cr.,  dividing  this  from  land 
of  Bartholomew  Hoskins.  Granted  to 
John  Gillett  4  Feb.  1653,  assigned  to 
John  Green,  dec'd.,  6  Oct.  1654  &  now 
renewed. 

WILLIAM  LANE,  940  acs.  N.  side 
of  Rappa.  Riv.  bet.  Pepetick  Cr.  &  a  Cr. 
at  the  foot  of  certain  white  cliff ts.  18 
Mar.  1662,  p.  148,  (18).  Granted  to 
Jno.  Paine  15  Nov.  1653,  who  sold  to 
sd.  Lane. 

MR.  JOHN  HULL,  500  acs.  on  N. 
side  &  in  the  freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  20 
Feb.  1662,  p.  148,  (19).  Beg.  at  land 
now  in  possession  of  Silvester  Thatcher 
&c.  running  to  Spanish  Oake  dividing 
land  of  sd.  Thatcher  &  Tho.  Whitlock. 
Sold  to  sd.  Hull  by  Alex.  Fleming  & 
Eliz.  his  wife,  being  part  of  1000  acs. 
granted  to  sd.  Thatcher  6  Oct.  1656. 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


443 


SAME.  650  acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  on  N. 
side  sd.  Riv.,  18  Mar.  1663/4,  p.  148, 
(19).  Bet.  two  main  branches  of  Totos- 
key Cr.  Beg.  at  poynt  of  land  where 
sd.  Cr.  divides  itself  into  two  main 
branches,  one  running  Nly.,  the  other 
Ely.  &c.  to  land  of  Michael  Hugell,  to 
trees  of  Dennis  Swillivants,  including 
all  marshes  between  the  water  side  of 
each  branch  &  the  firme  land.  Trans,  of 
13  pers:  Peter  Peterson,  David  Warren, 
Tho.  Offeild,  Roger  Brack  (or  Beack), 
Jane  Dunkin,  Walter  Wood,  Phillip 
Cox,  Edw.  Norman,  Walter  Coale,  Wm. 
Watkins,  Jno.  Charles,  Hen.  Moore, 
Eliz.  Welch. 

THOMAS  FRESHWATER,  200  acs. 
on  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  on  W.  side 
of  Totoskey  Cr.,  adj.  land  of  Leonard 
Jones  &c.  to  branch  of  Mr.  Williamsons 
Cr.  26  Sept.  1664,  p.  149,  (20). 
Granted  to  Robert  Sisson,  by  him  de- 
serted &  upon  petition  granted  to  sd. 
Freshwater.  The  following  names  ap- 
pear: James  Wms.  (Williams),  Tob 
(or  Job)  Lane,  Bartholomew  Lownes, 
Arthur  Upshott. 

WM.  BARBER  &  JOHN  INGRAM, 
464  acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  on  Swd.  side  of  E. 
most  branch  of  Totoskey  Cr.,  22  June 
1664,  p.  149,  (20).  Adj.  their  own  & 
land  of  Jno.  Williams.  Trans,  of  10 
pers:  Robt.  Bradly,  Dorathy  Perkins, 
Thomas  Melford,  John  Little,  Eliz. 
Hiorn,  Mary  Fisher,  Jane  Jolly,  Ann 
Kingington,  Wm.  Bridgett. 

NICHOLAS  WHITE,  176  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  14  Feb.  1662,  p.  149,  (21). 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  N.W.  side  of 
Purcaticon  Cr.,  beg.  on  N.W.  side  of  a 
branch  dividing  this  &  land  of  Mr.  Jno. 
Cox  &c.  to  branch  divding  this  &  land 
whereon  Wm.  Johnson  now  liveth. 
Granted  to  Wm.  Johnson  14  June  1655 
&  sold  to  sd.  White. 

WM.  GASKINS,  550  acs.  Northamp- 
ton Co.,  30  Mar.  1663,  p.  150,  (22). 
Bounded  W.  by  land  of  Richard  Wen- 
nell.  Trans,  of  11  pers:  Henry,  Joane, 
Bess,  Oversee,  Jack,  Joane,  Negroes; 
John  Steward,  John  Warper,  George 
Lilley,  Wm.  Rabishaw,  Robt.  Butter  (or 
Butler). 


JNO.  BLAK  (Blake),  Esqr.,  300  acs. 
in  Mathews  Cr.,  a  branch  of  the  S.  br. 
of  Nancimond  Riv.  30  Oct.  1662,  p. 
150,  (22).  Renewal  of  his  patent  dated 
14  Dec.   1653. 

WM.  HAINES,  700  acs.  on  the  head 
of  the  S.  branch  of  Nancimond  Riv.  28 
Oct.  1662,  p.  150,  (23).  Renewal— 
13  Apr.  1653. 

ROWLAND  BEAMAN,  25  acs. 
Warwick  Co.,  26  Jan.  1663,  p.  150, 
(23).  Being  barren  poynts  on  E.most 
side  of  Waters  Cr.,  beg.  to  the  Wwd. 
of  Mr.  Whitbies  house  &c.  towards  Mr. 
Whitbys  old  landing.  Trans,  of  Jno. 
Stuckey. 

SAME.  185  acs.  &  40  po.,  same  Co. 
&  date.  P.  151,  (24).  Beg.  at  W. 
bounds  of  1300  acs.  granted  to  Mr. 
Whitby,  27  July  1652,  running  to  gum 
parting  it  from  land  of  Major  Thomas 
Davis.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Thomas 
Lewis,  Wm.  Endin,  Hannah  Custis,  Jno. 
Walters. 

ROBERT  CHAPPELL,  100  acs.  War- 
wick Co.,  26  Jan.  1663,  p.  151,  (24). 
Nly.  on  Piny  Sw.  &  Ely.  on  Oaken  Sw., 
&  Sly.  on  land  of  Mr.  Whitby.  Trans, 
of   2   pers:    Alice  Thomas,  Ann  Hues. 

SAZvIUELL  CHAPPELL,  78  acs.  War- 
wick Co.,  4  July  1664,  p.  151,  (24). 
Bounding  on  a  branch  parting  this  from 
land  of  Thomas  Ramshaw,  running  to 
a  swamp  parting  this  &  land  of  Henry 
Ewingtons  (or  Errington)  land  &  run- 
ning near  tree  of  John  Williams.  Trans, 
of  2  pers:  Rich.  Thomas,  John  Ross 
(or  Rose). 

JOHN  HULL,  300  acs.  Lancaster  Co., 
18  Mar.  1662,  p.  152,  (25).  Upon 
Occapason  Cr.  Granted  to  Jno.  Watson 
12  June  1655,  by  him  sold  to  Vincent 
Stanford,  who  sold  to  Edward  Hudson, 


THOMAS  MARSTON  &  VINCENT 
ELLIOT,  340  acs.  James  City  Co.,  7 
June  1664.  P.  152,  (26).  On  N.  side 
of  Chikahomany  Riv.,  beg.  at  Mr. 
Williams'  gum  tree  in  a  swamp  which 


444 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


makes  part  of  long  neck,  running  to- 
wards Barbadoes  Runn.  Trans,  of  7 
pers:  Tho.  Petite,  Thomas  May,  Rich- 
ard Dobbins,  Robt.  Norton,  James 
Fisher,  Wm.  Angle,  Edward  Barned. 

JAMES  ALLYSON,  360  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  152,  (26).  S. 
side  Rappa.  Riv.,  running  to  a  small 
creek  dividing  this  from  land  of  Mr. 
Henry  Soanes.  Part  of  500  acs.  belong- 
ing to  Sir  Henry  Checkly  &  by  Mr.  Cut- 
bert  Potter,  his  lawful  Atty.,  assigned 
to  sd.  Allyson. 

MAJOR  NICHOLAS  HILL  &  SIL- 
VESTER, his  wife,  750  acs.  in  the  Up. 
Par.  of  Is.  of  Wight  Co.,  30  Sept.  1664, 
p.  153,  (27).  Being  the  moiety  of  1500 
acs.  appertayning  unto  the  sd.  Silvester 
&  her  sister,  who  were  daughters  and 
Coheires  to  Mr.  Edward  Bennett,  dec'd. 
Beg.  upon  the  top  of  a  bank  of  James 
Riv.  &c.  &  running  to  place  called  the 
Rocks.  Part  of  devdt.  of  1500  acs. 
granted  to  Richard  Bennett,  Esqr.,  as- 
signed to  Major  Nicholas  Hill  as  prop- 
erty belonging  to  Mary  Bland  &  sd. 
Silvester,  as  by  deed  of  partition  dated 
8  Apr.  1663  between  Tho.  Bland,  Esqr. 
Atty  of  Thomas  Bland  &  Mary,  his  wife, 
&  Major  Nicholas  Hill  &  Silvester,  his 
wife. 

ANTHONY  MATHEWS,  640  acs. 
Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  1  Feb.  1664,  p.  153. 
(27).  Beg.  at  head  of  Cranages  Sw. 
on  W.  side  of  Edmond  Palmers  land. 
Trans,  of  13  pers:  Mary  Gray,  Her 
sonn,  Mathew  Wakely,  Mary  Walkers, 
John  Bunnell  (or  Burnell),  Mary  his 
wife,  his  son,  Wm.  Cotton,  Mary  Tom- 
lin,  Peter  Langleigh,  Tho.  Reighnolds, 
Rich.  Lewes,  a  Negroe  woman. 

AMBROSE  CLARE,  300  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  15  Oct.  1664,  p.  153,  (28). 
On  the  head  of  Spring  branch  on  Hitch- 
mans  lyne,  E.N.E.  to  Mr.  Spencers  cor. 
tree,  &c.  to  Tho.  Merediths  lyne  &c.  to 
a  meadow  of  Marraquince  Swamp.  Part 
of  patent  sold  unto  Jonathan  Townsend 
by  Mr.  Jno.  Underhill  &  due  sd.  Clare 
as  marrying  the  relict  of  sd.  Towndsend. 

LT.  COL.  JNO.  BLAKE  &  MR.  ED- 
WARD   ISON,    2500    acs.    Nancimond 


Co.,  20  Feb.  1664,  p.  154,  (28).  Trans, 
of  50  pers:  Jno.  Holland,  Jno.  Gaye, 
Eliz.  Ludloe,  Ambrose  Right,  Jno. 
Members,  Joyce  Arnall,  Maudlin  Jones, 
Mathew  Castome,  Richard  Harris,  Peter 
Rich,  Robert  White,  John  Wale,  James 
Diddicutt,  A  Negro  boy,  Henry  Mills, 
Heny  Stone,  Wm.  Warde,  Wm.  Harri- 
son, Xtopher  Ashly,  Eliz.  Baly,  Jane 
Fisher,  Alice  King,  George  Coales, 
Danll.  Burton,  Jno.  Johnson,  Richard 
Newman,  John  Hewes,  Mary  Cocke, 
Tho.  Belcher,  John  Fowke,  3  Negroes, 
Arthur  Hope,  Alice  Steward,  Robt. 
Harrison,  2  Negroes,  Giles  Danby, 
Danll.  Rock,  John  Steward,  Wm.  Jones, 
Thomas  Spicer,  James  Kirkcome,  Hen. 
Cutterbooke,  John  Dodd,  A  Negro, 
Mathew  Holter,  Thomas  Mills,  Wm. 
Jnoson. 

MR.  WM.  PEIRCE,  (Perce),  4054 
acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  Farnham  Parish, 
1  June  1663,  p.  154,  (29).  On  N. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  on  E.most  side 
of  Rappa.  main  Cr.,  near  the  tripell 
dividing  thereof,  extending  &c.  over  a 
branch  called  Herring  Cr.  &c.  to  neere 
the  head  of  George  Bryers  Cr.  &c.  The 
following  names  appear  under  this  re- 
cord: Mary  Blunt,  Mary  Usher,  Ann 
Jones,  Fra.  Preist,  Wm.  Rosse,  Henry 
Martyn,  Tho.  Just,  Philip  Flower,  Wm. 
Royden,  Rachell  Williams,  Margaret 
Williams,  Bridget  Batcheller,  August 
Withey,  Wm.  Lewis,  Jno.  Jones,  Eliz. 
Wood,  Lidia  How,  Wm.  Badger,  Jno. 
Gaffer,  Daniell  Merricke,  Jno.  Jones, 
Edward  Seare,  Marg.  Williams,  Rich- 
ard Webb,  Abell  Jason,  Wm.  Richard- 
son, Anne  Robinson,  Susanna  Alcocke, 
Samll.  Hookes,  Fra.  Glover,  Dorothy 
Glover,  Richard  Bullocke,  Jno.  Mann, 
Edward  Evans,  Robt.  Evans,  Jno.  Gould- 
ing,  Edward  Reeves,  Ann  Blandon,  Ann 
Mason,  Mary  Miller,  Mary  Dunston, 
Wm.  Peirce,  Sarah  Peirce,  Jno.  Ellison, 
Geo.  Walker,  Ann  Leviton,  Fra.  Neson, 
Wm.  Gilbert,  Nich.  Shirt,  Jno.  Nor- 
mingto,  Rich.  Founding,  Mary  Gore, 
Edm.  Eacerman,  Grace  Hill,  Geo.  Clad- 
win,  Joane  East,  Garrest  Clesty,  Jno. 
Wilcox,  Tho.  Wilcox,  Jno.  Tanner,  Robt. 
Morris,  Jno.  Barlow,  Jno.  Middleton, 
Geo.  Smith,  Tho.  Rogers,  Susan  Edwards, 
Garrett  Bryan,  Wm.  Martin,  Eliz.  Wigg- 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


445 


more,  Anth.  Greenmay,  &  12  persons. 
The  residue  by  Certificate  dated  23d 
June  1661  from  Tho.  Brereton.  Marginal 
Note:  This  survey  being  re-surveyed 
and  found  to  be  but  3000  acres,  the 
over  plus  of  rights  being  past  into  Mr. 
Loyds  patt. 

COL.    EDWARD    CARTER,    Esqr., 

1650  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  on  N.  side  of 
Rappa.  Riv.,  29  Apr.  1665,  p.  155, 
(29).  Part  of  an  Indian  Habitation 
called  old  Moraticond,  beg.  at  a  poynt 
on  the  Nwd.  side  of  the  mouth  of 
Harrises  Cr.,  adj.  land  of  Edward  Harris 
&c.  to  Swd.  side  of  Swd.  branch  of  the 
deviding  Cr.  belonging  to  Cottowoman 
Riv.  &c.  to  the  middle  br.  of  Faire- 
waters  Cr.  &c.  crossing  Brices  Cr. 
Granted  to  Mr.  Thomas  Brice  27  Oct. 
1652,  given  by  will  to  his  wife  Martha 
&  by  sd.  Martha  &  her  second  husband, 
Wm.  White,  Clerke,  mortgaged  for  a 
certain  sum  of  tobacco  unto  Mr.  John 
Jefferyes  &  Mr.  Thomas  Coldclough  of 
London,  Merchants;  sd.  land  given  by 
her  will  unto  the  orphants  of  sd.  Wm. 
White  &  by  order  of  the  Govr.  &  Coun- 
cil put  in  possession  of  Col.  John  Car- 
ter, Atty  of  sd.  Jefferyes  &  Coldclough 
for  payment  of  the  sd.  debt,  the  over- 
plus to  remaine  to  Mr.  Jeremiah  White 
&  Mr.  George  Hewett,  guardians  of  sd. 
Orphans  for  their  use;  sd.  land  after- 
wards sold  unto  sd.  Col.  Edward  Carter 
&  his  heirs  forever  by  the  sd.  John 
Carter,  he  being  authorized  by  a  Joynt 
letter  of  Atty.  under  the  hands  &  seals 
of  sd.  JefFeries  &  Coldclough  &  the  sd. 
Guardians. 

JOSEPH  MILLER,  400  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  28  Apr.  1665,  p.  156,  (31). 
300  acs.  on  N.  side  of  the  S.  br.  of 
Eliz.  Riv.,  beg.  on  a  poynt  at  the  mouth 
of  Smithes  Cr.  &c.  to  mouth  of  Pusell 
Cr.  &c;  100  acs.  adj.  his  land,  running 
from  the  mouth  of  Smiths  Cr.  on  W. 
side  of  the  S.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.  into  the 
mouth  of  Pusell  Cr.  &c.  300  acs.  by 
pattent  dated  1  Oct.  1661  &  100  acs. 
for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Martha  Deare- 
Love,  Isaak  Dearelove    (or  Dearelow). 

MR.  RICHARD  JONES,  300  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  28  Apr.  1665,  p.  156, 


(32).  At  head  of  the  S.  br.  of  Eliz. 
Riv.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Alice  Martin, 
Alice  Young,  Gilbert  Lewis,  Mary 
Shute,  Wm.  Odion  the  younger,  Ellen 
Odion. 

THOMAS  WILSON,  75  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co-.,  28  Apr.  1665,  p.  156,  (32). 
N.Ewd.  from  the  head  of  Deep  Cr., 
running  by  the  maine  poquoson,  by  the 
Beare  path  &c.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Rich- 
ard Odeon,  Mary  Williams. 

MR.  RICHARD  JONES,  Marriner, 
280  acs.  in  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  8  Apr. 
1665,  p.  157,  (33).  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
Ellen  Odion,  Elizabeth  Manning,  Sarah 
Weaver,  George  Fardinando. 

EDMOND  CREEKMAN,  230  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  28  Apr.  1665,  p.  157, 
(33).  E.  side  of  the  S.  branch  of  Eliz. 
Riv.  &c.  nigh  Alexander  Ross'  trees, 
nigh  Riggs  Cr.  &c.  200  acs.  by  patent 
dated  1  Oct.  1661  &  30  acs.  for  trans, 
of  Jane  Wood. 

MR.    RICHARD    JONES,    of    Low. 

Norf.  Co.,  200  acs.,  28  Apr.  1665,  p. 
157,  (34).  On  W.  side  of  the  S.  br. 
of  Eliz.  Riv.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  James 
Damster,  Wm.  Nelson,  Elizabeth  Leess, 
Jno.  White. 

THOMAS  GODBY,  250  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  28  Apr.  1665,  p.  158,  (34). 
200  acs.  on  the  head  of  Gaythers  Cr.,  a 
br.  of  the  S.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  running 
to  land  of  Thomas  Marsh;  50  acs. 
bounded  from  his  marked  trees,  Ely.  to 
Thomas  Alexanders  lyne  &c.  200  acs. 
granted  to  Thomas  Etheridge,  1  Nov. 
1647,  sold  to  sd.  Godby  20  Nov.  1649, 
by  him  sold  to  Alex.  Foreman  &  Robt. 
Peacock  1st  Aug.  1659,  who  re-assigned 
to  sd.  Godby  1  Dec.  1659;  50  acs.  for 
trans,   of   Susan  White. 

MR.  ROBERT  BUTT,  1200  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  28  Apr.  1665,  p.  158,  (35). 
E.  side  of  S.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  beg.  on  a 
poynt  near  the  Nwd.  side  of  a  br.  called 
the  new  discovery  running  &c.  nigh  a 
main  poquoson,  crossing  severall 
branches  &c.  including  a  great  marsh. 
Granted  to  Mr.  Tristram  Nasworthy  19 


446 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Aug.  1650,  by  George,  his  son,  assigned 
to  sd.  Butt,  Richard  Whitby  &  Jno. 
Bright,  7  Jan.  1656,  the  two  last  men- 
tioned having  sold  their  part,  being  800 
acs.,  to  sd.  Butt. 

ANTHONY  ARNOLD,  500  acs. 
Westmoreland  Co.,  3  May  1665,  p.  159, 
(36).  Upon  the  head  of  Coss  Coss  Cr., 
lying  at  the  head  of  Robert  Yeos  land. 
Granted  to  Thomas  Brereton  20  Sept. 
1661  &  by  him  deserted.  Granted  sd. 
Arnold  by  order  of  Council  25  Nov. 
1663.  The  following  names  appear  un- 
der this  record:  Nicholas  Browninge, 
Mary  Page,  Mary  Anderson,  Henry 
Browne,  Tho.  Eggerly,  Wm.  Lane,  3 
Negroes,  Marke  Dawson. 

JOHN  ALEXANDER,  Senior,  550 
acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  23  Mar.  1664, 
p.  159,  (36).  S.  side  of  Attopin  Cr. 
dam,  bounded  E.  by  land  formerly  in 
possession  of  John  Vaughan  &  W.  by 
tract  of  land  surveyed  for  George  Wed 
ing,  Daniell  White  &  Miles  Phillips 
Trans,  of  11  pers:  Lawrence  How 
Phill.  Wilkenson,  David  Williams,  Jno 
Woodruff,  Ann  Tanner,  JefTery  Sum 
mons,  Margery  Westinscott,  Joan  Donn 
Alex.  Turner,  Wm.  Ackley,  Wm.  Cox 

JOHN  BEARD,  245  acs.  Westmore- 
land Co.,  23  Mar.  1664,  p.  159,  (37). 
Bounded  N.E.  by  land  in  possession  of 
Mr.  Anthony  Bridges,  W.S.W.  by  land 
surveyed  for  George  Weading,  S.S.W. 
by  great  swamp  &  S.S.E.  by  his  own 
land  &  lyne  of  Roysier,  now  in  posses- 
sion of  sd.  Bridges.  Trans,  of  5  pers: 
Thomas  Temple,  Sarah  Hawkins,  Tho- 
mas Merchant,  Howell  Jones,  Lazarus 
Owen. 

JOHN  &  THOMAS  PALMER,  365 
acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  23  Mar.  1664. 
p.  159,  (37).  Bounded  N.Ely,  by  land 
of  Mr.  Robt.  Howsing  &  Mr.  Davis,  E. 
Sly.  by  Mr.  John  Ashton  &  S.Wly.  by 
land  lately  surveyed  for  Mr.  Jno.  Ben- 
ton (or  Bruton).  Trans,  of  7  pers: 
Joane  Egg,  Sarah  King,  James  Willett, 
Ann  Clutterbook.  Jno.  Head,  Thomas 
Daubles,  Robt.  Paine. 

ROBT.  ALEXANDER,  500  acs.  Staf- 
ford Co.,  23  Mar.  1664,  p.  160,    (37). 


Upon  br.  of  Up.  Machotick  Dam,  beg. 
on  the  N.  side  of  a  br.  thereof.  Trans, 
of  10  pers:  Mary  Freeman,  James 
Cater,  Jno.  Porter,  Robt.  Sheppard,  Mar- 
garett  Gay,  Nicholas  Perrom  (?),  Tho- 
mas Gore,  Jane  Nash,  Henry  Gerish, 
Judeth  Pile. 

COL.  GERRARD  FOWKE  &  MR. 
RICHARD  HAIBERD,  1680  acs.  Staff. 
Co.,  23  Mar.  1664,  p.  160,  (38).  Beg. 
on  a  poynt  at  the  head  of  a  small  cr. 
falling  into  Rappa.  Riv.  near  the  Doegs 
Towne.  Trans,  of  34  pers:  Hannah 
Spender,  Thomas  Twiford,  Susan  Fox, 
Martha  Shipman,  Jno.  Willshire,  Ann 
Rose,  Joane  Smith,  Law.  Washington, 
Jno.  Seaman,  Jno.  Empson,  Maly  Mason, 
Antho.  &  Ana,  Negroes,  Mathew  Lewis, 
Jenkin  Jones,  Roger  Williams,  Margarett 

Price,    Mary    E ,    Elizabeth    Baker, 

Anthony  Sheppard,  Isaac  Cooke,  Tymo- 
thy  Baker,  Wm.  Davis,  Jno.  Beales, 
Wm.  Ruffer,  Jona.  Statly,  Ann  Bellimer, 
Nath.  Pope,  Thomas  Pope  3  tymes, 
Sarah  Turner,  Wm.  Baltrop,  Daniell 
Jones. 

MAJOR     JOHN     WASHINGTON, 

320  acs.  Westmoreland  Co.,  23  Mar. 
1664,  p.  161,  (38).  Upon  S.E.  side  of 
Hollis  Cr.,  beg.  at  an  Oyster  shell  poynt, 
N.E.  by  N.  upon  Potomack  Riv.,  N.W. 
by  W.  upon  a  cr.  dividing  this  from 
land  in  possession  of  Mr.  Daniell  Lis- 
son,  S.E.  by  E.  upon  a  gutt  dividing  this 
&  land  in  possession  of  Widdow 
Brookes  &c.  along  Richard  Hills  lyne 
228  perches  till  it  falls  on  line  of  Mr. 
Daniell  Lisson  &c.  125  acs.  granted  to 
Henry  Brooke  14  Oct.  1657  by  him  as- 
signed to  Richard  Coale,  who  sold  to 
Davy  Anderson  &  by  him  assigned  to  sd. 
Washington,  &  195  acs.  for  trans,  of  4 
pers:  Ambrose  Couch,  Robt.  Alexander, 
Jno.  Alexander,  Samll.  Short. 

TOHN  BIGGS,  of  Low.  Norf.  Co., 
450  acs.  28  Apr.  1665,  P.  161,  (39). 
E.  side  of  the  S.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  run- 
ning W.N.W.  &c.  bounding  on  a 
draught  of  Tristrum  Nasworthy  &c.  100 
acs.  granted  to  Lt.  Col.  Tristrum  Nas- 
worthy 10  June  1654  &  by  Thomas,  his 
son.  assigned  to  sd.  Bi^gs  4  Tan.  1661 
&  350  acs.  for  trans,  of  7  pers:    Peter 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


447 


Malbone,  Margerett  Wade,  Eliz.  Tomp- 
son,  Jno.  White,  Jr.,  Solomon  White, 
Hanah  White,  Thomas  Browne. 

ROBT.  ALEXANDER,  JOHN 
ALEXANDER,  JR.,  &  XTOPHER 
LUND,  1464  acs.  W'moreland  Co.,  23 
Mar.  1664,  p.  162,  (41).  S.  side  of 
Attapin  Cr.  Dam,  beg.  at  cor.  tree  of 
George  Weading,  Daniell  White  & 
Miles  Phillips,  extend.  W.  by  S.  &c.  to 
N.  side  of  a  small  runn  that  falls  into 
Appamattocks  Cr.  &c.  Trans,  of  29 
pers:  Roger  Korman  (or  Norman), 
Ann  Phillips,  Edward  Massey,  Henry 
Coplyn,  Charles  Perches,  John  Ellis, 
Robet  Franck,  Lawrence  Tomkins,  Tho- 
mas Webb,  Joyce  Axell,  Wm.  Butler, 
Robt.  Cockerell,  Thomas  Wilkenson, 
Daniell  Liss,  Thomas  Moore,  Wm. 
West,  Rachaell  Hailes,  Richard  Huff, 
John  Gayle,  Thomas  Butler,  Henry 
Vincent,  Ellen  Browne,  Thomas  Lund, 
Jno.  Walton,  Maurice  Smith,  Wm. 
Hills,  Samll.  Mottershead,  Lucy  Strat- 
ton,  Judeth  Beach. 

GEORGE    WEADING,    212    A.    80 

perches,  W'moreland  Co.,  23  Mar.  1664, 
p.  162,  (41).  Near  the  head  of  Tappin 
Cr.,  beg.  at  cor.  tree  of  Mr.  John  Rosier, 
Clk.,  &c.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Richard 
Nickolls,  Mr.  Foote,  a  Scotchman,  Tho- 
mas Browne. 

WILLIAM  VAUGHAN,  156  acs. 
W'moreland  Co.,  23  Mar.  1664,  p.  163, 
(42).  Ewd.  side  of  Fishing  Cr.,  beg. 
in  a  lyne  dividing  this  &  land  of  Mr. 
Thomas  Pope  &c.  to  branch  dividing 
this  &  land  of  Arthur  Terrill,  now  in 
possession  of  John  Browne  &c.  Trans, 
of  3  pers:  Robt.  Casher,  John  Dey, 
John  Sparke. 

THOMAS  POPE,  2454  acs.  W'more- 
land Co.,  23  Mar.  1664,  p.  163,  (42). 
Beg.  on  N.W.  side  of  a  marsh  &  swamp 
in  a  valley  bet.  two  hills  wch.  divides 
this  &  land  formerly  in  possession  of 
John  Walton,  Cooper,  running  near 
Fishing  Cr.  &c.  to  a  branch  falling  into 
Potomack  Riv.  near  a  branch  dividing 
this  from  land  of  Arthur  Terrill  &  near 
land  of  John  Vaughan  &c.  1050  acs. 
granted  to  Nathall.  Pope  19  May,  1651 


&  550  acs.  granted  to  sd.  Pope  24  Apr. 
1656  &  since  renewed  in  name  of  Mr. 
Tho.  Pope,  son  &  heire  of  sd.  Pope, 
dec'd.  854  acs.  for  trans,  of  17  pers: 
Rich.  Paine,  Damras  Watney,  Ell. 
Pickett,  Jno.  Cossick,  Robt.  Parker,  Jno. 
Hancock,  Robt.  Glover,  Jno.  Aringell, 
Phill.  Cole,  Ann  Found,  Eliz.  Alexan- 
der, Jno.  Alexander,  Jr.,  Jno.  Courtney, 
Jno.  Cosheir,  Ann  Paine,  Jona.  Sam- 
rayes,  Robt.  Hodges. 

MR.  RICHARD  WARD,  1337  acs. 
&  1  po.  on  S.  side  of  James  Riv., 
Henrico  Co.,  29  Mar.  1665,  p.  164,  (43). 
Beg.  at  cor.  tree  of  upper  end  of 
Xtopher  Branch,  Sr.  running  along  the 
river  N.N.W.  then  N.W.  by  N.  &c.  to 
mouth  of  Falling  Cr.,  up  the  Cr.  W. 
N.W.  &c.  Granted  to  Jeremiah  Black- 
man,  dec'd.,  14  Mar.  1646  &  by  Jere- 
miah, his  son  &  heir,  firmly  sold  to  sd. 
Ward  as  by  records  in  the  Secretaryes 
office. 

JOHN  COX,  550  acs.  Henrico  Co., 
on  N.  side  the  Riv.,  known  by  the  name 
of  Harristocks,  beg.  next  to  land  of 
Capt.  Edloe.  29  Mar.  1665,  p.  164, 
(44).  Granted  to  Arthur  Bayly,  who 
sold  to  Wm.  Johnson,  by  whom  it  was 
assigned  to  sd.  Cox. 

ALEXANDER  BENUM,  257  acs. 
W'moreland  Co.,  23  Mar.  1664,  p.  165, 
(45).  At  Appomattox  Cr.  Beg.  at  a 
small  cr.  issuing  from  Hollis  Cr.,  divid- 
ing this  &  land  of  Jno.  Cooke,  running 
by  the  white  marsh  &c.  to  Johnsons  cor. 
tree  &c.  to  Hollis  Cr.  which  divides 
this  &  land  of  Richard  Browne,  includ- 
ing a  small  island.  Granted  18  of 
March    1662    supposed   to    be    300   acs. 

STEPHEN  NORMAN,  443  acs., 
bounded  Sly.  by  Up.  Machotick  Riv., 
Ely.  upon  land  of  Jonas  Revett  &  Mrs. 
Dade,  formerly  Dodsons,  &  Wly.  by 
land  of  Mr.  Prescutt,  formerly  Lare- 
moores.  23  Mar.  1664,  p.  165,  (45). 
400  acs.  by  patent  dated  1  Apr.  1651  & 
43  acs.  for  trans,  of  John  Tizar. 

MR.  ROBERT  JONES  &  GEORGE 
FLOWER,  400  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  28 
June  1664,  p.  165,  (45).    Being  a  neck 


448 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


bet.  two  swamps  of  the  E.most  branch 
of  Corotoman.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Rich- 
ard Merryman,  Thomas  Sampton  (or 
Sampson),  Edward  Wood,  Michael 
Jones,  Mary  Fletcher,  Jno.  Thorn- 
borough,    Wm.    Hide,    Mathew   Parker. 

MR.  ROBERT  JONES,  160  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  28  June  1664,  p.  165,  (46). 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  Thomas  Rine,  Henry 
Dunnum,  Mary  Lovewell. 

ALEX.   READE    &   JOHN   NEDLE 

(Nedles),  220  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  23 
Feb.  1663,  p.  166,  (46).  Upon  N.  of 
Peanketanck  Riv.,  bounded  upon  S.W. 
with  a  W.  br.  of  sd.  Riv.  opposite  to 
the  Store  poynt  Devident  &c.  extend,  to 
a  br.  of  Barbary  Cr.  Granted  to  Thomas 
Bourne,  26  Feb.  1653,  by  him  assigned 
to  Edward  Webb,  who  assigned  to  the 
above  named. 

WM.  BLAZE,  350  acs.  Lancaster  Co., 
S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  1  Sept.  1663,  p. 
166,  (47).  Adj.  Rice  Jones  &  his  own 
land.    Trans,  of  7  pers.* 

MR.  EDWARD  ROE,  375  acs.  Glos- 
ter  Co.,  27  May  1664,  p.  166,  (47). 
Neer  cor.  tree  supposed  to  be  formerly 
Col.  Lee's,  adj.  devdt.  sd.  Roe  lives 
upon.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Jno.  Smart, 
Wm.  Stamp,  Mary  Curtis,  Francis  Black, 
Edward  Mason,  Symon  Ash,  Elizabeth 
Hubberd,  Thomas  Jenkins. 

MICHAEL  ARMES,  80  acs.  N.  side 
of  Lancaster  Co.,  12  Dec.  1663,  p.  167, 
(48).  Bounding  upon  land  of  Daniell 
Harrison.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  James 
Jones,  Ann  Parsones. 

ROBERT  KEMP,  200  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  25  Feb.  1663/4,  p.  167,  (48).  On 
the  head  branch  of  Parratts  Cr.  Trans, 
of  4  pers:  Jno.  Mason,  Edw.  Wilson, 
Thomas  Story,  Wm.  Rives. 

MR.  CUTHBERT  POTTER,  4000 
acs.  on  S.  side  of  Peanketanck  maine 
swamp,  beg.  opposite  white  oak  on  N. 
side  of  sd.  swamp  being  a  cor.  tree  of 
1380  acs.  surveyed  by  sd.  Potter.  Part 
of  patent  of  5380  acs.  granted  to  him 
20  June  1659.  20  Sept.  1661,  p.  157, 
(48). 


MAJOR     JOHN     WASHINGTON, 

300  acs.  N'umberland  Co.,  alias  West- 
moreland Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Hallowes 
Cr.,  towards  the  head  thereof,  adj.  tract 
of  Mr.  John  Hollowes.  1  June  1664, 
p.  167,  (49).  Granted  to  John  Walton 
15  Sept.  1641,  assigned  to  Jno.  Hal- 
lowes 20  Sept.  1652,  who  assigned  to 
Nicholas  Lansden  20  Oct.  1656  &  by 
him  assigned  to  sd.  Washington  16  July 
1659. 

MAJOR  JOHN  WASHINGTON  & 
THOMAS  POPE,  50  acs.  more  or  less, 
being  10  Islands,  W'moreland  Co.,  4 
Sept.  1661,  p.  167,  (49).  Situated  in 
the  mouth  of  Cedar  Is.  Cr.,  bounded  E. 
by  S.  with  land  of  Mr.  Nat.  Pope,  N.  bv 
E.  with  Potomack  Riv.,  W.  by  N.  with 
land  of  Henry  Brookes.  Trans,  of  Peter 
Renolds.    (By  Francis  Moryson,  Govr.) 

MAJOR     JOHN     WASHINGTON, 

1700  acs.,  lying  bet.  the  head  branches 
of  Powetridge  &  Appamattox  Cr.,  the 
one  falling  into  Rappa.  Riv.  &  the  other 
into  Potomack  Riv.,  beg.  by  Wariscreeke 
path  at  cor.  tree  that  lyeth  next  to  land 
belonging  to  Nat.  Pope,  over  certain 
branches  falling  into  Appamattox  Cr., 
W.  by  br.  of  Porortridge  Cr.  &c.  by 
land  cleared  by  Wm.  Freake.  600  acs. 
granted  Wm.  Freake  18  Mar.  1662  & 
assigned  to  sd.  Washington  26  Mar. 
1664.  1100  acs.  for  trans,  of  22  pers: 
Jno.  Sherman,  Robert  Baker,  Ann  Baker, 
Jno.  Rowly,  Susan  West,  Mary  Godfry, 
David  Lobdell,  Susan  Ripley,  Luke 
Raven,  Joan  Swift,  Robt.  Glass,  Abille 
Denny,  John  Dixon,  John  Heath,  John 
Linton,  Edward  Morgan,  John  Mustran, 
Susan  Sale,  John  Munday  3  tymes,  Law- 
rence Hatch  (or  Falch).  1  June  1664, 
p.  168,  (50). 

BRYAN  STOTT  (or  Scott— Scot), 
800  acs.  N.  side  of  Lancaster  Co.,  10 
July,  1663,  p.  168,  (51).  Bounding  up- 
on land  of  John  Simpson.  Trans,  of  16 
pers:  Tho.  Joyner,  Wm.  Marcum,  John 
Sanns  (?),  Nich.  Watts,  James  Johns, 
Samll.  Carter,  Mary  Wood,  Jane  Sharp, 
Tho.  Vintner,  Susan  Colt,  Emll.  Harris, 
Tho.  Should,  John  Harper,  Wm.  Waters, 
Fra.  Farmer,  Joseph  Marlar. 


t^tf-f  -wv^a  i 


Xr$m$i-l 


.*& 


t/'wV 


a 


m^m 


=vir*>  rj  '3^ 


'",fe": 


A 


w 


|i^M 


£   S' 


:< 


An  example  of  the  difference  in  recordation.    Note  five  patents  on  one  page, 
in  old  Patent  Book  5,  page  77.    New  Patent  Book  4,  pages 
548-49.~-Cavdliers  and  Pioneers,  page  420. 


- 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


449 


JULIAN  ALLAM  (Allain),  200  acs. 
beg.  at  Sandy  poynt,  bounding  W.  upon 
land  of  Major  Edloe.  Part  of  700  acs. 
Granted  to  Benjamin  Carroll,  deed.,  6 
May  1638,  lately  found  to  escheat.  8 
Feb.  1664,  p.  169,  (51). 

JAMES  CLAYTON  (Cleyton)  & 
JAMES  JOHNSON,  668  acs.  N' umber- 
land  Co.,  21  Feb.  1664,  p.  169,  (51). 
Beg.  nigh  the  maine  br.  of  the  broad  Cr. 
Swamp  &c,  being  a  head  line  of  Law- 
rence Damerons  land.  Trans,  of  14 
pers:  Ann  West,  Andrew  Skinner,  Tho- 
mas Man,  Isaack  Edmonds,  Mary  Tab, 
Henry  Preston,  Tho.  Edmons,  Wm.  Ivy, 
Mary  Sweet,  Jno.  Jones,  Wm.  Coocke, 
Mathew  Golden,  Anthony  Say,  Sarah 
Cock  (or  Cook),  Jno.  Jnoson,  Wm. 
Wms.  (Williams).  Note:  "the  two 
Last  namd  belong  to  the  following 
pattent. 

JAMES  CLAYTON,  72  acs.  N'um- 
berland  Co.,  21  Feb.  1664,  p.  169,  (52). 
Beg.  on  maine  S.  br.  of  the  head  Cr. 
Swamp,  adj.  tract  of  sd.  Clayton  & 
James  Johnson.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Wm. 
Jacobs,  Mary  Wilson. 

ANN  POPE  alias  WASHINGTON, 
700  acs.  W'moreland  Co.,  13  Jan.  1661, 
p.  170,  (52).  Upon  S.  side  of  Poto- 
mack  Riv.  600  acs.  upon  Ewd.  side  of  a 
vally  upon  E.  side  of  Hollawawes  Cr., 
&c.  to  a  creek  called  the  Wading  Place 
&c.  100  acs.  bounding  Nly.  upon  the 
aforesaid.  600  acs.  granted  to  John 
Hollis,  gent.,  30  Jan.  1650;  assigned  to 
John  King  &  by  John  Pitt,  Atty.  for  sd. 
King,  assigned  unto  John  Dobman,  who 
assigned  to  Nich.  Heyward  &  granted 
with  the  aforesd.  100  acs.  to  Heyward 
6  Oct.  1658.  Jno.  Dobman,  Atty.  for 
Mr.  Nich.  Heyward,  assigned  to  Lt.  Col. 
Nath.  Pope,  who  assigned  to  sd.  Ann. 
Note:    By  Francis  Moryson. 

WM.  COURT  &  ROBERT  HUT- 
CHENSON  (Hutcheson),  660  acs. 
W'moreland  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  170, 
(53).  Nigh  Up.  Machotick  Cr.,  extend. 
W.  by  N.  along  back  line  of  Mrs.  Ann 
Barnard,  S.W.  into  the  beaver  dams  be- 
longing to  Rosiers  Cr.  &c.  to  land  of 
Francis  Grey.    Granted  to  Nath.  Jones 


&  Abraham  Jerman  (or  Jenman)  16 
May  1660  &  sold  to  the  aforesd. 
patentees. 

MAJOR  JOHN  WASHINGTON  & 
THOMAS  POPE,  1200  acs.  W'more- 
land Co.,  4  Sept.  1661,  p.  171,  (54). 
S.  side  of  Potomack  Riv.  upon  branches 
of  Appamattox,  at  N.W.  cor.  of  land 
belonging  to  Mr.  Nathaniell  Pope  &c. 
to  E.most  side  of  a  run  that  falls  into 
Rappa.  Riv.  &c.  to  poynt  on  the  W.most 
side  of  a  swamp,  crossing  branches  of 
Appamattox  Cr.  to  the  beg.  Trans,  of 
24  pers:  Humphry  Pope,  Isaack  Berkly, 
Rich  Higsden,  Wm.  Buffett,  Samll. 
Green,  Eliz.  Norton,  Ann  Clerke,  Tho- 
mas Browne,  Richard  Taylor,  Charles 
Colkett,  Joseph  Bennett,  John  Coffer, 
John  Butler,  Robert  Owen,  Edward 
Pickery,  John  Walker,  Thomas  Rose, 
Margt.  Clerke,  Darcus  Rose,  Ann  Big- 
ney,  Ann  Shakelton,  Mary  Haggell  (or 
Haggett),  Elizabeth  Powell,  Joseph 
Jea  (?). 

RICHARD  HILL,  663^  acs.  &  32 
pearches,  S.  side  of  Potomack  Riv.,  4 
Sept.  1661,  p.  171,  (54).  500  acs.  on 
Fishing  Cr.  side  adj.  land  of  Henry 
Brooke  &c,  300  acs.  of  which  is  now  in 
possession  of  sd.  Hill  &  one  Griffin; 
63^  acs-  &  32  per.  beg.  at  upper  side 
of  aforesd.  cr.  &  100  acs.  on  the  back 
of  aforesd.  land.  563^  acs.  32  per. 
granted  sd.  Hill  23  Mar.  1659  &  100 
acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Richard  Hill 
&  Thomas  Hill.    (By  Francis  Moryson). 

DOROTHY  BROOKES  alias  Butler, 
650  acs.  W'moreland  Co.,  23  Mar.  1664, 
p.  172,  (55).  Upon  S.W.  side  of  Ap- 
pamattox Cr.  &  Potomack  Riv.  running 
&c.  to  small  gutt  dividing  this  &  part 
of  pattent  layd  out  for  Major  Washing- 
ton, thence  to  Bigwood  Sw.,  extend,  to 
head  of  same  thence  with  trees  which 
divides  this  &  land  now  in  possession  of 
Higden  &  Lawrence  Abington,  &  N. 
Wly.  to  land  taken  up  by  Richard 
Griffin  &  Major.  Washington.  Said  land 
given  by  will  from  Henry  Brookes  to 
sd.  Dorothy;  329  acs.  of  which  is  held 
by  patent  dated  14  Oct.  1657,  321  acs. 
found  more  due  for  trans,  of  7  pers: 
Jno.    Smith,    Jno.    Wells,    Jno.    Evans, 


450 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Tho.  Coles,  Jno.  Devenith,  Jno.  Jenkins, 
Robt.  Parker. 

MICHAELL  GILL,  400  acs.  Up. 
Parish  of  Nancimond  Co.,  18  Apr.  1664, 
p.  172,  (56).  Beg.  at  miles  end  of 
Walter  Bestyes  land  &c.  to  the  head  of 
a  Durty  branch.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Jno. 
Porter  Wife  twice,  Edward  Aster,  Wm. 
Porter,  Hester  Bennett,  Jno.  Edley,  Wm. 
Edley,  (Note:  Immediately  following 
this  appears  the  name:  Danne  or  Daniel 
F.  Strowther,  the  chirography  and  ink 
being  decidedly  unlike  the  preceding.) 

THOMAS  ATTAWAY,  300  acs. 
Nancimond  Co.,  18  Feb.  1664,  p.  173, 
(57).  Beg.  in  Cyprus  Sw.  Trans,  of  6 
pers:  Joyce  Hallaway,  John  Lankson, 
Pope  Allen,  John  Aggor,  Jno.  More- 
head,  Eliz.  Hatby  (or  Hatly). 

JAMES  SUER,  300  acs.  Nancimond 
Co.,  18  Feb.  1664,  p.  173,  (57).  Beg. 
at  a  poplar  by  a  greate  Ciprus  Sw. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Mary  Finch,  Tho- 
masin  English,  Eliz.  Holman,  Margrett 
Mathews,  Rubert  Balch  (or  Batch), 
Thomas  Everard. 

ARTHUR  HOOPER,  500  acs.  Nanci- 
mond Co.,  18  Feb.  1664,  p.  173,  (57). 
Beg.  by  the  Sw.  side.  Trans,  of  10  pers: 
Giles  Webb,  Wife  twice,  Thomas 
Shorte,  Jno.  Hendy,  3  Maides,  Samll. 
Daines,  Fran.  Young. 

THOMAS  MUMPFORD,  300  acs. 
Nancimond  Co.,  18  Feb.  1664,  p.  173, 
(58).  Beg.  by  a  big  Ciprus  Sw.  Trans, 
of  6  pers:  John  Rich,  James  Cressy 
(?),  George  Gladder,  Arthur  Holder 
(?),   Mathew  a  Negro,   Susan  Norvill. 

GEORGE  SPUY,  600  acs.  Up.  Parish 
of  Nancimond  Co.,  28  Feb.  1664,  p. 
174,  (59).  Adj.  Randall  Crews  land. 
Trans,  of  12  pers:  James  Arthur,  Jno. 
Lasher,  Benja.  Hill,  Jeremiah  Canadr 
(?),  Jno.  Thomas,  Simon  Cox,  Tho. 
Driver,  Cristoper.  James,  John  Walters, 
Mary  Williams,  Abraham  Crooke,  Wm. 
Waiters  (or  Walters.) 

JOHN  GATLIN,  250  acs.  abutting 
on   N.W.    side   of   Warrisquock   River, 


12  Aug.  1663,  p.  174,  (59).  Granted 
to  John  Bridges  13  Sept.  1636  &  sold 
to  sd.  Gatlin. 

WM.  CORDEROY,  400  acs.  Gloster 
Co.,  1  Feb.  1664,  P.  174,  (59).  Beg. 
at  mouth  of  a  branch  on  N.W.  side  of 
Tottopottomoyes  Sw.  &c.  by  the  Cross 
path  to  Mr.  Buckners  &c.  to  first  great 
br.  on  S.  E.  side  of  the  swamp  &c.  by 
Purton  path  &c.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  An- 
thony Stevens,  John  Jones,  Thomas 
Towers,  Wm.  Draper,  John  Browne, 
Francis  Cooper,  Wm.  Cooke,  Alice 
Swan. 

ABRAHAM  WEEKES,  450  acs.  on  S. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  26  May  1665,  p. 
175,  (60).  Bounded  on  S.E.  with  a  cr. 
dividing  this  &  land  of  Mr.  Rowland 
Burnham,  on  N.W.  with  Wading  Cr. 
dividing  this  from  land  of  Richard 
Parott.  300  acs.  by  assignment  from 
Mr.  David  Fox,  1  Nov.  1650  &  150  acs. 
added  &  granted  sd.  Weekes  22  Nov. 
1653  and  now  renewed. 

JOHN  ROBBINSON,  1000  acs. 
N'umberland  Co.,  24  July  1664,  p.  175, 
(61).  On  the  head  of  Yoacomico  Riv. 
where  it  divides  into  branches  or 
swamps,  bounding  on  S.  E.  with  land 
of  Anthony  Lynton.  Trans,  of  20  pers: 
John  West,  Mary  Wright,  John  Smith, 
John  Price,  Tho.  Williams,  James 
Smart,  Jno.  Eastland,  Thomas  Davis, 
Edward  Travers,  Wm.  Richards.  Tho- 
mas Jones,  John  Free,  Henry  Parker, 
Richard  Saintloe,  John  Perkins,  Samuel 
Castor,  James  Tompson,  Richard  Read, 
John  Flash,  Thomas  Hoell. 

WM.  STENTON  (Stinton)  &  ROBT. 
NURSE,  204  acs.  Henrico  Co.,  27  May, 
1665,  p.  175,  (61).  S.  side  of  James 
Riv.  on  head  of  land  called  Warwick, 
bounded  from  Peter  Lees  land  on  head 
of  land  now  in  possession  Henry  Sher- 
man &c,  N.N.E.  to  lyne  of  Robt. 
Huson,  E.S.E.  on  the  heads  of  Sherman 
&  Robt.  Bradway.  Trans,  of  5  pers: 
Francis  Bennett,  Wm.  Sawer,  Robt. 
Draper,  Anthony  Gunnell. 

MR.  JOHN  KNOWLES,  100  acs. 
Henrico  Co.,  6  May  1665,  p.  176,  (62). 
S.  side  of  James  Riv.  on  lower  side  of 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


451 


the  falling  Cr.  &c.  towards  land  of 
Jeremiah  Blackma(n),  now  in  posses- 
sion of  Mr.  Richard  Ward.  Trans,  of  2 
pers:    John  Mayson,  Elizabeth  Salter. 

SAME.  220  acs.  Same  county,  date 
&  page.  S.  side  of  James  Riv.  beg.  at 
corner  of  Peter  Lees  126  acs.  at  War- 
wick &c.  to  runn  of  the  falling  Cr.  with- 
out a  slash  called  Hog  bed  Slash  & 
E.S.E.  on  head  of  land  he  purchased  of 
Thomas  Cox.  Trans,  of  5  pers:  Mathew 
Richardson,  Wm,  Amman  (?),  Phillip 
Barker,  Robt.  Curtis. 

JOHN   LEWIS   &  EDWARD  ROE, 

550  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  29  June  1663,  p. 
176,  (63).  On  branches  of  Peanke- 
tancke  Sw,  running  N.  to  trees  of  Mr. 
John  Curtis  by  Mattapony  path,  then 
W.  by  N.  inclining  N.  to  Mr.  Potters 
cor.,  then  S.S.W.  &  S.W.  to  sd.  Sw.  &c. 
Trans,  of  11  pers.* 

JOHN  KNOWLES,  133  A.  35  chs. 
9  decimall  parts  in  James  City  Co.,  part 
within  &  part  without  the  Lybertyes  of 
sd.  Citty,  6  Mar.  1665,  p.  177,  (63). 
Beg.  by  a  ditch  nere  the  house  formerly 
belonging  to  John  Phipps  &c.  nere  a 
branch  of  Pitch  &  Tarr  Sw.  &c.  upon  a 
poynt  against  Mr.  Nicholas  Merry- 
wethers  cleared  ground,  over  a  marsh 
&c.  to  W.  side  of  a  Cart  path  &c.  to  S. 
side  of  a  Cart  path  to  the  Island  House 
&c.  to  lower  end  of  Mr.  Walter  Childes 
ditch  &c.  from  S.W.  end  of  Mr. 
Knowles  dwelling  house  &c.  to  S.W. 
corner  of  his  old  Garden  &c.  next  to 
Mr.  Wm.  May's  house  &c.  120  acs. 
purchased  of  Jno.  Phipps,  13  Dec.  1663 
recorded  in  James  County;  3  A.  44  chs. 
37  dec.  parts  by  purchase  from  sd. 
Phipps,  who  purchased  of  the  Relict  of 
Jno  Rix  as  land  appertaining  to  a  brick 
house  now  in  James  Citty,  but  sd. 
Knowles  doubting  Phips'  sale  made  an 
humble  motion  to  the  Honble.  Gov.  & 
Councell  who  immediately  confirmed 
that  sale  as  by  order  dated  17  Oct.  1660, 
which  sd.  order  was  confirmed  by  an 
order  of  Assembly;  9  A.  71  chs.  &  53 
dec.  parts  due  for  trans,  of  Wm.  Bigly. 

THOMAS  DAVYES,  300  acs.  Up. 
Parish  of  Nancimond,  11  Mar.  1664,  p. 


173,  (66).  Beg.  on  miles  end  of  John 
Maysons  land,  butting  on  land  of  Henry 
Plumton  (or  Plunton)  &  James  Foster. 
Trans,  of:  Mary  Hopkins,  Jno.  OfTkair 
(?),  Alice  Carpenter,  Mary  Tyer,  Ann 
&  Jugg,  Negroes. 

JAMES  CANIDA,  400  acs.  in  Ma- 
thewes  Cr.,  a  br.  of  the  S.  br.  of  Nanci- 
mond Riv.,  11  Mar.  1664,  p.  178,  (66). 
Adj.  land  of  Humphry  Griffin.  Trans, 
of  8  pers:  Jno.  Odium,  Wm.  Carpenter, 
Rich.  Williams,  Tho^  Hinton,  Jasper 
Lane,  Nath.  Jordan,  Jno.  Bouch,  Sara 
Bebin. 

JOHN  ODIUM,  500  acs.  Nancimond 
Co.,  21  Mar.  1664,  p.  178,  (67).  Trans, 
of  7  pers:  John  Hayman,  Daniell 
Flinge,  Jno.  Darbye,  Eliz.  Hollar, 
Katherine  Kalin,  Richard  White,  Danll. 
Kelly,  Phillip  Eson,  Arthur  Bryant, 
John  Rich. 

HUMPHRY  GRIFFIN,  200  acs.  in 
Mathews  Cr.,  a  S.  br.  of  Nancimond 
Riv.,  11  Mar.  1664,  p.  179,  (67). 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  James  Kirkkum, 
twice,  Humphry  Griffin,  his  wife  . 

THOMAS  DAVYES,  400  acs.  Up. 
Parish  of  Nancimond  Co.,  11  Mar. 
1664,  p.  179,  (68).  Beg.  by  the  South- 
ern br.  side,  adj.  land  of  Richard  Har- 
mon. Trans,  of  8  pers:  Henry  Bonner, 
twice,  his  wife,  once,  2  children,  Ed- 
ward Joyner,  Maid  Servant,  Thomas 
White. 

RICHARD  GREEN,  400  acs.  Nanci- 
mond Co.,  25  Mar.  1665,  p.  179,  (68). 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  Jno.  Overton,  Wm. 
Wms  (Williams),  Theodus  Bean  (or 
Bran),  Tho.  Smith,  Robt.  Hud,  Wm. 
Thomas,  Ann  Cooper,  Mary  Phillips. 

JOHN  HOGG,  140  acs.  New  Kent 
Co.,  16  Mar.  1663,  p.  179,  (68).  Upon 
Warrany  branches,  beg.  at  cor.  of  Mr. 
Hopes  land  &c.  to  Mr.  Barnhouse  &c. 
Renewal  of  patent  dated  27  Aug.  1659. 

JOHN  MAKERLAND,  150  acs.  Up. 
Parish  of  Nancimond  Co.,  11  Mar. 
1664,  p.  180,  (69).  In  the  S.  branch 
&c.  butting  on   land   of  Jno.   Harryson. 


452 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Trans,  of  3  pers:    Sara  Gay,  Wm.  Hil- 
son,  Susan  Wilnutt. 

GEORGE  ARCHER,  550  acs.  Henri- 
co Co.,  2  June  1665,  p.  180,  (69).  In 
Bristoll  Parish,  on  N.  side  of  Appamat- 
tox  Riv.  next  above  the  old  towne  land, 
running  for  breadth  from  a  marked  lyne 
of  the  old  Towne  at  the  mouth  of  a 
neck  called  Tunstalls,  S.S.W.  along  the 
Riv.  to  the  path  at  the  poynt  of  Landing 
at  the  water  side  below  &  nere  the 
dwelling  house  formerly  sold  by  Wm. 
Ridly  to  Jno.  Mudgett  so  directly  as  the 
path  now  is  through  the  Meadow  until 
it  come  to  the  foot  of  the  hill  to  a  tree 
by  sd.  path  &c.  to  trees  of  Major  Wm. 
Harris  &c.  to  where  Mudgett  formerly 
&  Archer  now  liveth.  250  acs.  pur- 
chased of  Edward  Tunstall,  but  finding 
his  tytle  to  bee  invalid  traversed  (?)  an 
office,  by  virtue  of  which  office  the  said 
land  was  found  to  escheate  to  his  Ma- 
jesty upon  compositon  made  his  said 
land  was  confirmed  &c.  300  acs.  for 
trans,  of  6  pers:  Xtopher.  Kennings, 
Thomas  Moore,  Wm.  Traveler,  Benja- 
min Vintua  (?),  Robt.  Crimly  (or 
Croinly),  Richard  Reade. 

JOHN  STIRGIES,  200  acs.  Accomack 
Co.,  10  Apr.  1663,  p.  181,  (70).  Nere 
Machepungo,  bounded  on  N.  by  land  of 
Thomas  Selby,  on  S.  by  Edward  Smith 
&  on  E.  by  Catt  tale  branch.  Trans,  of 
4  pers:  Jno.  Sanderson,  Jane  Murry, 
Joan  Mills,  Thomas  Evans. 

MR.  SOUTHBY  LITTLETON,  850 
acs.  Accomack  Co.,  12  Sept.  1664,  p. 
181,  (71).  At  Occocomson,  bounded 
on  E.  by  the  seaboard  side,  N.  by  land 
of  Samll.  Taylor  &  S.  by  Edward  Smith. 
Trans,  of  17  pers:  Peter  Luevell,  Jno. 
Goring,  Thomas  Dule  (or  Diche),  Jno. 
Steward,  Thomas  Gray,  Ralph  Carr, 
Henry  Chown,  Henry  Bill,  Edward  May, 
Stephen  Elphich  (?),  Jno.  Churle,  (or 
Charle),  Jno.  Charles,  Wm.  Rye,  Ed- 
ward Nott,  Robt.  Stoller,  Lawrence 
Marsh,  James  Austin. 

JOHN  RENNY,  400  acs.  Accomack 
Co.,  10  Jan.  1662,  p.  181,  (71).  At 
N.  branch  of  Muddy  Cr.,  beg.  at  a  great 
swamp,  running  Nly.  towards  Mesango 


Cr.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Thomas  Dalma, 
Rich.  Heath,  Anto.  Street,  James  Copp- 
ing, Herbert  Springer,  Thomas  Nutt, 
Jno.  May. 

DORATHY  JORDAN,  450  acs.  Ac- 
comack Co.,  10  June  1664,  p.  181,  (71). 
At  Occahannock  Cr.,  bounded  on  N.W. 
by  a  former  devdt.  granted  to  Wm.  Jor- 
dan. Trans,  of  9  pers:  Jno.  Yeo,  Edw. 
Spicer,  Jno.  Surgis,  Rich.  Francklin, 
David  Edwards,  Thomas  Glew,  Wm. 
Tompkins,  Jone  Vina,  Jacaminta  Bodella. 

CORNELIUS  WATKINSON,  450 
acs.  Accomack  Co.,  10  Sept.  1664,  p. 
181,  (71).  Bet.  the  lands  of  Occahan- 
nock &  Machepungo,  bounded  by  trees 
of  Dorothy  Jordan,  Arthur  Upshott, 
Jno.  Salvadge,  Jno.  Stirgies,  Edward 
Smith  &  Henry  Bishop.  Trans,  of  9 
pers:  Xp.  Browne,  Fran.  Lasley  (?), 
Henry  Vernon,  Richard  Prince,  Wm. 
Cohild  (?),  Jane  Hopkins,  Robt.  Leigh- 
ton,  Samll.  Wring,  Robt.  Berry. 

COL.  EDMUND  SCARBURGH, 
1000  acs.  Accomack  Co.,  21  June  1664, 
p.  182,  (72).  At  middle  br.  of  Muddy 
Cr.,  beg.  at  lyne  of  trees  where  the 
fresh  water  branch  begins,  on  the  N.  & 
S.  sides  of  same,  extending  Ely.  to  the 
head  thereof.  Trans,  of  20  pers:  Jonah 
Lord,  Jane  Grey,  Jno.  Carter,  John 
Long,  Jane  Taylor,  JefTry  Wallington, 
Jno.  Atterby,  Jno.  Martin,  Jenken 
Morris,  James  Lolland,  Thomas  Locker, 
Edward  Hollis,  Roger  Froth,  Mathew 
Castleton,  Susan  Farmer,  Francis  Mur- 
ray, Abraham  Short,  Robt.  Loring,  Row- 
land Ashington,  Ann  Redland. 

SAME.  Acreage,  county  &  pages  the 
same  as  above.  20  Apr.  1664.  Lying  on 
N.  &  S.  sides  of  Timber  Cr.,  extend,  to 
head  of  the  main  branch  thereof.  Trans, 
of  20  pers:  Mary  Norwood,  Rich. 
Johnson,  Tho.  Thoroughgood,  William 
Moore,  William  Owen,  Xtopher.  Elfrid, 
Jno.  Stelington  (or  Shelington),  Eliz. 
Rathborne,  Mary  Roberts,  Meredith 
Morgan,  James  Cutler,  Eliz.  Roules,  Jno. 
Hedrington,  James  Wellington,  Tho. 
Mathews,  Ismael  Watlins,  Tho.  King- 
ston, Wm.  Marigold,  Edm.  Ordorne, 
James  Godfry. 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


453 


SAME.  150  acs.,  17  Aug.  1664. 
County  &  pages  the  same.  Bounded  on 
S.  parts  by  Boulmans  branch  &  N.  by 
land  of  Nathanll.  Bradford.  Trans,  of 
3  pers:  Jno.  Crew,  Mary  Frost,  Sarah 
Welch. 


SAME.  3000  acs.,  22  June  1664,  p. 
183,  (73).  Same  Co.  At  the  seaboard 
side,  bounded  on  E.  therewith,  S.  by 
Gingotege  Cr.  &  on  N.  by  Swansicutts 
Cr.  Trans,  of  threescore  pers:  Owen 
Morgan,  Tho.  Luellin,  James  Harris, 
Evan  Jones,  John  Lewis,  Henry  Morris, 
Hup.  Edwards,  Joan  Redman,  Thomas 
Redman,  Jno.  Castleton,  Edw.  Millford, 
Margerett  Jones,  Hugh  Horsington, 
James  Pedly,  Jno.  Mort,  Henry  Out- 
wright,  James  Tuke,  Jeffry  Mosse, 
James  Wright,  Richard  Wells,  Mary 
Smith,  Edward  Speed,  Thomas  Read, 
Rich.  Allgatt,  Humphry  Loyd,  Thomas 
Ford,  Edwin  Loth,  James  Hurle,  Ed- 
ward Shelly,  Owen  Pembroke,  Thomas 
Rosse  (or  RofTe),  Henry  Ashton,  Wm. 
Wright,  Martha  Grimes,  Tobias  South, 
Rowland  Rivers,  Mary  Watkins,  James 
Langly,  John  Moore,  Edward  Neale, 
Hump  Cooke,  Jenkin  Jones,  Martha 
Powell,  Jane  Mathews,  JefTery  White, 
Jno.  Meares,  Henry  Swallow,  Thomas 
Herring,  Morgan  Evans,  Mary  Moult, 
Jno.  Jenken,  Oliver  Martin,  Wm.  Car- 
ter, Jno.  Thorpe,  Thomas  Jenkle,  Roger 
Osborne,  David  Thurle,  Joane  Taylour, 
Lewis  Farthing,  Edward  Whally. 

SAME.  2000  acs.,  10  Sept.  1664,  p. 
183,  (73).  Same  county  &  pages.  Near 
Pokomock  Riv.,  being  a  neck  bounded 
on  S.  by  Crooked  Cr.,  W.  by  the  bay  & 
N.  by  the  Sack  Cr.,  parting  this  from 
land  of  Mr.  Robt.  Pitts.  Trans,  of  40 
pers:  Elf  rid  Snow,  Thomas  Oxly,  James 
Allin,  George  Radder,  Ann  Scarlett, 
Lewis  Whaly,  James  Oxford,  Miles 
Wrack,  James  Hay,  Jervis  Lock,  Tymo- 
thy  Redly,  Michaell  Rooke,  Sarah  Long, 
Henry  Mallard,  Ann  Smith,  Thomas  Joy, 
James  Moat,  Rebecca  Crow,  Ismaell 
Holt,  Edward  Goslin,  Rnndall  Gaines, 
Thomas  Luck,  Mary  Wood,  Robt. 
Willoughby,  Edward  Moore,  John  Rosse, 
Roger  Isham,  Jane  Shaw,  Randall 
Willis,  Jane  Shelly,  Mary  Winter,  Alex. 
Wallis,  Martha  Hill   (or  Hall),  JefTery 


Mosse,  John  Wood,  Joane  Fox,  John 
Osburne,  Ralph  Mew,  James  Nowell, 
Martha  Arris. 

SAME.  2400  acs.  20  Oct.  1663,  p. 
184,  (73).  Same  Co.  At  the  seaboard 
side,  bounded  on  N.  by  the  maine  Cr.  & 
branch  of  a  middle  cr.,  lying  bet.  great 
&  little  Matomkins  Cr.  Trans,  of  48 
pers:  James  Seabott,  Ellinor  Roe,  Mary 
Smith,  Michaell  Watkins,  Thomas  Ship, 
Roger  Newcom,  Jno.  Lozen,  Rich. 
Hollis,  JefTery  Roades,  Jno.  Holmes, 
Rowland  Mills,  James  Sanderson,  James 
Tuke,  Roger  Oheley,  Ann  Rivers,  Henry 
Spur,  Thomas  Girdle,  Lawrence  Roe, 
Thomas  Long,  Joane  Loftis,  Rich. 
Rooke,  Ann  Clifton,  Martha  Fish,  Mar- 
tha Rotoby  (or  Rokesby),  Owen  Carlow, 
Jane  Weall,  Edwin  CrafTt,  Wm.  Wigg, 
An  Carpenter,  Edw.  Firbush,  Thomas 
Fly,  Mathew  Fly,  Jno.  Marwin  ?,  Henry 
Bloie  (or  Bloir),  Margt.  White,  Sarah 
Basely,  Robt.  Rench,  Thomas  Bush,  Jno. 
Roberts,  Jonathan  Barloe,  Walter  Eagle, 
James  Ellis,  James  Miller,  George  Roe, 
Jno.  Stow,  Wm.  King,  Mary  Short, 
Roger  Jones. 

SAME.  1400  acs.,  20  June  1664,  in 
same  Co.  P.  184,  (74).  At  the  sea- 
board side  on  E.,  N.  by  Stokelyes  branch 
&  Cr.,  S.  by  Arathusa  Cr.  &  main  branch 
formerly  called  Kickcotanck  Cr.  Trans, 
of  28  pers:  JefTery  Sadler,  Martha 
North,  Lewis  Wells,  Jenkin  Powell, 
Paul  Wintrop,  Rich.  Wallford,  James 
Richards,  Edward  Rury,  Thomas  Whar- 
ton, Jone  Mellington,  James  Wrath  (or 
Weath),  Thomas  Nowell,  Rich.  Carpen- 
ter, James  Sands,  Ruth  Willis,  Hen. 
Whitchurch,  Thomas  Owen,  Mathew 
Rippon,  Edw.  Carter,  Edm.  Harrington, 
Thomas  Williams,  Jane  Shall,  Sarah 
Blackleech,  Owen  Makerly,  James  Tho- 
mas, Thomas  Murray,  Bartho.  Edwards, 
Xtoper.  Croply. 

WM.  ONAUGHTON  &  TEAGE 
MISKELL,  400  acs.  Acco.  Co.,  4  Aug. 
1664,  p.  185,  (74).  Part  of  a  devdt. 
belonging  to  Col.  Edmund  Scarburgh, 
lying  in  the  middle  neck  of  Muddy  Cr. 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  Henry  Porter,  Wm. 
Turner,  Thomas  Smith,  Jno.  Tirrill  (or 
Tirvill),  Jno.  Danvires  (?)  Edw. 
Browne,  Robt.  Carr,  Mary  Scroope. 


454 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


JOHN  DYE,  450  acs.  Accomacke  Co., 
10  Aug.  1664,  p.  185,  (75).  Near  sea- 
board side  at  S.  side  of  Mathomkin 
branch  &  bounded  on  E.  by  land  of 
Coll.  Edmond  Scarburgh.  Trans,  of  9 
pers:  Walter  Duble  (or  Dubte),  Rich. 
Mills,  Charles  Brett,  Thomas  Seafort, 
George  Joy,  Tho.  Stewkly,  Richard 
Long,  Jno.  Bearecraft,  Thomas  Wild. 

MR.  JOHN  WEST,  1500  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  10  Aug.  1664,  p.  185,  (75). 
S.  side  of  Deep  Cr.,  bounded  on  W.  by 
land  of  Matilda  Scarburgh,  running  Sly. 
towards  Chucanesseks  Cr.  Trans,  of  30 
pers:  Mathew  Bennitt,  Jno.  Juell,  Giles 
Boones,  Jno.  Wilton,  Jno.  Stephens, 
Teage  Matarta,  Wm.  Abtill,  Xtop. 
Moses,  Jno.  Say,  Tho.  Bell,  Tho.  Wms. 
(Williams),  Rich.  Fele,  Tho.  Palmer, 
Barbery  Baty,  Nicholas  White,  Nicholas 
Coward,  Jno.  Sixton,  Owen  Colona, 
Patriack  Hare  (?),  Edw.  Cuck,  Jno. 
Rooe,  Edw.  Prestedge,  Wm.  Wms.  Eliz. 
James,  Hannah  Knowell,  Xtop.  Stro- 
bridge,  Wm.  Palmy,  Alex.  Kinsman, 
Bous  (?)  Markes,  Wm.  Wms. 

JNO.  RENNY,  500  acs.  Accomack 
Co.,  10  Sept.  1664,  p.  185,  (75). 
Bounded  on  N.  with  Crooked  Cr. 
Trans,  of  10  pers:  Peter  HufTey,  George 
Garth,  Vincent  Randall,  Geo.  Brothby 
Wm.  Covert,  Henry  Pelham,  Jno.  Mor- 
ley,  Henry  Pecham,  Jno.  Farington,  Tho. 
Middleton. 

MILES  GRAY,  400  acs.  Accomack 
Co.,  12  July  1664,  p.  186,  (76).  At 
Muddy  Crr.,  beg.  at  land  of  Col.  Ed- 
mond Scarburgh.  Trans,  of  8  pers: 
John  Freeman,  Ralph  Brumfeld,  Rich. 
Lenthall,  Edm.  Howard,  Jno.  Heyward, 
Nich.  Brodrick,  Edward  Temple,  Edw. 
Phillips. 

RICHARD  KELLUM,  900  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  10  May  1664,  p.  186,  (76). 
At  head  of  Mathepungo  Cr.,  beg.  at  N. 
side  of  his  former  devdt.  Trans,  of  18 
pers:  Jno.  Tompson,  Sarah  Amsley, 
Ann  Corbitt,  Isaack  Wilson,  Hen. 
Mosely,  Mary  Kine,  Jno.  Walpole,  Pres- 

cilla  Fills,  Eliza.  Phillips,  Danll. 

dermon,    Sisley    Brooks,     Jno.    Proctor, 
Jno.  Kellum,  Edw.  Bird,  Robt.  Blinken- 


son,  Doro.  Churchill,  Rich.  Welch, 
Xtop.  Yeomans. 

CHARLES  RATCLIFFE,  600  acs. 
Accomack  Co.,  10  Sept.  1664,  p.  186, 
(76).  At  Mesango  Cr.  &  running  Nly. 
towards  Pocomoke.  Trans,  of  12  pers: 
Jno.  Baker,  Georg  Easy,  Peter  Guard, 
Wm.  Ire  (?),  Jno.  Awbry,  Tho.  Street, 
Wm.  Sheldon,  Jno.  Jones,  Rich.  West, 
Jno.  Dawes,  James  Allett,  Wm.  Wright. 

ROBERT  HILL,  400  acs.  Accomack 
Co.,  10  July  1664,  p.  187,  (77).  At  S. 
branch  of  Muddy  Cr.,  bounded  on  E.  by 
land  of  Col.  Edmund  Scarburgh  &  W. 
by  land  of  Lawrence  Robbinson.  Trans, 
of  8  pers:  Thomas  Jones,  James  Will- 
brooke,  Mary  Tompson,  Jeffery  Whitly, 
Edward  Wallis,  John  Jones,  Henry 
Mathews,  Mathew  Williams. 

EDWARD  SMITH,  1250  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  12  Sept.  1664,  p.  187,  (77). 
At  Occomcomson,  bounded  on  E.  by  the 
seaboard,  N.  by  land  of  Southby  Little- 
ton &  S.  by  Jno.  Michaell.  Trans,  of  25 
pers:  Edward  Wrath  (or  Weath), 
Mathew  Roan,  Jeffery  Marsh,  Wm. 
Manington,  Jno.  Blake,  Hen.  White- 
church,  Rich.  Snow,  Roger  Isam,  Jacob 
Clakford,  Paul  Emerson,  Jno.  Mack- 
worth,  Rich.  Overbury,  Roger  Duncomb, 
Charles  Ancram  (?),  Francis  Weston, 
Benj.  Angeir,  Fran.  Vincent.  Thomas 
Trevor,  Wm.  Gresham,  Marmaduke 
More,  Jno.  Onsloe,  Charles  Bowyer, 
Allen  Carew,  Jno.  Parbeck,  Robt.  Bish. 

MR.  JNO.  STOKELEY,  2600  acs. 
Accomack  Co.,  2  Sept.  1664,  p.  187. 
(77).  Bounded  E.  with  the  seaboard 
side,  N.  by  Corrattawaman  Cr.,  S.  by 
Stokeleyes  br.  &  a  right  lyne  parting  tihs 
from  land  of  Col.  Edmond  Scarburgh. 
Trans,  of  52  pers:  Edward  Court,  Jno. 
Smith,    James  Morgan,   Martha   Ellford, 

Archibald  Allen,  Reynoldes,   Eliz. 

Stockeley,  Abra.  Hath  (?),  Jno.  Smith, 
Peter  Heyman,  Thomas  Brewer,  Henry 
Hunt,  Phillip  Hitley,  Thomas  Owen, 
Rebecca  Walbrook,  Jno.  Hopkins,  Hast- 
ly  (or  Hartly),  Wallington,  Jno.  Stuck- 
ley,  Robt.  Twiller,  Benj.  Hichman,  Jno. 
Bowin,  Peter  Pett,  Herbert  Rye,  James 
Bane,  Jno.  Newton,  Jno.  Palmer,  James 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


455 


Hill,  Michaell  Lewis,  Edward  Wood, 
Jno.  Thornbush,  Thomas  West,  Margt. 
Carvill,  James  Owin,  Jno.  More,  Wm. 
Radly,  Rich.  Leigh,  Thomas  Carus,  Ester 
Bayly,  Thomas  Thorp,  Jonah  Price  (?), 
Ann  Delfe,  Robt.  Price,  Floraine  All- 
wood,  Eliz.  Stuckley,  Jno.  Stockeley, 
Eliza.  Ashton,  Robt.  Lewkner,  Jno.  Cane 
(?),  James  Orton,  Wm.  Bent,  Charles 
Bishop,  John  Boyes. 

TABITHA  SMART,  1000  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  10  July  1664,  p.  188,  (78). 
At  Deep  Cr.,  bounded  by  one  half  of  a 
devdt.  of  3000  acs.  granted  to  Matilda 
&  Tabitha  Scarburgh.  Trans,  of  20 
pers:  Robt.  Barnham,  Phill.  Packett, 
Henry  Gilson,  Jno.  Culpepper,  Hen. 
Washington,  Wm.  Boice  (?),  Rich. 
Head,  Tho.  Flind,  Jno.  Lake,  Jno.  Best, 
Rich.  Masters,  Hen.  Thorne,  Fran.  Twi- 
man,  Jno.  Woodyer,  Tobias  Clere,  Wm. 
Fooke,  Geo.  Curtice  (?),  Geo.  May, 
Robt.  Vivell,  Jno.  Parker. 

MAJOR  JNO.  TILNEY,  1000  acs. 
Accomack  Co.,  10  Sept.  1664,  p.  188, 
(78).  Bounded  on  E.  with  the  sea- 
board, N.  by  Naswattocks  Cr.  &  S.  by 
land  of  Jno.  Dolby.  Trans,  of  20  pers: 
Jno.  Lockson,  Mara.  Jones,  Hen.  Stone, 
Jno.  Dincock,  Robt.  Heath,  Edw.  Fell- 
more,  Arnold  Brams  (or  Beams),  Wm. 
Hugeson,  Wm.  Meredath,  Anto.  Bate- 
man,  Herbert  Kendall,  Danll.  Maquillan, 
Jno.  Maketrone,  Elias  Maconn,  Phill. 
Jackman,  Geo.  Boaraham  (?),  Morris 
Mathews,  James  Taylor,  Ann  Showell, 
Rich.  Archer. 

CAPT.  EDMOND  BOWMAN,  1200 
acs.,  being  the  equall  halfe  of  a  neck  of 
land,  Accomacke  Co.,  10  Oct.  1664,  p. 
188,  (78).  Bounded  on  S.  with  great 
Matomkin  Cr.,  E.  by  the  seaboard  &  N. 
by  line  parting  this  from  land  of  Lt. 
Col.  Waters.  Trans,  of  24  pers:  John 
Illes,  Eliza.  Atkenson,  James  Whettam, 
Jane  Griffing,  Danll.  Neck,  Robt. 
Bridges,  Ellinor  Lucas,  Walter  Marton, 
Ann  Morcan,  Dorothy  Lamb,  Eliza. 
Cooke,  Benj.  Scotch,  Abra.  Taylour,  De- 
borah Catchmee,  Morris  Dennis,  Joshua. 
Smith,  Dennis  Morris,  Moore  Dennis, 
Rich.  Marrinor,  Moses  Burnell,  Jane 
Sf.ffell,  Ann  House,  Tho.  Woodfeild, 
Elinor  Jnoson   (Johnson). 


JAMES  GREY  &  ALPHONSON 
BALL,  900  acs.  Accomack  Co.,  10  July 
1664,  p.  189,  (79).  Bounded  on  W.  by 
land  of  Richard  Smith  in  Capt.  Thomas 
Neck,  S.  by  William  Taylor  &  N.  by 
land  formerly  Rich.  Bundocks.  350  acs. 
granted  sd.  Gray  &  Ball  3  Mar.  1658; 
150  acs.  granted  them  29  May  1661  & 
400  acs.  for  trans,  of  8  pers:  Jno. 
Coales  (or  Coates),  Ann  Morris,  An- 
drew Hill,  Thomas  Hays,  Robt.  Forrest, 
Arthur  Hincks,  Edward  Walker,  Mary 
Rotherford. 

CAPT.  WILLIAM  JONES,  550  acs. 
N'ampton  Co.,  10  June  1664,  p.  189, 
(79).  At  Hungers  Cr.,  bounded  on  N. 
by  land  of  Richard  Smith  &  S.  by  Capt. 
Wm.  Stone.  450  acs.  granted  sd.  Jones 
22  July  1645  &  100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2 
pers:    Robt.  Anderson,  Thomas  Bickley. 

LAWRENCE  ROBBINSON,  800  acs. 
Accomack  Co.,  part  thereof  being  a 
peninsula  called  Hills  Choyce,  the  other 
part  on  S.  side  of  the  middle  br.  of 
Muddy  Cr.,  28  Nov.  1664,  p.  189,  (80). 
500  acs.  by  patent  dated  23  Feb.  1663  & 
300  acs.  for  trans,  of  6  pers:  Mathew 
Aldridge,  James  (or  Jane)  Hollingford, 
Jno.  Ashenhurst.     (No  other  names.) 

ALEXANDER  ADDISON,  700  acs. 
Accomack  Co.,  20  June  1664,  p.  189, 
(80).  Bounded  on  N.  with  Occahan- 
nock  Cr.  350  acs.  by  patent  10  May 
1652  &  350  acs.  for  trans,  of  7  pers: 
Thomas  Cox,  Jno.  Jones,  Peter  Clause, 
Samll.  Banton,  Wm.  Bernard,  Sara  Mash 
(or  Mask),   Mary  Parker. 

MR.  JNO.  DOLBY,  1000  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  10  Sept.  1664,  p.  190,  (80). 
Bounded  on  E.  with  the  seaboard  &  N. 
by  land  of  Major  John  Tilney.  Trans, 
of  20  pers:  Wm.  Shepard,  Alex.  Joyce, 
Jno.  Webb,  Jno.  Osulvan,  Edw.  Han- 
cock, Wm.  White,  Mary  Barell,  Mary 
Vaughan,  Wm.  Morris,  Eliza.  Prame, 
Cornelius  Morian,  Tho.  Greene,  Derick 
Costeance,  Peter  Freeding,  Hen.  Mar- 
shall, Danll.  Micant,  Susan  Thomas, 
Rich.  Bently,  Margt.  Morgan,  Jno. 
Clerke. 

JOHN  WALLOP,  400  acs.  Accomack 
Co.,     10    June    1664,    p.     190,     (81). 


456 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Bounded  on  N.  with  Pocomock,  on  W. 
by  E.most  bounds  of  3000  acs.  of  Mr. 
Robert  Pitt.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Samll. 
Taylor,  Robt.  Atkins,  Edw.  Tompson, 
Jno.  Windsor,  Thomas  Hunt,  Jno. 
Medcap,  Wm.  Hopkins,  Jno.  Wallop. 
(Note:  Later  Accomack  records  give 
this  name  as  Waddilow.) 

MR.  ROBERT  PITT,  3000  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  2  Oct.  1663,  p.  190,  (81). 
Bounded  on  N.  with  Pokomoke  Riv., 
W.  by  Bay  of  Chespiack  &  sunken 
marshes.  1000  acs.  by  patent  12  Mar. 
1662  &  2000  by  the  Election  of  Col. 
Edmond  Scarburgh  &  assigned  to  sd. 
Pitt.  Trans,  of  40  pers:  Jno.  Eloer  (?), 
Tho.  Griffin,  Mary  Harwood,  James 
Wellfleet,  Wm.  Morgan,  Henry  Loyd, 
Mary  Thomas,  Edw.  Washington,  Tho. 
Lazengby,  Jane  Shelly,  Thomas  Smith, 
Crispian  Morris,  Mary  Sewell,  Edw. 
Griffeth,  Margt.  Powell,  Nicho.  Wal- 
brooke,  Joseph  Jnoson,  An  Heath,  Mary 
Wms.  (Williams),  Joan  Millford,  Tho. 
Dunn,  Tho.  Whenham,  Anto.  Spencer, 
Tho.  Cope,  Jno.  Norris,  Jno.  Robbinson, 
Wm.  Clayton,  James  Fliers,  David  Lacy, 
Wm.  Knowles,  Jno.  Tavernor,  Wm. 
Ganock,  Jno.  Doyley,  Rich.  Crooke, 
Tho.  Sanders,  Wm.  Wright,  Samll. 
White,  Math.  Langley,  Wm.  Bayley, 
Edw.  Heath. 

MRS.  ANN  TOFT,  1500  acs.  (Acco- 
mack) at  Manoakin,  being  halfe  of  the 
middle  neck,  on  S.  side  thereof,  Wly.  on 
Manoaken  Riv.,  bounded  on  S.  by  the 
Southern  Cr.  2  Apr.  1664,  p.  191,  (82). 
Trans,  of  30  pers:  James  Draper,  Jno. 
Orbald,  Vincent  Barry,  Anto.  Libb, 
Robt.  Parriot,  Jno.  Machen,  Hen.  Sil- 
vester, Rich.  Miller,  Roger  Griffin,  Rich. 
Wing,  Abill  Barker,  Walter  Acton,  Tho. 
Whitmore.  Jno.  Weld,  Jno.  Charlton, 
Ann  Phillips,  Rich.  Lister,  Thomas 
Morefeild,  Geo.  Ludloe,  Thomas  Jones, 
Francis  Smith,  Mary  Feild,  Jno.  Whit- 
taker,  Rich.  Rivers,  Jno.  Harding,  James 
Dudly,  Thomas  Wells,  Henry  Lee,  Tho. 
Fleetwood,   Wm.   Morton. 

SAME.  500  acs.  Accomack  Co.,  12 
July  1664,  p.  191,  (82).  Beg.  at  S.W. 
angle  of  a  former  devdt.  of  1200  acs., 
running  N.W.  to  a  swamp  called  Devills 


Den  &  bounded  on  N.  by  land  of  Col. 
Edmond  Scarburgh.  Trans,  of  10  pers: 
Francis  Hord,  Edw.  Bray,  Fran.  Tippin, 
James  Jenkins,  Tho.  Setteplace,  Rowland 
Walter,  George  Burry,  Jno.  Draper, 
Thomas  Cobb,  Charles  Holloway. 

NICHOLAS  HUDSON,  200  acs. 
N'ampton  Co.,  10  Oct.  1664,  p.  191, 
(82).  Bounded  on  S.  by  a  branch  of 
Broad  Cr.  &  running  Wwd.  by  land  of 
Jno.  Townsend.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
Robert  Blayes,  Ann  Waterson,  Richard 
Ward,  Ann  Bryan. 

MR.  CHARLES  SCARBURGH,  eldest 
sonn  of  Col.  Edmond  Scarburgh,  3050 
acs.  in  Accomack  Co.,  formerly  N'amp- 
ton Co.,  12  Nov.  1664,  p.  191,  (83). 
Beg.  on  N.  side  at  first  of  the  little 
branches  of  Pungoteage  Cr.,  extend,  up 
the  main  cr.,  including  all  the  neckes  & 
branches  on  the  W.  part  by  sd.  Little 
Cr.  or  branch  &c.  Renewal  of  patent 
dated  10  May  1652. 

BALDWIN  (Bauldwin)  SHEP- 
PARD,  Orphan,  1000  acs.  N'umberland 
Co.,  9  June  1665,  p.  192,  (83).  Upon 
N.  side  &  nere  the  mouth  of  a  swamp 
upon  the  head  of  Jarnews  Cr.  dividing 
this  &  land  of  Jno.  Powell,  extend, 
along  the  head  of  Nicholas  Jernew's 
land,  upon  Mr.  Wm.  Hockaday  to  br. 
of  Machotick  Cr.  Due  as  son  &  heire  of 
Jno.  Sheppard,  to  whom  it  was  granted 
6  May  1652. 

PATRIACK  JACKSON  &  RICHARD 
BAKER,  1500  acs.  Chas.  City  Co.,  18 
Mar.  1662,  p.  192,  (83).  950  acs. 
about  2  mi.  from  the  Riv.  on  back  side 
of  Merchants  Hope,  bounding  N.  upon 
same,  W.  on  land  of  Richard  Craven, 
S.  upon  the  old  towne,  being  the  land 
of  Mr.  Richard  Tye  &  E.  upon  Thomas 
Wheeler.  550  acs.  E.  upon  the  upper 
ponds  adj.  his  former  patent,  S.  upon 
Cravens  land  &  N.  upon  the  Merchants 
land.  Granted  to  Richard  Jones  12  Mar. 
1655  &  by  him  sold  to  the  abovenamed. 

THOMAS  ROYSTON,  270  acs. 
Gloster  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  192, 
(84).  On  Chesecake  br.  behind  land  of 
Lt.  Col.  Warner  &c.  by  Chesecake  path. 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


457 


Trans,  of  6  pers:  Edw.  Young,  Jno. 
Forby  (or  Ferby),  Tho.  Fowler,  Wm. 
Johnson,  Tho.  Carew,  Fra.  Fleet. 

MR.  AUGUSTINE  CANT,  750  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  12  June  1665,  p.  193, 
(84).  N.  side  of  Peanketanck  Riv., 
beg.  at  mouth  of  a  small  creek  &c.  run- 
ning to  white  oake  parting  this  &  land 
of  Mr.  Jno.  Appleton.  500  acs.  granted 
to  Thomas  Trotter  10  Aug.  1642  & 
purchased  by  Col.  Augustine  Warner  & 
Major  David  Cant  for  use  of  sd.  Augus- 
tine Cant;  250  acs.  found  within  the 
bounds  of  aforesd.  patent  &  due  sd. 
Augustine  Cant  for  trans,  of  5  pers: 
Jno.  Rumbald,  Jno.  Rawlings,  Robert 
Passe,  James  Hopkins,  Wm.  Ardrey. 

JOHN  CLARKE,  400  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  4  May  1665,  p.  193,  (85). 
Wwd.  side  of  the  third  swamp  of  black 
water,  beg.  at  mouth  of  Hubies  br.  &c. 
running  nere  mouth  of  a  broad  branch 
&c.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Tony,  Cloyce, 
Tymothy,  Palmer,  Jane,  Kate,  Mary,  and 
Maria. 

CAPT.  ROBT.  PRIDDY,  500  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  7  June  1665,  p.  193, 
(85).  N.  side  of  Mattapony  Riv.,  upon 
S.E.  side  of  Arratico  Cr.  &c.  to  white 
oake  that  stands  by  Tassiopumps  &c. 
Trans,  of  10  pers:  Robert  Dixon,  Jno. 
Andrewes,  Ann  Cobb,  Thomas  Blake, 
Mary  Jnoson,  Edward  Mills,  Wm.  Skill, 
Wm.  Toffy,  Jno.  Morry,  Jno.  Morgan. 

CAPT.  EDWARD  HILL,  4000  acs. 
on  N.  side  &  within  the  freshes  of 
Rappa.  Riv.,  opposite  to  Poretobacco, 
bounded  on  S.  by  W.  side  with  Rappa. 
Riv.,  on  W.  by  N.  with  a  cr.  upon  the 
Ewd.  of  Ausaticon  Towne  &  on  Wwd. 
of  Warisquock  Indian  Towne  &c.  E. 
S.E.  with  cr.  commonly  known  as  fall- 
ing Cr.  Granted  to  Edward  Hill,  Esqr., 
10  Oct.  1655  &  given  by  will  to  sd. 
Capt.  Hill.    28  Sept.  1664,  p.  194,  (86). 

EDWARD  COALE,  threescore  &  10 
acs.,  heretofore  called  Phillips  Island, 
on  W.  side  of  Chikahomany  Riv.,  N. 
upon  Phillips  bay.  10  Feb.  1664,  p. 
194,  (86).  Formerly  taken  up  by  Tho- 
mas Donington,  practitioner  in  phisick, 


who  assigned  to  Thomas  Stamp,  who 
assigned  to  Samll.  Paine,  who  sold  to 
sd.  Coale. 

WM.  SEWARD,  300  acs.,  29  Sept. 
1664,  p.  194,  (87).  Being  part  of  a 
great  quantity  taken  up  by  Tho.  Swan, 
Junr.,  in  Surry  Co. ;  beg.  at  mouth  of 
the  white  marsh  &  Indian  spring  Sw. 
&c.  to  Col.  Jordans  cor.  tree  beside  sd. 
marsh  &c.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Thomas 
Gibson,  Wm.  Kytt  (?),  Jno.  Hawkes, 
Henry  Allen,  Wm.  Boyse,  Wm.  Spring. 

RICHARD  KING,  200  acs.  on  S.  side 
of  S.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  20  Sept.  1664,  p. 
195,  (87).  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Jno. 
King,  Wm.  Cutt,  Anthony  Williams, 
Robert  Norgrove. 

SUSAN  AUSTIN,  50  acs.  New  Kent 
Co.,  23  Oct.  1664,  p.  195,  (88).  Beg. 
at  branch  below  an  Indian  feild  called 
Rockahockaw,  formerly  belonging  to 
Anthony  Arnold  &  by  him  sold  to  Ed- 
ward Price,  down  sd.  br.  Sly.  &c.  Trans, 
of  Jno.  Browne. 

JOHN  MASON,  300  acs.  Nancimond 
Co.,  11  Mar.  1664,  p.  195, (  (88).  In 
the  Upper  Parish,  beg.  at  miles  end  of 
his  own  land  &  abutting  on  land  of 
Michael  Gill.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Mary 
Yeomans,  Thomas  Paine,  Teague  Wallis, 
Lawrence  Petty,  Jno.  Wallis,  Susanna 
Knott. 

JAMES  COLLINS,  400  acs.  Nanci- 
mund  Co.,  11  Mar.  1664,  p.  195,  (89). 
In  the  Up.  Parish.  Crossing  the  head 
of  a  small  run  nere  land  of  Thomas 
Mayson.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Jno.  Ben- 
nett, Rich.  Harris,  1  name  lost,  Nathall. 
Gordon,  Danll.  Mackneal,  "3  persons 
more  dyed  after  their  arrivall  in  Virga." 

MRS.  MARY  BAWD,  the  daughter 
&  heire  of  Wm.  Bawd,  deed.,  800  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  15  June  1665,  p.  196, 
(89).  Upon  S.  side  &  at  the  mouth  of 
Rappa.  Riv.,  bounded  on  E.S.E.  with 
the  maine  bay,  including  Goate  Island, 
upon  S.S.E.  with  Peancketanck  bay,  W. 
N.W.  with  the  Wading  Cr.  Granted  to 
Capt.  Wm.  Brocas,  Esqr.,  2  Feb.  1653, 
&  by  John  Jackson,   heire  apparent  of 


458 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


sd.  Brocas,  assigned  to  Sir  Henry  Chich- 
ly  13  Jan.  1656,  &  by  Cuthbert  Potter 
lawfully  authorized  by  letter  of  Atty. 
from  sd.  Sir  Henry,  dated  24  Sept.  1661, 
assigned  to  sd.  Mary  Bawd,  24  Sept. 
1663. 

MR.  JOHN  DRAYTON,  150  acs. 
Chas.  City  Co.,  14  June  1665,  p.  196, 
(90).  Upon  the  Ready  Swamp  issuing 
out  of  Powells  Cr.,  bounded  S.  &  W. 
upon  land  of  Mr.  David  Peoples. 
Granted  to  James  Ward  7  June  1651, 
by  him  assigned  to  Mrs.  Eliz.  Peoples, 
12  Jan.  1657,  &  now  due  sd.  Drayton 
as  marrying  the  sd.  Elizabeth. 

THOMAS  JONES,  420  acs.  (margi- 
nal note  calls  for  450  acs.)  Henrico  Co., 
17  Jan.  1663,  p.  196,  (90).  S.  side  of 
James  Riv.  &  on  back  of  Barmoder  hun- 
dred between  land  of  one  Arundell  (or 
Arndell)  &  one  Clerke  where  Powells  Cr. 
divides  them  at  the  mouth;  200  acs. 
N.N.W.  along  line  of  Arundell,  W. 
S.W.  to  sd.  Cr.  &  S.S.E.  on  the  river; 
200  acs.  on  the  heads  hereof  bounding 
N.  along  Court  Swamp  &  the  heads  of 
the  hundred;  20  acs.  on  the  head  of 
Arundell's  land  being  a  field  &  some 
thicketts  called  Epses,  bounded  N.N.W. 
as  Claphams  Slash  windeth  &  W.S.W. 
towards  sd.  Swamp.  Trans,  of  9  pers: 
An  Broadway,  Margtt  Sandrs.,  Jno. 
Amey,  Wm.  Flowers,  Jane  Ingle,  Tho. 
May,  Henry  Avery,  Alex.  Arnold,  Tymo- 
thy  Roberts. 

THOMAS  MEREDETH,  420  acs.  on 
S.W.  of  the  narrov/s  of  Yorke  Riv., 
New  Kent  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  197, 
(91).  Beg.  at  S.most  cor.  of  his  own 
land  &c.  by  Mr.  Hurds  path  &c.  by 
branch  of  Warriny  Sw.,  by  the  run  of 
same  to  Capt.  Richard  Barnhouse  &c. 
Trans,  of  9  pers:  James  Gorting  (or 
Gosling),  Wm.  West,  Edwd.  Burgis, 
Margtt.  Hamlin,  Wm.  Edes,  James 
H-i?e,  Mary  Shaw,  Tho.  Sewell,  Mary 
Gibbs. 

SAME.  380  acs.  New  Kent  Co., 
Same  date  &  pages.  S.  side  of  the 
freshes  of  Yorke  Riv..  by  land  of  Mr. 
Richard  Barnehouse.  200  acs.  granted 
to  Major  Wm.  Hockady  9  Mar.   1654, 


assigned  to  sd.  Thomas  Meredeth  &  180 
acs.  for  trans,  of  4  pers:  Jno.  Smith, 
Jane  Gadstone,  Richd.  Carter,  Ann 
Littleton. 

SAME.  1370  acs.  James  City  Co.,  27 
Apr.  1661,  p.  197,  (92).  Upon  N.  side 
of  Chikahomani  maine  swamp  about  l*/2 
mi.  from  Poewhite  Sw.,  beg.  at  a  small 
br.  upon  the  S.  side  of  a  small  br.  by 
the  Sw.  side  &c.  crossing  Westham  path 
&c.  Trans,  of  27  pers:  James  Otter- 
long,  Fran.  Powell,  Neale  Peterson,  Tho. 
Powell,  Fran.  Sergeant,  Geo.  Corham 
(or  Cocham),  Francis  Thrush,  Tho. 
Granger,  Jno.  Gillett,  twice,  Will.  Caw- 
ly,  Jno.  Robbinson,  Wm.  Cock,  Giles 
West,  Samll.  Cornix,  Wm.  Dawsy,  Tho. 
Gibbs,  Jno.  Wormslend,  Geo.  Dilton, 
Mary  Lewis,  Tho.  Carter,  Hugh  Kit- 
chen, Jno.  Jones,  Mary  Ward,  Tho. 
Conell  (or  Covell),  Tho.  Joyner,  Eliz. 
Gibbs. 

CAPT.  JNO.  JENNINGS,  100  acs. 
Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  29  Sept.  1664,  p. 
198,  (92).  Being  all  marsh  land, 
bounded  Wly.  with  Lownes  Cr.,  Ely.  by 
the  land  he  now  holds  by  right  of  his 
wife  comprehending  the  great  marsh  & 
the  Little  Marsh  &c.  Trans,  of  2  pers: 
Robt.  Mosse,  Thomas  Ward. 

BRYAN  SCOTT  (or  STOTT),  850 
acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  24  Aug.  1664,  p.  198, 
(93).  800  acs.  bounding  upon  land  of 
Jno.  Sympson  &  50  acs.  beg.  at  tree  of 
sd.  Sympson,  running  N.N.W.  to  Narra- 
tico  Cr.  800  acs.  by  patent  dated  10 
July  1663  &  50  acs.  for  trans,  of  Paul 
Kinsey. 

THOMAS  MADDISON  &  THOMAS 
ELVART,  606  acs.  on  N.  side  of  Rappa. 
Co.,  18  July  1663,  p.  198,  (93).  Bound- 
ing upon  land  of  Richard  Merryman. 
Trans,  of  13  pers:  Margtt.  Kinsey, 
Danll.  Kinsey,  Eliz.  (Kinsey  ?),  Tho. 
Holding,  Jone  Taylor,  Hannah  Rogers, 
Rich.  Mereday,  Abram  South,  Jno.  God- 
fry,  Jane  Nudigute  (?),  Jno.  Jackson, 
Charles  Seares,  Magdalin  Jones. 

ABRAHAM  BUSH  &  PETER  EL- 
MOR,  300  acs.  on  N.  side  of  Lancater 
Co.,  5  Apr.  1664,  p.  199,  (94).    Trans. 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


459 


of  6  pers:  Wm.  Martin,  Hen.  Dame, 
Jno.  Rogers,  George  Huis  (or  Avis), 
Edwd.  Fitby,  Jno.  Pole. 

MR.  RICHARD  MERRIMAN,  1000 
acs.  upon  N.  side  of  Lancaster  Co.,  7 
Apr.  1664,  p.  199,  (94).  Upon  the 
head  of  Morratico  Cr.  Trans,  of  20 
pers:  Abram  Shaw,  James  Wilson,  Jno. 
Jeames,  Tho.  Mason,  Giles  Tompson, 
Mary  Fletcher,  Wm.  Ladmore,  Susan 
Francklin  (or  Framblin),  Jno.  Gregory, 
Edwd.  Wade,  Richd.  Smith,  Jno. 
Thorngton,  Wm.  Hade,  Mathew  Parker, 
Hen.  Dunning,  James  Cadmill,  Anthony 
Lowell,  Wm.  Reve  (or  Rene),  Joye 
Mason,  Mary  Snelling.  Marginal  Note: 
This  land  assigned  to  Wm.  Hall,  Marri- 
ner  &  renewed  5  Dec.  1666. 

THOMAS  BRYAR,  300  acs.  in 
Rappa.  Co.,  14  Mar.  1663,  p.  199,  (94). 
Upon  outermost  lines  of  marked  trees 
of  Mr.  Charles  Grimes.  Trans,  of  6 
pers:  Eliz.  Wms.  (Williams),  Wm. 
Wms.,  Seth  Browne,  Samll.  Cherid  ?, 
Mary  Kinsey,  Sarah  Kinsey. 

BRYANT  &  THOMAS  STOTT  (or 
Scott),  600  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  18  Mar. 
1662,  p.  199,  (95).  Upon  S.E.  side  of 
Morraticon  Riv.,  bounded  W.  by  S.  up- 
on land  of  Mr.  David  Fox.  Granted  to 
Rich.  Hotton  &  Lambert  Lamberton  14 
Oct.  1652  &  after  several  sales  assigned 
by  Alex.  Porter  to  sd.  Stotts. 

MR.  THOMAS  CHETWOOD  & 
GEORGE  HASELLOCK,  (Haslelocke), 
2250  acs.  on  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Co.,  9 
July  1663,  p.  200,  (95).  Running  along 
a  maine  br.  at  the  head  of  Totoskey  Cr. 
called  the  Cross  Cr.  &c.  to  chestnutt 
dividing  this  &  land  of  Mr.  Samll. 
Griffin.  Trans,  of  45  pers:  Ed.  Ben- 
nett, Jno.  Iriby,  Nicho.  Paris,  Tho. 
Lane,  Robt.  Foster,  Peter  Rowen, 
Tho.  Warren,  Walter  Horton,  Lowry 
Stafford,  Eliz.  Lane,  Katha.  Streate 
(or  Skeate),  Noy  (?)  Burford,  Wm. 
Attaway,  Mary  Price,  Ann  Burslitt, 
Henry  Clay,  Mary  Loyd,  Rich.  Wait, 
Xtop.  Rogers,  Antho.  Apostingall,  3 
Negroes,  Jno.  Pitt,  Jno.  George,  Sara 
Plumson,  Demingo  Brass  (?),  Demingo 
Demerense    (?),    Kate    Phelpley,    Jno. 


Young,  6  rights  assigned  by  Michael 
Armes,  Edw.  Man,  Jno.  Wms.,  Tho. 
Travis,  Wm.  Tavernor,  Jno.  Harwell, 
Wm.  Rauley,  Wm.  Cock,  Eliz.  Growndy, 
Eliz.  Morry. 

THOMAS  CHETWOOD,  Gent.,  250 
acs.  N.  side  of  Lancaster  Co.,  9  July 
1663,  p.  200,  (96).  Trans,  of  5  pers: 
James  Potter,  Thomas  Colt,  Richard 
Hopkins,  Ann  Hopkins,  Judith  Hopkins. 

ADD  AM  YARRETT,  400  acs.  N'um- 
berland  Co.,  24  Aug.  1664,  p.  200, 
(96).  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Jno.  Poore, 
James  Man,  Erasmus  Perry,  Mary  Smith, 
Wm.  Cock,  3  Negroes. 

SAMUELL  GRIFFIN,  260  acs.  Rap- 
pa. Co.,  24  May  1664,  p.  201,  (96). 
Bounding  Wly.  upon  his  own  land,  run- 
ning S.  from  Chikacone  path  to  path 
called  Square  Jnos.  (Johns)  Trans,  of 
6  pers:  David  Griffin,  Bagnall  Vincent, 
Wm.  Benjamin,  Edwd.  Wetherbat,  Am- 
brose Clare,  Wm.  Gunter. 

DENNIS  EYES  &  DENNIS  CON- 
WAY, 390  acs.  N'umberland  Co.,  24 
Aug.  1664,  p.  201,  (97).  By  Chikacone 
path.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Jno.  Watford, 
(or  Walford),  Ralph  Spickman,  An- 
thony Smithy  Timothy  Godheard,  Fran- 
cis Armor,  Peter  Dule,  Ralph  Palmer, 
Jno.  Smith. 

RICHARD  NELMES,  525  acs.  N'um- 
berland Co.,  4  Feby.  1662,  p.  201,  (97). 
N.  side  of  great  Wiccomico  Riv.,  beg. 
at  head  lyne  of  land  formerly  taken  up 
by  sd.  Nelmes,  running  Nly.  to  branch 
of  Chinghohan  Cr.  &c.  by  Scotts  Cr. 
Trans,  of  11  pers:  Tho.  Smith,  Henry 
Jordan,  David  Carter,  James  Barnes, 
Johanna  Smith,  Richard  Harryson,  Eliz. 
a  servant,  Jno.  Dugen,  Joyce  Mattocks, 
(?),  Jno.  Bond,  Mary  Floyd. 

JNO.  WILLIAMS,  350  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  18  Mar.  1663/4,  p.  201,  (98). 
Beg.  at  a  marked  tree  joyning  upon  land 
of  Col.  More  Fantleroy,  running  W. 
N.W.  along  land  of  Luke  Billington,  S. 
Wly.  along  land  of  Giles  Webb,  & 
thence  N.Ely,  along  land  of  sd.  Fantle- 
roy.   Trans,   of  7   pers:    Hoell  Waters, 


460 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Jno.  Godfry,  Geo.  Robbinson,  Bartholo- 
mew Sims,  Tho.  Vicares,  Danll.  Smith, 
Ann  Warrin. 

MR.  THO.  CHETWOOD,  700  acs. 
N.  side  of  Lancaster  Co.,  14  Mar.  1663, 
p.  202,  (98).  200  acs.  thereof  running 
along  Chikacone  path.  500  acs.  by- 
patent  dated  9  July  1663  &  200  acs. 
for  trans,  of  4  pers:  Mary  Smith,  Fran. 
Peoble,  Joane  Smart,  Richd.  Povey. 

CLOUD  TVLOS  (or  Tulos),  100 
acs.  N'umberland  Co.,  27  June  1665,  p. 

202,  (99).  In  Chikacone  Riv.,  bound- 
ing upon  lands  of  Robt.  Lick,  Capt. 
Rogers,  Mr.  Roddam  &  Jno.  Kent. 
Trans,  of  2  pers:  Dorcas  Hinton,  Jno. 
RofFe  (or  Rosse). 

JNO.  OVEDDAM,  600  acs.  N'thum- 
berland  Co.,  27  June  1665,  p.  202,  (99). 
Running  E.S.E.  from  main  branch  of 
Wiccomico  &c.  Trans,  of  12  pers:  Wm. 
Sergeant,  Jno.  Price,  Susan  Ward,  Jno. 
Greenwood,  Jno.  Warner,  Mary  Warn- 
(er),  Rich.  Simpson,  Wm.  Grimble, 
Ann  Browne,  Nich.  Jones,  Tho.  Taylor, 
Toby.  Rogers. 

JNO.  SHURLOCK,  600  acs.  on  N. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  upon  Totoskey  Cr., 
bounding  upon  land  of  Jno.  Hull  & 
Dennis    Swillivant.    27    June    1665,    p. 

203,  (100).  Trans,  of  12  pers:  Wm. 
Bright,  Sarah  Meade,  Jno.  Kemp,  Judeth 
Olive,  Mary  Hopkins,  Sarah  Milbridge, 
Roger  Waterford,  James  Love,  Patriack 
Love,  Symon  Georg,  Edith  Taylor,  Mor- 
gan Jones. 

JOSEPH  BAYLY,  1215  acs.  N.  side 
of  Lancaster  Co.,  27  June  1665,  p.  203, 
(100).  Upon  a  main  branch  of  Corro- 
toman.  Trans,  of  25  pers:  Jno.  Ben- 
nett, Jno.  Carter,  James  Blackman, 
Robert  Clanck,  Edward  Hill,  Wm. 
Hackney,  Valentine  Vallys,  Samll.  Ever- 
ton,  Jno.  Gutteridge,  Robt.  Norman, 
Wm.  Rann,  George  Baker,  Wm.  Miller, 
Rich.  Wells,  George  Dyer,  Eliz.  Woods, 
Mary  Martin,  James  Porter,  Jno.  Scold, 
Rich.  Parrett,  3  Negroes;  Wm.  Evans, 
Jno.  Jones. 

PETER  KNIGHT,  JR.,  925  acs.  in 
Potomack    Riv.,    adj.    to    Chapawansick 


Cr.    15  Mar.  1663,  p.  203,  (101).    Re- 
newal of  his  patent  dated  8  Mar.  1658. 

WM.  FLOWERS,  250  acs.  4  Mar. 
1662,  p.  204,  (101).  Upon  S.  side  of 
great  Wiccomico  Riv.,  upon  W.N.W. 
side  of  a  branch  of  Vulkons  Cr.,  E.S.E. 
upon  the  head  of  same  &  land  of  Jeffery 
Bocke  (?)  150  Granted  9  Nov.  1652  to 
Henry  Weekes  &  after  several  sales  & 
assignments  sold  to  sd.  Flowers  &  100 
acs.  lying  upon  Vulcans  Cr.  &  Goches 
land  properly  belonging  to  David  Or- 
land  &  his  heirs  &  assignes  for  ever,  as 
by  assignment  of  Gervase  Dodson. 

JNO.  &  HENRY  BRADLEY,  300 
acs.  Northumberland  Co.,  4  Feb.  1662, 
p.  204,  (102).  Sly.  upon  Wiccocomico 
Riv.,  Ely.  upon  a  Cr.  dividing  this  & 
land  of  Thomas  Saffall.  Granted  to 
Thomas  Mallard  8  June  1653  &  after 
several  sales  &  assignments  sold  to  sd. 
patentees. 

ANDREW  PETTEGREW,  1000  acs. 
N'thumberland  Co.,  28  Jan.  1662,  p. 
204,  (102).  S.  side  of  Chikacone,  Wly. 
upon  land  of  Jacob  Cortanecan  &  Col. 
Mattron,  dec'd.,  by  land  of  Mr.  Chand- 
ler &  N.Ely,  upon  a  lyne  dividing  it 
from  land  of  Dr.  Russell.  Granted  to 
Jno.  Trussell  &  Gervase  Dodson,  &  the 
former  dying  it  came  due  to  the  latter, 
who  gave  it  by  will  to  his  wife  who 
married  sd.  Pettegrew. 

GEORGE  CLARKE,  100  acs.  N'th- 
umberland Co.,  4  Feb.  1662,  p.  205, 
(102).  Upon  S.  side  of  great  Wiccoco- 
mico Riv.  at  the  head  of  150  acs.  now 
in  the  occupation  of  sd.  Clarke  &c, 
following  a  line  of  trees  belonging  to 
Gervase  Dodson,  dec'd.,  Nly.  then  Ely. 
to  land  of  Richard  Nelmes.  Trans,  of 
2  pers:  Mary  Hewes,  Edward  Lawson 
(or  Lanson). 

JNO.  HUGHLETT,  900  acs.  N'thum- 
berland Co.,  3  June  1663,  p.  205,  (103). 
N.  by  E.  upon  1200  acs.  formerly 
patented  by  Col.  Jno.  Matrom,  dec'd., 
Ely.  upon  land  of  Jno.  Hainye,  Sly.  & 
S.Wly.  upon  a  branch  dividing  this  from 
his  own  land  &  land  of  Tho.  Salisbury 
&c.  to  a  tree  upon  a  branch  of  Chika- 
cone   Riv.,    N.N.W.    &    W.S.W.    upon 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


461 


land  of  Adam  Yarrett  &  Rich.  Eaton. 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  Robt.  Lawson,  Tho. 
More,  Jacob  Willoughbie,  Ed.  Roe, 
George  Slitham,  Edw.  Mills,  Mary 
Doughty,  Tho.  Connaway,  An  Leech, 
Wm.  Foster,  Robt.  Hutson,  Tho.  Pen- 
ning, Edw.  Goodlin,  Tho.  Moby  (?), 
Ann  Clayton,  Edw.  Cordin,  Mary  Yates, 
Wm.  Murry. 

GEORGE  CLARKE,  150  acs.  N'th- 
umberland  Co.,  30  Jan.  1662,  p.  205, 
(103).  Bounding  S.  by  W.  upon  great 
Wiccocomico  Riv.  at  the  head  thereof, 
E.  by  S.  upon  land  surveyed  for  Rich- 
ard Nelmes,  W.  by  N.  upon  land  sur- 
veyed for  Mr.  Knight.  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  14  July  1654. 

WM.  BETTS,  300  acs.  N'thumber- 
land  Co.,  9  Dec.  1662,  p.  206,  (104). 
S.S.E.  upon  a  Cr.  issuing  out  of  great 
Wiccocomico  Riv.,  E.  N.  E.  upon  the 
main  br.  of  same  called  Betts  Cr., 
dividing  this  from  land  of  Coll.  Clay- 
borne,  W.  S.  W.  upon  br.  dividing  this 
from  land  of  Peter  Ashton  &  upon  the 
land  of  Goodman  Johnson  &  Mr.  Haw- 
ley,  &  N.N.W.  towards  land  of  Edward 
Coale.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  16 
July  1654. 

EZEKEALL  GENESIS,  300  acs. 
N'thumberland  Co.,  4  Feb.  1662,  p.  206, 
(104).  Bounding  N.N.E.  upon  land  of 
Mr.  Jeffery  Gough  at  Vulcans  Cr.  on  S. 
side  of  great  Wiccocomico  Riv.,  W.  N. 
W.  upon  land  of  Henry  Wicker. 
Granted  to  Thomas  Read  1  Dec.  1653, 
assigned  to  Jno.  Hughlett,  who  sold  to 
Ezekiell  Genesis. 

JNO.  WOOD,  350  acs.  N'thumber- 
land Co.,  4  Mar.  1662,  p.  206,  (105). 
Upon  N.  side  of  Gr.  Wiccocomico  Riv., 
being  part  of  850  acs.  granted  to  Tho- 
mas Saffall,  1  June  1654  &  after  several 
sales  &  assignments  sold  to  sd.  Wood. 
Bounding  N.W.  upon  a  Cr.  formerly 
called  St.  Jnos.  Cr.,  dividing  this  from 
land  of  Henry  Bradly,  S.W.  upon  Wic- 
cocomico Riv.,  E.  by  S.  upon  a  line  of 
marked  trees  dividing  this  from  the 
other  500  acs.  included  in  the  above 
mentioned  patent  that  Jno.  Hudnall  now 
hath. 


THOMAS  SALISBURY,  son  of  Tho- 
mas Salisbury,  dec'd.,  &  ANDREW 
PETTEGREW,  650  acs.  N'thumberland 
Co.,  12  Oct.  1663,  p.  207,  (106).  300 
acs.  on  S.  side  of  Gr.  Wiccocomico  Riv., 
N.N.E.  upon  Valkan  Cr.,  W.N.W.  upon 
a  cr.,  E.S.E.  upon  land  of  Henry 
Weeker;  350  acs.  W.N.W.  upon  sd.  Cr., 
running  along  the  head  of  the  sd.  300 
acs.  &  along  head  of  land  of  Henry 
Hicker,  bounding  upon  Weekers  to 
Huletts,  S.S.W.  &c.  to  land  of  Thomas 
Kedby,  sold  to  Thomas  Ball  &c,  mak- 
ing an  entire  tract  of  650  acs.  300  acs. 
granted  to  Tho.  Salisbury,  dec'd.,  13 
Oct.  1653,  &  350  acs.  joyned  to  same  & 
granted  sd.  Salisbury  4  June  1656;  350 
acs.  due  sd.  Pettegrew  as  marrying  Isa- 
bell,  former  wife  of  sd.  Salisbury,  & 
300  acs.  being  given  by  will  to  the  sd. 
Thos.  Salisbury  by  sd.  Tho.  dec'd. 

JAMES  JONES  &  JNO.  TAYLOR, 

1000  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  22  June  1664, 
p.  207,  (107).  Bet.  great  Wiccocomico 
Riv.  &  branches  of  same  &  branches  of 
Corrotoman  Riv.  Granted  to  Jno. 
Hughlett,  who  sold  to  Thomas  Gascome 
28  May  1658  &  by  him  assigned  to  sd. 
Jones  &  Taylor  24  Oct.  1659. 

MR.  GEORGE  WADING,  600  acs. 
N'thumberland  Co.,  18  Aug.  1664,  p. 
208,  (107).  Upon  S.  side  of  Rappa., 
beg.  upon  land  of  James  Bonner,  extend- 
ing to  cr.  dividing  this  from  land  of 
Patriack  Miles.  Renewal  of  patent 
dated  19  Oct.  1653. 

ANN  TABB,  66  acs.  N'thumberland 
Co.,  28  June  1664,  p.  208,  (108).  Beg. 
upon  a  marsh  at  a  Cr.  issuing  out  of 
Yeocomico  Riv.,  extending  N.E.  upon 
land  of  Thomas  Hayles,  N.W.  to  land 
of  George  Tompson.  Granted  to  Tho- 
mas Sheppard  5  July  1653  &  by  Rich. 
Flynt,  Atty.,  assigned  to  Jno.  Garnoll  & 
Jno.  Palmer  14  Sept.  1657;  reassigned 
to  sd.  Flint  7  Dec.  1658,  who  assigned 
to  sd.  Sheppard  &  by  him  assigned  to 
Ann  Tabb  27  Dec.  1659. 

XTOPHER  HARRIS  &  WM.  BEAD, 
1040  acs.  on  S.  side  of  Potomack  Riv., 
16  June  1664,  p.  208,  (108).  Bounded 
Nly.  with  a  branch   of  Chappawansack 


462 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


parting  this  &  land  of  Lt.  Col.  Na- 
thanaell  Pope,  running  Sly.  on  back  line 
of  Peter  Knight,  Tho.  Fowkes  &  Wm. 
Mumford.  Granted  to  Abram  Rouse  19 
Aug.  1659,  one-half  of  which  assigned 
to  sd.  Harris  4  Oct.  1659  &  the  other 
part  assigned  to  Capt.  Giles  Brent  20 
Feb.  1659,  who  assigned  to  sd.  Bead, 
19  Aug.  1662. 

THOMAS  WILLIAMS,  1000  acs. 
between  Wiccocomico  Indian  Towne  & 
branches  of  Corrotoman  called  Mere- 
deths  Riv.  or  Cr.,  beg.  at  head  of  land 
of  Jno.  Cossens  &  Thomas  Heed  &c.  to 
head  of  land  of  Thomas  Dodson,  &c. 
Granted  to  George  English  &  Tho. 
Williams  26  Nov.  1660  &  by  English 
assigned  to  sd.  Williams.  11  Feb.  1663, 
p.  209,   (109). 

RICH.  GIBLE,  500  acs.  N'thumber- 
land  Co.,  9  Dec.  1662,  p.  209,  (HO). 
N.  side  of  Gr.  Wiccocomico  Riv.  250 
acs.  Wly.  &  N.Wly.  upon  Saffalls  Cr., 
E.  N.  E.  upon  Island  Cr.  &c.  250  acs. 
S.Wly.  upon  land  of  Wm.  Thomas, 
N.Wly.  upon  Roger  Walker,  N.Ely,  up- 
on the  path  that  goes  to  Chikacone  & 
divides  this  from  land  of  Henry  Watts 
&  Tho.  Dorrell,  S.Ely,  upon  lands  of 
Henry  Smith  orphant  &  land  of  Mr. 
Wm.  Nutt.  Granted  to  Wm.  Thomas 
&  assigned  to  sd.  Gible. 

WM.  HUCHESON,  300  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co.,  31  Oct.  1664,  p.  209,  (HO). 
Upon  Corotoman  Riv.,  upon  the  back 
of  a  devdt.  of  Wm.  Hucheson  &  Wm. 
Thatcher,  S.S.E.  upon  land  of  Thomas 
Steares  &  Jno.  Cusens.  Trans.  6  pers: 
Elizabeth  Grime,  Mary  Maine,  George 
Huson,  James  Mann,  Ralph  Woodford, 
Richard  Adams. 

MR.  WM.  LECH,  250  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  17  July  1665,  p.  210,  (111).  On 
the  S.  side  of  sd.  County,  upon  the 
Green  Sw.,  bounding  upon  land  of  Col. 
Elliot,  running  N.E.  by  N.  &c.  &  E.  by 
S.  to  land  of  Wm.  Tignor,  S.  by  W.  &c. 
Trans,  of  5  pers:  Wm.  Poole,  George 
Finch,  Henry  Sturman,  George  Gaunt, 
Richard  Picknell  (or  Pickrell). 

WM.  TOMPSON,  300  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  19  July  1665,  p.  210,  (111).  Upon 


S.  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  abutting  S.E.  upon 
land  surveyed  for  Francis  Browne,  upon 
N.W.  side  of  Sandy  poynt  Neck. 
Granted  to  Jno.  Sharpe  10  Oct.  1659  & 
sold  to  sd.  Tompson. 

PAUL  LUKE,  750  acs.  Isle  of  Wight 
Co.,  21  July  1665,  p.  210,  (ill).  Upon 
head  of  the  branch  of  Pagan  Cr.,  beg. 
on  the  Swamp  side,  running  to  an  old 
poplar  &c.  Formerly  belonging  to  Wm. 
Crannidge  &  after  his  decease  to  Tho- 
mas Luellin  &  both  dying  without  issue 
now  liveing,  land  was  granted  after  it 
escheated  to  sd.  Luke,  who  married  the 
relict  of  sd.  Luellin. 

MR.  RICHARD  YOUNG,  SR.,  1700 
acs.  Gloster  Co.,  20  June  1665,  p.  211, 
(112).  900  acs.  part  in  Waire  Parish, 
beg.  at  marked  tree  of  Thomas  Todd  on 
W.  side  of  Cow  Cr.  on  the  head  of 
Waire  Riv.  in  Mockjack  Bay,  running 
S.S.W.  &c.  800  acs.  in  sd.  parish  upon 
the  No.  River  in  sd.  Bay,  beg.  at  mouth 
of  back  Cr.,  running  W.N.W.  until  it 
meets  sd.  900  acs.  &c.  The  sd.  1700 
acs.  found  to  be  within  the  bounds  of 
2400  acs.  granted  to  Edmond  Dawber 
28  Nov.  1642  &  by  his  heir  sold  to  sd. 
Young  &  John  Price,  both  of  London, 
17  June  1659;  Sd.  Price  dying,  sd. 
Young  as  survivor  received  the  whole 
patent,  due  for  trans,  of  34  pers:  Isaack 
Stephens,  Wm.  Lannaman,  Jno. 
Thoroughgood,  Humphry  Buckley,  Tho- 
mas Jones,  Jno.  Nelson,  Job  Sutton, 
Margtt.  Kate  (or  Kale),  Thomas  Bayly, 
Jno.  Aiden  (or  Hiden),  Edw.  Smith, 
James  Simmons,  Tho.  Greene,  Rich. 
Mannering,  Jno.  Bearls  (or  Bearts), 
James  Goodwin,  8  Negroes;  Wm. 
Smith,  Ralph  Elkins,  Jonathan  Mott, 
Ann  Harper,  Mary  Harper,  James 
Nelson,  Augustine  Skiner,  Wm.  Ayhurt, 
Gabriell  Norton,  Jno.  Hay. 

JNO.  HAYNIE,  350  acs.  at  the  head 
of  Wiccocomico  Riv.,  bounded  S.  &  E. 
upon  land  of  Gervase  Dodson,  dec'd., 
&  Henry  Wickars  branch,  &  Nly.  on 
land  of  Col.  Jno.  Matrom,  dec'd.  10 
Mar.  1662,  p.  212,  (113).  Trans,  of  7 
pers:  Jno.  Edwards,  Mary  Jones,  Susan 
Avery,  Wm.  Michell,  Andrew  Stephens, 
Charles  Haynes,  Thomas  Norton. 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


463 


THOMAS  LANE,  1000  acs.  N'thum- 
berland  Co.,  26  July  1665,  p.  212, 
(113).  Ely.  upon  land  of  Mr.  George 
Fletcher,  dec'd.,  Sly.  on  branch  of  Den- 
nis Cr.  dividing  this  from  land  of  Mr. 
Rich.  Badd.  Granted  to  Andrew  Bayer 
(or  Boyer)  21  Oct.  1662  &  assigned  to 
sd.  Thomas  Land. 

MR.  WM.  POPE,  950  acs.  Nanci- 
mond  Co.,  25  July  1665,  p.  212,  (114). 
Beg.  at  corner  tree  of  Symon  Symons, 
running  N.E.  by  E.  &c.  400  acs.  by 
patent  dated  30  Oct.  1662  &  550  acs. 
for  trans,  of  11  pers.    Negroes.* 

JOHN  HUDNALL,  250  acs.  N'thum- 
berland  Co.,  25  July  1665,  p.  213, 
(115).  S.  side  gr.  Wiccocomico  Riv. 
150  acs.  N.N.E.  upon  sd.  river  at  a 
place  called  the  Island,  W.N.W.  upon 
land  of  Mr.  Nicholas  Morrice  &c.  100 
acs.  N.N.E.  upon  sd.  Riv.,  W.N.W. 
upon  land  of  Daniell  Crosby,  E.S.E. 
towards  land  of  Wm.  Thomas  &  S.S. 
W.  towards  land  of  Gervase  Dodson. 
Granted  to  John  Hudnall,  dec'd.,  24 
Aug.  1658  &  now  due  the  patentee  as 
son  &  heire. 

JOHN  HAMPSHIRE,  100  acs.,  being 
part  of  a  tract  formerly  belonging  to 
Mr.  Samll.  Parry,  on  Swd.  side  of  Pus- 
caticon  Cr.,  beg.  at  an  old  decayed  red 
oake  by  a  corner  side  at  a  landing 
known  by  the  name  of  Coops  Landing, 
extending  S.S.W.  &c.  Granted  to  Samll. 
Parry  &  by  him  assigned  unto  David 
Thomas  9  Dec.  1659,  by  whom  it  was 
assigned  to  sd.  Hampshire  7  July  1660. 
26  July  1665,  p.  213,  (115). 

WM.  THOMAS,  300  acs.  N'thumber- 
land  Co.,  26  July  1665,  p.  213,  (116). 
Beg.  at  the  head  of  the  land  sold  to 
Mr.  Michaell  at  a  marked  tree  of  Henry 
Smiths,  running  S.W.  &c.  Granted  to 
Edward  Cole  9  Mar.  1653,  assigned  to 
Jenkin  Morgan  4  Aug.  1657,  by  him 
sold  to  Tho.  Moulton  &  Tho.  Tripe  24 
Feb.  1661.  Sd.  Tripe  sold  his  part  to 
sd.  Moulton  9  Feb.  1662,  who  sold  to 
sd.  Thomas  20  June  1664. 

JNO.  HUGHLETT,  900  acs.  N'thum- 
berland    Co.,    3    June    1663,    p.    214, 


(117).  Bounding  N.  by  E.  upon  1200 
acs.  patented  by  Col.  Jno.  Matrom, 
dec'd.,  Ely.  upon  land  of  Jno.  Haynie, 
Sly.  S.Wly.  upon  a  branch  dividing  this 
from  land  of  sd.  Hughlett  &  Thomas 
Salisbury,  running  W.N.W.  &c.  to 
branch  of  Chickacone  Riv.,  N.N.W.  & 
W.S.W.  upon  land  of  Adam  Yarrett  & 
Rich.  Eaton,  including  within  this  tract 
an  acute  angle  of  land  lying  bet.  land 
of  sd.  Yarrett,  Eaton  &  Matrom  poynt- 
ing  on  Chikacone  aforesd.  to  the  place 
called  black  poynt.  Trans,  of  18  pers: 
Mary  Grimes,  Wm.  Jnoson,  Hen. 
Stevens,  Margtt.  Wilson,  3  Negroes, 
Antho.  James,  Wm.  Bigly,  Stephen  In- 
gram, Wm.  Betts,  Ann  Say,  Jno. 
Savadge,  Mary  Jones,  Wm.  Peters, 
Jonathan  Allen,  Andrew  Towers,  Wm. 
Towers. 

MR.  THOMAS  WRIGHT,  1000  acs. 
on  S.  side  &  in  the  freshes  of  Rappa. 
Riv.,  bounding  upon  land  of  Mr.  Wm. 
Trawers.  1  Aug.  1665,  p.  214,  (117). 
Trans,  of  20  pers:  Ri.  Lors  (?),  Sath. 
Holder,  Math.  Fletcher,  Jno.  Faror, 
Peter  Ellis,  Thomas  Smith,  Tho.  Cary, 
Edw.  Haile,  Mary  Clerke,  Jno.  Edmonds, 
Tho.  Watson,  Hen.  Willis,  Wm.  Leach, 
Wm.  Roberts,  Robt.  Carter,  Tho.  Sutton, 
Jarrett  Hill,  Tho.  Cocke,  Ri.  Holden, 
Wm.  Starkey, 

MR.  THOMAS  CHETWOOD,  2000 
acs.  on  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  in  the 
freshes  thereof,  beg.  at  the  head  of 
Munns  Cr.  1  Aug.  1665,  p.  214,  (118). 
Trans,  of  40  pers:  23  Negroes;  Jno. 
Marton  (or  Maston),  Geo.  Tree,  Tho. 
Bochen,  Ri.  More,  Fra.  Bourne,  Robt. 
Teexwell  (?),  Hen.  Ford,  Randall 
Morris,  Abram  Snow,  Jno.  Green,  Tho. 
Prior,  Robt.  How,  Jno.  Aires,  Rebecca 
Webnott,  Thomasin  Haines,  Susan 
Pattison,  Eliz.  Growndy. 

RICHARD  HINMAN,  100  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  1  Aug.  1665,  p.  215,  (118). 
Granted  to  Wm.  Cole,  dec'd.,  &  lately 
found  to  escheat  as  by  inquisition  re- 
corded in  the  Secretary's  office  under 
the  hand  &  seale  of  Coll.  Jno.  Stringer, 
by  virtue  of  a  deposition  from  Col. 
Myles  Cary,  Escheator  Generall  of  this 
county,  &  jury  sworne  before  him  15 
Sept.  1664. 


464 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


JNO.  GREENHOUGH,  400  acs.  on 
E.  side  of  James  Riv.  in  Henrico  Co., 
5  Aug.  1665,  p.  215,  (119).  Commonly 
called  &  knowne  by  the  name  of  Smiths 
Bay;  bounded  from  the  river  into  the 
woods  along  Thomas  Markhams  devdt., 
E.  &c.  towards  4  mi.  Cr.  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  6  Dec.  1652. 

MR.  THOMAS  DENNETT,  700  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  8  Aug.  1665,  p.  215, 
(119).  Beg.  at  Mr.  Grimes  corner  by 
Dyascun  Sw..  Part  of  a  devdt.  of  1000 
acs.  belonging  to  Wm.  Hitchman,  who 
sold  to  sd.  Dennett. 

ROBERT  SELFE,  300  acs.  Westmore- 
land Co.,  20  May  1665,  p.  215,  (120). 
On  N.  E.  side  of  Bloys  Swamp,  beg.  at 
a  white  oak  dividing  this  from  land  of 
Vincent  Cox,  extending  N.  E.  &c.  Trans. 
of  6  pers:  Tho.  Hawkins,  Senr.,  Tho. 
Hawkins,  Junr.,  Wm.  Harper,  Abigail 
Hawkins,  Danll.  Stepping,  Jonathan 
Stepping. 

JOHN  HOSKINS,  40  acs.  N'thum- 
berland  Co.,  4  June  1663,  p.  216,  (120). 
Bounding  upon  Yeocomoco  Riv.,  S.  E. 
upon  land  of  Wm.  Warder  &  S.  W. 
upon  a  creek  dividing  this  from  land  of 
Mr.  Charles  Ashton.  Trans,  of  Wm. 
Farmer. 

JOHN  WHISTON,  1000  acs.  on  S. 
side  Patomeke  Riv.  at  the  head  of 
Nomeny  Riv.  nigh  Herring  Cr.,  bounded 
N.  E.  with  the  main  swamp  thereof, 
N.W.  with  land  of  Tho.  Hawkins, 
deed.,  &c.  9  Apr.  1663,  p.  216,  (120). 
Trans,  of  20  pers:  Isaac  Whittacars, 
Tho.  Johnson,  Wm.  Guest,  Ja.  Burges, 
Jno.  Turner,  Joane  Jones,  Walter  Pye, 
Ismaell  Foard,  Judith  Horsing,  Marg. 
Taner,  Anth.  Blood,  Jacob  Strange,  Wini- 
fred Blevin,  Samll.  Ward,  Johna.  Merin, 
Teague  Mathone  (or  Machone),  Patrick 
Kelly,  Wm.  Stubbs,  Jno.  Billett,  Marke 
Fisher. 

WM.  JONES,  150  acs.  New  Kent 
Co.,  1  Feb.  1663,  p.  216,  (121).  On 
E.  side  of  Mattopony  Riv.,  bounded 
N.E.  on  land  Ralph  Greene,  E.N.E.  on 
his  own  350  acs.,  S.E.  on  Oapt.  Cham- 
berlines    &    W.S.W.    on    John    Gosse. 


Trans,  of  3  pers:    Edw.  Mathews,  Tho. 
Jones,  Edw.  Moreland. 

EDWARD  CHEESMAN,  50  acs.  of 
marsh  land  at  the  mouth  of  New  Poquo- 
son Riv.,  bounding  Wly.  on  his  land, 
N.  E.  on  Bay  tree  Cr.,  Ely.  on  Chisa- 
pian  bay  &  Sly.  on  sd.  Riv.  23  Dec. 
1662,  p.  216,  (121).  Trans,  of  Wm. 
Young. 

MR.  THOMAS  MICHAELL,  1500  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  15  Jan.  1662,  p.  217, 
(122).  On  branches  of  Chickahominy 
Sw.,  beg.  at  corner  of  Lt.  Col.  Gooch 
&  Wm.  Pullams  land  &c.  1000  acs. 
granted  to  him  1  Dec.  1660  &  500  acs. 
for  trans,  of   10  pers.* 

LUKE  BULLINGTON  (Billington), 
329  Ac.  &  50  po.,  18  Mar.  1663,  p. 
217,  (122).  Beg.  at  miles  end  of  Col. 
Fantlaroy  on  Farnham  Cr.,  at  a  corner 
tree  of  Robt.  Bayly,  running  S.W.  &c.  to 
head  of  a  branch  of  Gyles  Webbs  Cr., 
E.  by  N.  &c.  to  land  of  sd.  Bayly  &c. 
Trans,  of  7  pers:  Wm.  Harvey,  Jno. 
Young,  Thomas  Martin,  Mary  Taylor, 
Edw.  Farr,  Thomas  Wise,  Fra.  Williams. 

JAMES  BRADBURY,  250  acs.  GIos- 
ter  Co.,  31  Dec.  1662,  p.  217,  (123). 
Beg.  at  corner  of  Oliver  Greenes  land, 
running  S.  by  E.  &c.  Trans,  of  5  pers: 
John  Coniers,  Wm.  Marting,  Sarah 
Glover,  Wm.  Hopes,  Jno.  Dancy. 

JOHN  BRYAN,  200  acs.  in  Up. 
Norf.  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  217,  (123). 
At  S.  side  of  the  W.  branch  of  Nanci- 
mond  Riv.,  lying  at  S.  side  of  Indian 
Cr.,  running  by  Mr.  Wm.  Densons  &c. 
Renewal  of  patent  dated  20  Mar.  1659- 

THOMAS  GARDNER,  &  John 
Cocker,  187  acs.  in  New  Kent  Co.,  15 
Feb.  1662,  p.  218,  (123).  Bounded 
Wly.  on  John  Barsby  &  Robt.  Harris, 
N.E.  on  James  Wilson,  S.E.  on  Mount 
Follie  path  &  S.W.  on  path  that  goes 
from  John  Barsbies  to  John  Hankins 
(or  Hawkins).  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
James  Harris,  Joseph  Miller,  Wm.  Bur- 
ton, Tho.  Trewell. 

JOHN  VAUGHAN  &  JOHN  REA, 
130  acs.  &  50  po.  in  New  Kent  Co., 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


465 


15  Jan.  1662,  p.  218,  (124).  Beg.  at 
corner  Spanish  Oak,  thence  by  Mr. 
Burnells  line  of  marked  trees,  S.W.  &c. 
to  N.W.  side  of  Burchen  Swamp  &c. 
Trans,  of  3  pers:  Wm.  Murry,  James 
Hailing,  David  Cromy. 

THOMAS  MIMES  (or  Mines),  800 
acs.  James  City  Co.,  3  Feb.  1662,  p. 
218,  (124).  Upon  branches  of  Chicka- 
hominy  Sw.,  beg.  at  corner  oak  in  West- 
ham  path  about  a  mile  from  sd.  swamp 
in  the  head  of  Thomas  Merediths  land, 
running  by  his  line  86  po.  to  land  of 
Mr.  George  Smith  E.  by  N.  &c.  by  line 
of  Mr.  Richmond  Terrell  &  along  line 
of  Edmond  Price  &c.  Trans,  of  16 
pers.* 

WM.  HUMPHRIES,  200  acs.  Chas. 
City  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  218,  (125). 
Upon  Ely.  side  of  Turkey  Island  Cr. 
opposite  to  the  great  or  long  meadow. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  Tho.  Humphries,  Wm. 
Humphries,  Fra.  Humphries,  Edward 
Ward  (or  Ware). 

GEO.  BROWNING,  400  acs.  lying 
between  the  land  of  one  Clarke,  Henry 
Lowne,  Gilbert  Deacon  &  Robt.  Elam. 
10  June  1663,  p.  219,  (125).  Trans, 
of  8  pers.* 

RICHARD  EGGLESTONE,  1377  acs. 
&  58  chs.  in  James  City  Co,,  18  Mar. 
1662,  p.  219,  (125).  Beg.  on  N.  side 
of  a  branch  of  Poetan  Sw.  called  the 
Hay  Meadow,  up  sd.  Poetan  Sw.  neere 
the  third  branch  &c.  neer  the  second 
branch  &c.  to  Lady  Lunsfords  line  &c. 
to  the  Cart  path  &c.  to  Thomas  War- 
berton  &c.  to  Mr.  Hunts  line  &c.  900 
acs.  granted  9  Mar.  1653  &  477  acs.  & 
58  chs.  for  trans,  of  10  pers:  Wm.  Far- 
low,  Jno.  Shaw,  Edward  Luell  (?),  Tho. 
Wills,  Mary  Fuller,  Samll.  Greene,  Ed. 
Oliver,  Tho.  Cary,  Xpher  Young,  Jno. 
Sanvill. 

ROBT.  PITT,  1000  acs.  Accomacke 
Co.,  12  Mar.  1662,  p.  219,  (129).  At 
Pohomoke  Riv.,  bounded  on  N.  part  by 
sd.  Riv.,  on  W.  by  a  small  branch  part- 
ing this  from  land  of  Edm.  Scarburgh. 
Trans,  of  20  pers:  Tho.  Rilie,  Jno. 
Rodes,  Jno.  Cremer,  Eliz.  Doughty,  Tho. 


Smith,  Jno.  Willis,  Jno.  Browne,  Ed- 
ward Ward,  Robt.  Yallop,  Garrard 
Mourtny  (?),  Clemt.  Only,  Wm.  Clava- 
tor,  Susan  Berry,  Edward  Steward,  Peter 
Baxton,  Paul  Lambert,  Ann  Foard,  Jno. 
Spilman,  James  Cooke,  Moris  Neane. 

EVAN  WATERS,  50  acs.  Warwick 
Co.,  6  Mar.  1662,  p.  220,  (126).  Sly. 
on  head  of  Newmans  Dam  &  Ely.  on 
land  of  Francis  Rice.  Trans,  of  Margt. 
Priddock. 

MATHEW  HOGSON,  361  acs. 
Charles  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  220, 
(127).  On  W,  most  side  of  upper 
Chippokes  Cr.,  runing  along  Edward 
Greenwoods  marked  trees.  Trans,  of  8 
pers:  Leonard  Sanders,  Wm.  Gaultny, 
Anth.  Lewis,  Robt.  Turner,  Mary  Whit- 
loke,  Peter  Phillips,  Jno.  Howson,  Elli- 
nor  Garton. 

THOMAS  SWANN,  Junr.,  248  acs. 
Surry  Co.,  28  Sept.  1664,  p.  220,  (127). 
About  3  mi.  Wwd.  from  John  Bradies, 
beg.  at  a  white  oake  standing  in  a 
readie  branch  issuing  out  of  the  Sipres 
Sw.,  thence  S.  to  red  oak  standing  by 
the  path  that  goes  to  Capt.  Corkers  &c. 
to  S.most  side  of  the  Pegion  Sw.  Trans, 
of  5  pers.* 

DANIELL  HALLES,  150  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  27  Jan.  1663,  p.  221,  (128). 
Upon  a  branch  of  Poetan  Sw.,  beg.  by 
the  path  side  that  goeth  from  the  Green 
Spring  to  the  Hott  Water  &c.  to  Sir 
William  Berkelies  marked  trees  &  over 
the  Cart  path.    Trans,  of  3  pers.* 

CAPT.  JOHN  WEIR,  660  acs.  on  N. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  next  above  land 
called  Colemans  &c.  26  Mar.  1664,  p. 
221,  (128).  Granted  to  Wm.  Yearwood 
&  Fra.  Whitton,  29  July  1650  &  granted 
to  sd.  Weir  as  deserted  land  by  order  of 
Court  dated  25  Nov.  1661.  14  Negroes 
by  certificate  dated  2d  Nov.  1661.  40 
acs.    being    still    due    in    the   certificate. 

JNO.  CURTIS,  600  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  5  Mar.  1662,  p.  221,  (129).  On 
the  head  of  Nimcock  Cr.,  beg.  at  a 
small  cr.  known  by  the  name  of  Holo- 
bush    Sw.    Cr.    &c.    down    Hollowbush 


466 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


E.  N.  E.  &c.  Granted  to  Charles 
Grymes,  by  him  deserted  &  granted  sd. 
Curtis  by  order  of  the  Gen.  Ct. 

SAME.  560  acs.  Same  date  &  pages. 
On  N.E.  side  of  the  great  Swamp,  beg. 
at  a  white  oake  standing  by  the  path 
side  that  goeth  over  sd.  Swamp,  N.W. 
to  land  of  Mr.  Cuttbert  Potter  &c. 
Trans,  of  11  pers:  Wm.  Hay,  Tho. 
Wright,  Robt.  Onsby,  Tho.  Deareham, 
Tho.  Turner,  Robt.  Norman,  Gregory 
Okley,  Tho.  Ravenall,  Jno.  Watson, 
Ann   Goade    (or  Goode),   Mary  Birch. 

RICHARD  GRIFFIN,  57  acs. 
Wmoreland  Co.,  30  Sept.  1664,  p.  222, 
(129).  Being  a  triangular  parcel, 
bounded  N.E.  with  land  of  Henry 
Brookes,  S.S.W.  with  land  of  Richard 
Hill,  etc.    Trans,  of  Wm.  Coles. 

JOHN  NEWMAN,  480  acs.  on  the 
lower  or  Ewd.  side  of  Moratticon  Cr.  in 
Lancaster  Co.,  26  Mar.  1663,  p.  222, 
(130).  Adj.  land  formerly  belonging 
to  Mr.  David  Fox.  Trans,  of  10  pers: 
Tho.  Crow,  Wm.  Morton,  Margt.  Web- 
ster, Jane  Edwards,  Hen.  Webster, 
Danll.  Stanton,  Mary  Wakeman,  Hen. 
Creton,  Hump.  Lambert. 

WILLIAM  LUDFORD,  300  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  1  June  1663,  p.  222, 
(130).  On  head  of  Parrates  Cr.  Trans. 
of  6  pers:  John  Sales,  Edw.  James, 
Jacob  Laramore,  Tho.  Court,  Wm. 
Simons,  Mary  Jackson. 

THOMAS  WILLIAMS,  66  Acs.  4 
chs.  7  dec.  parts,  in  James  City  Co.,  10 
Nov.  1663,  p.  223,  (131).  Upon 
branches  of  Archers  Hope  Cr.,  beg.  on 
N.E.  side  of  a  branch  dividing  this 
from  Harrop  &  Littletowne  devdts.  &c. 
to  branch  dividing  this  from  Col. 
Humph.  Higgensons  devdt.  &c.  near  the 
path  to  Col.  Higgensons  Quarter  &c. 
Trans,  of  2  pers.* 

JOHN  MADDISON,  320  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  4  July  1664,  p.  223,  (131). 
Adj.  land  of  Mr.  Lockey  upon  Horecock 
Sw.,  beg.  at  Richard  Morleys  cor.  tree 
on  W.  side  his  devdt.  &c.  Trans,  of  7 
pers.* 


JOHN  PIGG  &  JOHN  MADDI- 
SON, 1050  acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  4  July 
1664,  p.  223,  (132).  Upon  a  branch 
of  the  main  swamp  of  Pianketanke  & 
the  Sw.  itself,  beg.  at  a  corner  poplar 
in  a  small  branch,  runing  thence  S.  by 
E.  &c.  to  Timber  branch  &c.  Trans,  of 
21  pers.* 

LT.  JOHN  HOWELL,  212  acs.  on  S. 
side  of  Appamatocks  Riv.  in  Bristoll 
Parish,  bounding  E.  by  S.  on  Capt. 
Epps  land  called  Casons  (or  Cosens), 
W.  by  N.  on  Nathanll.  Tatums  land  & 
N.  by  E.  on  the  River.  25  Mar.  1663, 
p.  224,  (132).  Trans,  of  5  pers: 
Marma.  Young,  Edw.  Sands,  Tho.  Cart- 
wright,  Jno.  Harmar,  Mary  Finch. 

MIHILL  HUGILL,  591  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  27  Jan.  1663,  p.  224,  (133).  On 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  on  a  branch 
at  a  red  oake  the  branch  bearing  E.  & 
thence  running  S.  &c.  on  the  head  of  a 
branch  of  Farnham  Cr.,  thence  N  to 
land  of  John  Williams  &c.  Trans,  of 
12  pers:  Gyles  Fettyplace,  Wm.  Graves, 
Jane  Hobson,  Mary  Hicks.  (Other 
names  not  given.) 

GEO.  BULLINGTON,  503  acs. 
Henrico  Co.,  21  June  1664,  p.  224, 
(133).  On  N.  side  of  James  Riv.,  beg. 
at  Thomas  Feelds  Cr.  Trans,  of  10 
pers:  James  Crews,  Jno.  Tomson,  Mary 
Huffe,  Wm.  Harding,  Eliz.  Arnell,  Wm. 
England,  Negro,  Margaret,  Eliz.  Hart, 
Edw.  Cooke. 

JOHN  DAVIS,  200  acs.  Low.  Parish 
of  Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  last  of  June  1664, 
p.  224,  (133).  Beg.  at  a  poynt  of  land 
called  the  Goatepen  Neck  at  the  mouth 
of  Taberers  Cr.,  running  up  Pagan  Cr. 
to  mouth  of  Hudnalls  Cr.,  including 
Buchers  Island,  up  Hudnalls  Cr.  to  land 
of  Thomas  Elmes,  along  same  &  land 
of  Wm.  Dawson  to  Taberers  Cr. 
formerly  called  Hutchinsons  Cr.  Trans, 
of  4  pers:  Wm.  Jones,  Jno.  Farmer, 
Wm.  Towne,  Mary  Williams. 

GEORGE  KEIBLE,  390  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co.,  29  Jan.  1663,  p.  225,  (134). 
On  N.  side  of  Peanketanke  Riv.,  210 
acs.  beg.  on  the  back  side  of  a  devdt. 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


467 


of  700  acs.  of  sd.  Keibles,  running  N.W. 
to  a  branch  called  the  Greane  Glead  &c. 
180  acs.  beg.  on  N.  side  of  sd.  700  acs. 

running  W.   &c.   alongst   land   of  

Moore  &c.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Hen. 
Herbert,  James  Price,  Jno.  Arthur,  Jno. 
Gibson,  Sam.  Cox,  Wm.  Phenix,  Ann 
Stephens,  Mary  Corbet. 

MATHEW  HILL,  470  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  24  Feb.  1663,  p.  225,  (134). 
Bet.  Chickahominy  Sw,  &  Pamunkey 
Riv.,  beg.  at  a  corner  tree  by  Westover 
path,  running  E.  by  S.  to  Mr.  Breretons 
land  &c.  to  sd.  path  dividing  this  from 
land  of  Mrs.  Joanes  &  Johna.  Higby  & 
Robt.  Garrett.  337  acs.  granted  to  John 
Hodg  11  Oct.  1662  from  whom  it  was 
purchased  by  sd.  Hill,  &  133  acs.  for 
trans,  of  3  pers:  Math.  Hill,  Johna. 
Norcott,  Doro.  Diccars. 

STEPHEN  BENBRIDGE,  250  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  4  July  1664,  p.  225, 
(135).  N.  side  of  Mattapony  Riv.,  beg. 
by  a  branch  of  Peanketank  Sw.,  near 
land  of  James  Coale  formerly  but  now 
in  the  tenure  of  Gabriell  Hill,  running 
to  land  of  Col.  Robt.  Abrahall,  formerly 
Capt.  Wm.  Claiborne  &c.  Trans,  of  5 
pers:  Wm.  Wallis,  Mary  Salter,  Jno. 
Edwardson,  Wm.  Simpson,  Tho.  Turner. 
Note:  Patent  relinquished  &  the  rites 
transferred  29  Apr.  1670.  Test:  R. 
Awborne. 

EDWARD  ROE,  150  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  2  Dec.  1663,  p.  226,  (136).  Beg. 
on  the  head  of  branches  of  the  beaver 
damms  that  issue  out  of  Peanketanke 
Riv.,  running  N.W.  along  Chesecake 
path  towards  Matchapungo,  thence  S. 
W.  towards  marked  trees  of  Col.  Robt. 
Smith.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Ann  Stephens, 
Wm.  Phenix,  Mary  Corbett. 

CHRISTOPHER        GARLINGTON, 

150  acs.  N'thumberland  Co.,  4  June 
1663,  p.  226,  (136).  Upon  a  Cr.  issu- 
ing out  of  the  S.  side  of  Gr.  Wiccoco- 
moco  Riv.,  bounding  S.Ely,  upon  land 
of  John  Dennis,  dec'd.,  N.Wly.  upon 
tract  whereon  sd.  Garlington  now  liveth. 
Trans,  of  3  pers:  Jno.  Hacney,  Sarah 
Howard,  Doro.  Yeomans. 


BENJAMIN  STRANG  &  JOHN 
BROCKHURST  (Brokhurst),  200  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  11  Mar.  1663,  p.  226, 
(136).  Ely.  side  of  the  head  of  Ware 
Cr.,  bounded  W.N.W.  on  the  Cow  pen 
Sw.,  S.  upon  a  branch  &  marked  trees 
of  James  Wilson  &  Thomas  Gardner, 
E.N.E.  on  Mrs.  Higgens  &  N.  on  John 
Brokhurst.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Wm. 
Hartwell,  Jno.  Sargent,  Edw.  Williams, 
Mary  Jones. 

MICH.  HUGILL,  664  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  Farnham  Parish,  20  Feb.  1662,  p. 
226,  (137).  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  at 
the  head  of  Totoskey  Cr.,  running  S.E. 
&c.  to  Sellevants  Gutt,  S.  neere  an  In- 
dian path  &c.  Trans,  of  14  pers:  Wm. 
Bateman,  Alex  Menc:  (name  abbre- 
viated), Marke  Alexander,  Geo.  Bay- 
mun,  Samll.  Burton,  Mich.  Wills,  Cutt. 
Fletcher,  Fardin  Downes,  Wm.  Ed- 
monds, Jos.  Gibson,  Robt.  Read,  Wm. 
Lewis,  Tho.  Waad,  Wm.  Badger. 

THOMAS  MEADER,  320  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Hoskins  Cr.,  2  June 
1663,  p.  227,  (137).  Nigh  a  path  that 
goeth  over  the  main  runn  of  sd.  Cr. 
unto  the  plantation  of  John  Gillett  &c. 
to  W.most  trees  belonging  to  John  Gre- 
gory. Trans,  of  7  pers:  Henry  Holm- 
wood,  Lewis  Williams,  Walter  Price, 
Easter  Watson,  Thomas  Paggitt,  Ann 
Austin. 

CAPT.  GEORGE  BRYER  &  RICH- 
ARD LAWRENCE,  3000  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  17  Mar.  1663,  p.  227,  (138). 
Ewd.  side  of  Rappa.  Cr.,  beg.  on  the 
creek  side,  adj.  land  of  Col.  More 
Fantleroy  opposite  to  the  new  planta- 
tion of  Col.  Walker,  extending  along 
the  creek  side  to  the  head  of  Parson 
Grymes,  by  land  of  of  sd.  Grymes,  Mr. 
John  Hull  &  Capt.  Geo.  Bryer  until  it 
comes  to  a  marked  white  oak  standing 
on  a  br.  of  Capt.  Bryers  Cr.  &  adj.  land 
of  Col.  Moore  Fantleroy  &c.  Note: 
"The  rights  for  this  3000  acs.  are  by  a 
certificate  from  Mr.  Jno.  Edwards  as- 
signed  to   Laurence." 

GOZEN  DELONIE,  alien,  50  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,  19  Oct.  1664,  p.  228,  (139). 
Adj.  to  S.most  bounds  of  land  first  taken 


468 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


up  by  Mr.  Rich.  Lee,  Secretary,  and  is 
commonly  called  the  Ridge.  Granted  to 
Edw.  Wright  3  July  1654  &  by  him 
assigned  to  sd.  Delonie. 

THOMAS  ILES,  225  acs.  Yorke  Co., 
formerly  called  Charles  River,  19  Oct. 
1664,  p.  228,  (139).  Bounded  N.  up- 
on the  back  creek,  E.  with  land  of  Jno. 
Clearkson  &c.  running  S.  till  it  meets 
with  a  branch  of  Chesmans  Cr.  Re- 
newal of  patent  dated  2  Oct.  1640. 

JOHN  BARBER,  halfe  an  acre  in 
James  Towne,  bounding  Sly.  on  the 
maine  Riv.,  Ely.  on  Mr.  Childes,  Nly. 
on  Jno.  Phipps  &  Wly.  on  Wm.  Wood. 
Renewal  of  patent  dated  14  May  1656. 
19  Apr.  1664,  p.  228,   (140). 

MR.  HENRY  WATTS,  125  acs. 
N'thumberland  Co.,  20  May  1665,  p. 
229,  (140).  Beg.  on  the  head  of  a 
branch  of  Little  Wiccocomoco  extend- 
ing N.N.E.  &c.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Wm. 
Anderson,  Xtop.  Seagreene,  Henry 
Dennis. 

VINCENT  COX,  400  acs.  W'more- 
land  Co.,  20  May  1665,  p.  229,  (141). 
Beg.  at  white  oak  dividing  this  &  land 
of  Robt.  Selfe,  thence  N.W.  &c.  to  nigh 
a  branch  of  Nomeny,  S.E.  to  the  head 
of  a  br.  of  Yeoacomico  Riv.  &c.  Trans, 
of  8  pers:  Jno.  Serviant,  Thomas  Sy- 
mons,  Jno.  Meekes,  Thomas  Watson, 
James  Jnoson,  Thomas  Barwick,  Tho. 
Bauldwin,  Martha  Dell. 

WM.  MOSELEY  &  JOHN  HULL, 
5798  Acs.  2  rodds  &  13  perches,  Rappa. 
Co.,  Farnham  Parish,  20  Feb.  1662,  p. 
229,  (141).  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
beg.  at  land  of  Mich.  Hugill  &c.  to 
N.W.  side  of  a  branch  of  Totoskey  &c. 
to  lands  of  Tho.  Robinson  &  Edward 
Lewis  &c.  Trans,  of  116  pers:  Jno. 
Hull  3  times,  Eliz.  Hull,  Eliz.  Hull 
Junr.,  Tim.  Sorrell,  Geo.  Watson,  Wm. 
Tuny,  Wm.  Brewer,  Wm.  Hodgkins, 
Geo.  Andrews,  Jno.  Beard,  Wm.  Parker, 
Wm.  Caple,  Jno.  Savage,  James  Bankes, 
Robt.  Cleavor,  Rich.  Walton,  Benj. 
Henshaw,  Jno.  Mason,  Jno.  Walton, 
Sam.  Farmer,  Eliz.  Wilson,  Jane  Den- 
nett,   Marg.    West,    Jno.    Neves,    Jno. 


Parsons,  Wm.  Barksdall,  4  Negroes, 
Rich.  Herbert,  Adam  Higeson,  Isham 
Withey,  Wm.  Edwards,  Wm.  Ethey, 
Wm.  Jones,  John  Thomas,  Tho.  An- 
drewes,  Rich.  Andrewes,  Aug.  Withey, 
Robt.  Walton,  Miles  Riles,  Nich.  Col- 
burne,  Geo.  Foot,  Richard  Munt,  Roger 
Read,  Wm.  Jones,  Ellinor  Carey,  Jno. 
Cane,  Christo.  Lewis,  Wm.  Holding, 
James  Norman,  Jno.  Redding,  Zach. 
Langly,  Humph.  Robins,  Miles  Parnis 
(or  Parvis),  Jno.  Crow,  James  Morton, 
Wm.  Lewis,  Eliz.  Waad,  Wm.  Badger, 
Jno.  Jones,  Lidia  How,  Jno.  Gafer, 
Edw.  Seare,  Abell  Jason,  Danll.  Mer- 
ricke,  Margt.  Williams,  Samll.  Hooke, 
Fra.  Glover,  Tho.  Mann,  Edw.  Evans, 
Jno.  Garey,  Wm.  Gutton,  Samll.  Cornix, 
Wm.  Hughes,  Mary  Stephens,  Jno.  Cur- 
tam,  Wm.  Crow,  Abra.  Travers,  Wm. 
Carman,  Steph.  Wells,  Jno.  Philpot, 
Wm.  Taylor,  Wm.  Strood,  Simon  Allen, 
Jeremy  Ward,  Rich.  Card,  Cuttbert 
Fletcher,  Fard.  Downes,  Wm.  Edmonds, 
Jos.  Gibson  Robt.  Read,  Rich.  Smith, 
Sam.  Warren,  Ja.  Bird,  Isaac  Scott,  Jno. 
Attkins,  Jno.  Field,  Nich.  Wilson, 
Ralph  Sharpe,  Wm.  Bateman,  Mich. 
Wills,  Alex.  Mont,  Marke  Allister,  Geo. 
Rayman,  Sam.  Burton,  Richard  Webb, 
Susan  Alcocke,  Rich.  Bullocke,  Jno. 
Sharpe,  James  Fuller,  Jacob  Cary. 

JOHN  ROSIER,  sonne  of  John 
Rosier,  dec'd.,  1450  acs.  W'moreland 
Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  230,  (142).  S. 
side  of  Potomake  Riv.,  vizt:  Rosiers 
Refuge,  bounded  vizt,  on  S.  by  sd.  Riv. 
from  the  mouth  of  Attopin  Cr.  to 
mouth  of  E.most  branch  next  Bluffe 
point,  on  E.  with  E.most  branch  &  a 
Sly.  &  Ely.  line  of  marked  trees  to  a 
cor.  white  oak  in  Huttlebury  thickett, 
etc.  on  S.  side  with  certain  lines  of 
marked  trees  including  all  the  falling 
branches  belonging  to  the  head  of  the 
ponds  to  marked  white  oak  at  the  head 
of  Attopin  Cr.  &  on  W.  with  the  chan- 
nel of  sd.  Cr.  unto  the  mouth  thereof. 
Granted  to  sd.  Jno.  Rosier,  dec'd.,  28 
Nov.  1657. 

FARDINANDO  AUSTIN,  1200  acs. 
Chas.  City  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  230, 
(142).  N.  side  of  James  Riv.,  E.  side 
of  Queens  Cr.,  bounded  Ely.  on  Moses 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


469 


run,  S.  on  Mr.  Horsmandine  &  Mr. 
Hamlin  &  Wly.  on  sd.  Cr.  run  &c.  Re- 
newal   of   patent   dated    25    Feb.    1654. 

WALTER  BROOKES,  460  acs.  Chas. 
City  Co.,  Bristoll  Parish,  18  Mar.  1662, 
p.  230,  (143).  160  acs.  on  Ely.  side  of 
the  Citty  Cr.  &  where  it  bounds  S.  into 
the  woods  &c,  N.  on  Appamatocke  Riv. 
300  acs.  at  the  head  thereof,  running 
E.  along  the  head  of  Nath.  Tatums  land 
&c.  to  head  of  John  Bakers  land.  Re- 
newal of  patent  dated  12  Mar.  1653. 

THO.  HOBSON,  500  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  26  June  1663,  p.  230,  (143).  N. 
side  of  Rappa.  River,  beg.  at  upper  cor. 
tree  of  the  miles  end  of  Capt.  Weirs 
land  &c.  E.  by  N.  to  &  over  an  Indian 
path  &c.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Wm.  Har- 
vey, Mary  Wells,  Tho.  Gray,  Jane  Wil- 
liams, Jno.  Hawley,  Sarah  Pead,  Wm. 
Walker,  Fra.  Farlow,  Wm.  Young, 
James  CrafTord. 

THO.  WHITE  &  THOMAS 
BLANCH,  450  acs.  Norfolk  Co.,  18 
Mar.  1662,  p.  231,  (144).  Ewd.  side 
of  S.  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  beg.  at  mouth 
of  Gathers  Cr.  &c.  down  by  the  side  of 
the  little  Cr.  &c.  Granted  to  sd.  White 
&  Peter  Saxton,  last  day  of  March  1653; 
&  by  Ann  Saxton,  the  Widdow  of  sd. 
Saxton,  sold  her  part  to  sd.  Blanch. 

WM.  SARSON,  107  acs.  James  Citty 
Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  231,  (145).  N. 
side  of  James  Riv.  &  S.  side  of  Parch- 
mores  Cr.,  Nly.  on  Goose  hill  house,  &c. 
Ely.,  Sly.  &  Wly.  on  the  maine  river. 
Renewal  of  patent  dated  2  Mar.   1656. 

PETER  MILLS,  sonne  &  heire  of 
Wm.  Mills,  400  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  6 
Sept.  1654,  p.  231,  (145).  On  N.  side 
&  within  the  freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
bounded  on  N.  with  land  surveyed  for 
Toby  Smith  &  S.E.  upon  land  of  Tho- 
mas Hobkins.  Granted  to  said  Wm. 
Mells  6  Sept.  1654. 

LT.  COL.  JNO.  CHEESMAN,  Esqr. 
&  JOHN  ADLESTONE,  300  acs.  18 
Mar  1662,  p.  231,  (l45~).  On  N.  side 
of  Cheesmans  Cr.  &  on  the  bay  tree 
necke,  beg.  at  corner  tree  of  sd.  Addle- 


stones  70  ac.  devdt.,  running  by  marked 
trees  dividing  their  lands  &  land  of  Mr. 
Beale  &  Jno.  Clerkton  &c.  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  13  May  1654. 

RICHARD  DAVIS,  660  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  232,  (146). 
N.  side  of  Mattapony  Riv.  upon  the 
main  swamp  of  Esqr.  Diggs  Cr.  Re- 
newal of  patent  dated  25  June  1660. 

JOHN  M ADDISON,  300  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  232,  (147). 
N.  side  of  Mattapony  Riv.,  beg.  at  a 
red  oake  corner  of  Jno.  Piggs  land, 
running  W.  joyning  to  another  devdt. 
of  sd.  Maddison,  thence  N.,  thence  E. 
to  sd.  Piggs  land,  thence  S.  to  beg. 
Renewal  of  patent  dated  9  Aug.   1659. 

MR.  RAWLEIGH  TRAVERS,  300 
acs.    Lancaster   Co.,    29    Dec.    1662,    p. 

232,  (147).  Upon  W.N.W.  side  of 
Morattico  Cr.,  opposite  land  of  Edward 
Myles,  abutting  S.W.  upon  a  branch  of 
sd.  Cr.  dividing  this  &  land  of  Capt. 
Moore  Fantleroy  &c.  Granted  to  Mr. 
Henry  Corbyn  30  Nov.  1659  &  by  him 
assigned  to  sd.  Travers. 

DAVID  FOX,  Gent.,  350  acs.  called 
the  Poplar  Necke,  on  N.  side  of  Lan- 
caster Co.,  running  Ely.  upon  land  of 
Capt.  Hacket,  W.  Nly.  upon  land 
formerly  John  Robinsons.  21  Aug. 
1663,  p.  232,  (147).  Trans,  of  7  pers: 
Wm.  Jarvis,  Jno.  Jaret,  Edw.  Marma- 
duke,  Jno.  Snowdell,  Wm.  Fry,  Jaco 
Tall,  Nath.  Knot. 

WM.  WILTON  &  JOHN  SPEED, 
400  acs.  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  at 
marked  oake  adj.  land  of  Thomas  Wil- 
kingson,  extending  W.  by  S.  cross  the 
head  of  a  Cr.  &c.  Renewal  of  patent 
dated  15  Aug.  1660.    18  Mar.  1662,  p. 

233,  (148). 

WM.  TILT,  400  acs.  W'moreland 
Co.,  6  Dec.  1662,  p.  233,  (148). 
Bounding  Wly.  with  W.most  branch  of 
Pasbetancy  Cr.,  beg.  nigh  the  back  line 
of  William  &  John  Heaberd.  Granted 
to  Thomas  Frissell  19  Aug.  1659,  by 
him  sold  to  Abra.  Rowse,  &  by  him  sold 
to  Gerrard  Fowke,  who  assigned  to  sd. 
Tilt. 


470 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


CAPT.  GYLES  BRENT,  1000  acs. 
Wmoreland  Co.,  29  Nov.  1662,  p.  233, 
(149).  In  Chapawansicke  Cr.,  beg.  at 
head  line  of  Mr.  Walter  BroaHhurst, 
extending  on  both  side  of  the  run  of 
two  sd.  Cr.  &c.  including  the  Rocke 
and  two  Caves  called  Machezan.  Re- 
newal of  patent  dated  24  Nov.  1658. 

THO.  ROBINSON  &  EDWARD 
LEWIS,  1140  acs.,  Rappa.  Co.,  20 
Feb.  1662,  p.  233,  (149).  Beg.  on  a 
long  point  of  land  extending  itself  E. 
into  Totoskey  Cr.,  on  N.  side  of  Rappa. 
Riv.  in  Farnham  Parish.  Trans,  of  23 
pers:  Edw.  Moulson,  Wm.  Jarvis, 
Jno.  Sea,  Mary  Frith,  Tho.  Warlett, 
Mary  Marlow,  Ed.  Faulkner,  Jane 
Smart,  Ben  Broad,  Lawrence  Fowke, 
Mary  Calvert,  Jacob  Jenman,  Samll. 
Cranz  (?),  Wm.  Lever,  Tho.  Power, 
Sarah  Salmon,  Tho.  Makerland,  Emll. 
Martin,  Thomas  Truloe,  James  Falow, 
Tho.  Spann,  Fra.  Chowning,  Wm. 
Glover. 

THOMAS  OSWILLIVANT  (O'Swil- 
livant  ?),  200  acs.,  part  of  patent  of 
1000  acs.  granted  to  Mr.  Fra.  Harrison 
6  Oct.  1654,  N.N.W.  upon  land  of 
Valentine  Peyton.  Granted  to  Capt. 
Gyles  Brent  8  June  1658  &  by  him  as- 
signed to  sd.  Oswillivant.  28  Nov. 
1662,  p.  234,   (150). 

WM.  SNOWDELL,  100  acs.  N'thum- 
berland  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  234, 
(150).  N.Wly.  upon  Yeocomoco  Riv., 
S.Ely,  upon  Mattapony  Riv.,  N.Ely, 
where  the  two  Rivers  meet  &  S.Wly.  on 
land  patented  by  John  Meekes  &  Wm. 
Newman.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  15 
Mar.  1658. 

EVAN  WILLIAMS,  200  acs.  called 
the  New  Discovery,  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  18 
Mar.  1662,  p.  234,  (150).  On  E. 
branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.  &c,  including 
Pillatory  Ridge.  Renewal  of  patent 
dated  24  Nov.  1659. 


WM.  LEWER,  350  acs.  Isle  of  Wight 
Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  235,  (151). 
Bounding  from  Mr.  Flintons  marked 
trees  &c.  Granted  to  John  Gutteridge 
23  Mar.  1654,  by  him  assigned  to  Peter 
Bagly  (or  Bagby),  who  assigned  to  sd. 
Lewer. 

(blank)  ARMEFEILD,  400  acs. 

Glocester  Co.,  24  Nov.  1663,  p.  235, 
(152).  Beg.  at  John  Greens  cor.  tree 
by  Mr.  Pates  Swamp,  running  W.  by  N. 
&c.  by  land  of  Mr.  Peter  Knight. 
Granted  to  Thomas  Curies  28  Apr. 
1659,  by  him  sold  to  Mr.  John  Pate, 
who  assigned  to  sd.  Armefeild. 

JOHN  BUNCH,  450  acs.  New  Kent 
Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  235,  (152).  On 
both  sides  of  Rickahock  Path,  beg.  by 
Burchen  Sw.,  running  W.  N.  W.  &c. 
to  land  of  Mr.  Richard  Barnehouse, 
thence  E.N.E.  &c.  Granted  to  Thomas 
Merreday  25  Feb.  1658,  by  him  sold  to 
Phillip  Freeman,  who  assigned  to  sd. 
Bunch. 

CHARLES  EDMONDS,  2750  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  235, 
(153).  S.  side  Yorke  Riv.,  beg.  on  N. 
side  of  Tyascun  Sw.,  running  down 
same  &c.  by  Chickahominy  Sw.,  .up  the 
same  to  corner  of  his  own  devdt.  &c.  to 
Diascan  Sw,  where  it  began.  Granted 
to  sd.  Edmonds  28  Feb.  1658,  one-half 
of  which  he  assigned  to  John  Davies 
(Davis)    who    reassigned    to    Edmonds. 

THOMAS  HUMPHRIES  &  THO- 
MAS TYPPER,  547  acs.  Westmoreland 
Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  236,  (153).  Beg. 
at  corner  of  land  of  Gerrard  Fowke, 
extending  up  S.most  branch  of  Paspe- 
tanke  Cr.  S.  by  W.  to  white  oake  in 
Roger  Perfetts  line  &c.  by  a  path  that 
leads  from  Nanzaticun  unto  Mr. 
Fowkes  house  &c.  Renewal  of  patent 
dated  30  July  1660. 


MARY  PATE,  300  acs.  Wmoreland 
Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  234,  (151).  On 
E.most  br.  of  Pasbetanke  Cr.,  on  back 
of  Wm.  &  John  Heaberd  &c.  Granted 
to  Roger  Perfitt  31  Mar.  1660  &  by  him 
given  by  will  to  sd.  Mary  Pate. 


VINCENT  YOUNG,  200  acs. 
Wmoreland  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  236, 
(154).  Near  Chotanke,  extending  on 
branches  of  Mattapony,  on  lands  of 
Gervase  Dodson  &  David  Phillips.  Re- 
neal  of  patent  dated  15  Aug.  1660. 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


471 


JAMES  HARRIS,  60  acs.  W'more- 
land  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  236,  (154). 
Being  a  point  of  land  bounded  Ely. 
with  land  of  James  Harris,  North 
Wly.  &  S.Wly.  with  Hallowes  Cr.  &  a 
small  br.  called  Morakswee  ( ? ) .  Granted 
to  Thomas  Buttler  16  May  1660  &  by 
him  sold  to  sd.  Harris. 

RICHARD  KELSON,  250  acs.  War- 
wicke  Co.,  29  Jan.  1662,  p.  236,  (155). 
S.Ely,  upon  Warwicke  Riv.  near  the 
head,  S.Wly.  upon  land  of  Thomas 
Flint,  deed.,  N.Ely,  upon  land  of  Wm. 
Bullocke,  dee'd.  &  N.Wly.  upon  the 
maine  woods,  Capt.  Nath.  Hurds  &c. 
other  lands.  Renewal  of  patent  dated 
20  Oct.  1659. 

THOMAS  TAYLOUR,  281  acs. 
Henrico  Co.,  20  Mar.  1662,  p.  237, 
(155).  N.  side  of  James  Riv.,  common- 
ly called  Harrahatocks,  over  against 
Kings  land,  bounded  from  the  Riv.  a 
little  below  the  Orchard  by  land  of  Mr. 
Arthur  Bayly  &c.  Granted  to  Mathew 
Edlow  8  Dec.  1653  &  by  him  assigned 
to  sd.  Taylour. 

MR.  GEORGE  MARSH,  750  acs. 
Rappa.  Co.,  on  S.  side  the  River,  24 
Mar.  1662,  p.  237.  (156).  Upon  N. 
side  of  a  great  swamp  running  into 
Pyanketanke  Riv.,  beg.  on  S.E.  side  of  a 
branch  running  into  sd.  Sw.  at  an  oak 
on  S.W.  side  of  an  Indian  path  that 
cometh  from  Pyanketanke  &  goeth  to 
Mattapony,  thence  S.W.  &c.  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  29  Nov.   1659. 

CAPT.  WM.  WHITTICAR,  90  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  237, 
(157).  On  N.E.  side  of  James  Riv., 
beg.  in  Mr.  Loveings  line  behind  Rich- 
ard Leonards  house,  running  W.  by  N. 
&c.  by  Yorke  path  &c.  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  5  June  1656. 

EDWARD  BOWMAN,  Merchant, 
600  acs.  on  W.  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv., 
beg.  on  a  poynt  &  running  up  side  of 
Mr.  Loyds  Cr.  &c.  to  head  of  Mar- 
chants  Cr.  &c.  Renewal  of  patent  dated 
24  Nov.  1654.  28  Jan.  1662,  p.  238, 
(157). 


JOHN    &    THOMAS    BUCKOCKE, 

350  acs.  W'moreland  Co.,  18  Mar. 
1662,  p.  238,  (158).  250  acs.  bound- 
ing S.Ely,  on  Hollis  Cr.,  S.W.  upon 
land  of  John  Vaughan  &  N.Ely,  towards 
land  of  William  Freake;  100  acs.  S. 
Ely.  upon  sd.  land,  N.Ely,  towards  land 
of  Lt.  Col.  Pope.  Granted  to  David 
Phillips  25  Sept.  1657,  by  him  sold  to 
Jno.  Washington,  who  sold  to  Nich. 
Sexton,  who  sold  to  John  Buckocke, 
and  one-half  thereof  by  him  sold  to  the 
sd.  Thomas. 

JOHN  STANUP,  1350  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  238,  (158). 
S.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.,  beg.  at  corner  by 
Henry  Ashwells  path,  running  S.W.  by 
S.  &c.  to  corner  by  John  Basbies  path, 
thence  S.Ely,  to  Thomas  Collings  cor- 
ner &c,  including  1750  acs.  granted  to 
Martin  Baker  28  Nov.  1658,  300  acs.  of 
which  sd.  Baker  sold  to  Tho.  Tilsey  & 
100  acs.  to  Jno.  Gynes  (?),  which  is 
excepted  out  of  the  bounds  according  to 
the  bills  of  sale  from  Baker;  1350  acs. 
assigned  sd.  Stanup  by  sd.  Baker. 

ANDREW  PETTIGREW,  2000  acs. 
upon  great  Wiccocomoco  Riv.,  Sly.  upon 
a  main  br.  at  the  head  thereof,  Ely.  upon 
land  of  George  Clarke,  the  sd.  branch 
dividing  this  from  land  of  Capt.  Bond 
(or  Bud)  &  Robt.  Wilson.  Granted  to 
Gervase  Dodson,  deed.,  27  Apr.  1658 
&  due  sd.  Pettigrew  as  marrying  the 
relict  of  sd.  Dodson.  28  Jan.  1662,  p. 
239,    (159). 

WM.  BROWNE,  DANIELL  WHITE 
&  WM.  BOLTROP  (Baltrop),  744  acs. 
in  the  forrest  between  the  Rivers  Pato- 
mecke  &  Rappahanocke,  W'moreland 
Co..  3  Mar.  1664,  p.  239,  (160).  Beg. 
in  the  back  line  of  land  surveyed  for 
Henry  Pate,  extending  W.  by  S.  &c. 
Trans,  of  15  pers:  Wm.  Barlow,  Tno. 
Browne,  Mary  Partin,  Jno.  Shaw,  Tho. 
Holmes,  Jane  Smart.  (Other  names  not 
given.) 

JOHN  CARTWRIGHT.  100  acs.  on 
S.  side  in  E.  branch  of  Elizabeth  Riv., 
bounding  on  E.  side  of  Henry  NicHolls. 
14  July  1664,  p.  239,  (160).  Trans, 
of  2  pers.* 


472 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


GEORGE  BRYER  &  RICHARD 
LAWRENCE,  1000  acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  26 
Sept.  1664,  p.  239,  (161).  N.  side  of 
Rappa.  Riv.,  S.W.  upon  the  head  of 
Fleets  Cr.  upon  N.  side  of  Rappa- 
hanocke  Towne.  Granted  to  Charles 
Grymes  8  Oct.  1657,  by  him  deserted 
&  now  granted  by  order  of  the  Genii. 
Ct.,  &  due  for  trans,  of  20  pers:  Wm. 
Furmis,  Wm.  Matter,  Fra.  Pope,  Rich- 
ard Browne,  Edie  Kegg,  Jno.  Teague, 
George  Gale,  James  Gardiner,  Robt. 
Huston,  Joyce  Smith,  Ann  Jordan,  Toby 
Culgy,  Jeffry  Hewes,  Wm.  Tix,  Jno. 
Harrold,  Rich.  Browne,  Ed.  Loyd,  Fra. 
Jones,  Nich.  Rice,  Eliz.  Thomas. 

MR.  JOHN  UNDERHILL  &  WM. 
BASSETT,  463  Acs.  New  Kent  Co,  3 
July  1664,  p.  240,  (161).  S.W.  side  of 
Weyanoke  Sw.,  beg.  at  cor.  poplar  be- 
longing to  Peter  Adams,  by  line  of 
Stephen  Tarlton  &c.  to  S.W.  branch  of 
black  Cr.  down  same  &c.  to  line  of  John 
Horsidens  &c.  to  a  corner  Highland 
Gum  &c.  to  a  br.  of  sd.  swamp  divid- 
ing this  &  land  called  Chamokins  Sec. 
Trans,  of  10  pers:  Wm.  Dickes,  James 
Bessett,  Nich.  Hull,  Nan  a  Negro,  Edw. 
Ward,  Jno.  Martin,  Mary  Pearman,  Tho. 
Carew,  Tho.  Simons,  Wm.  Feild. 

JOHN  UNDERHILL,  309  acs.  New 
Kent  Co,  3  July  1664,  p.  240,  (162). 
On  branches  of  black  Cr.  maine  Sw, 
beg.  at  cor.  of  S.most  end  of  land  of 
UnderHill  &  Bassett,  in  John  Horsen- 
dons  line  &c.  to  land  of  Stephen  Tarlton 
Sec.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Rich.  Harrison, 
Eliz.  Harrison,  Jno.  Morepent,  Peter 
Plumer,  Tho.  Shaw,  Jane  Bone. 

GEO.  BRYER,   500  A.   2  R.   20  Po. 

Rappa.  Co,  20  Feb.  1662,  p.  240, 
(162).  Farnham  Parish  on  N.  side  of 
Rappa.  Riv,  beg.  at  the  head  of  a  br. 
arising  out  of  the  head  of  Oatspekety 
Cr.  (?).  trans,  of  10  pers:  Wm. 
Bromwell,  Jno.  Letherland,  Rob. 
Browne,  James  Ballware,  Wm.  Bolware, 
Tho.  Strange,  Wm.  Langly,  Miles  Para- 
more,  Rich.  Hasting,  Tho.  Shory. 

THOMAS  SPENCER,  THOMAS 
BROOKES  &  WM.  HITCHMAN,  3300 
acs.  James  City  Co,  27  Apr.  1664,  p. 


241,  (163).  N.  side  of  James  Riv.  & 
Sly.  side  of  the  head  of  Chickahominy 
Riv.  above  Westover  path,  beg.  on  Mr. 
Brumfeild  cor.  tree  &c.  to  the  maine 
Sw.  &c.  including  a  smallneck  of  150 
acs.  &c.    Trans,  of  66  pers.* 

JOHN  KILLMAN,  150  acs.  Rappa. 
Co,  2  Dec.  1663,  p.  241,  (163).  Adj. 
land  of  sd.  John  &  George  Killman, 
upon  Piscattaway  Cr,  beg.  at  an  ancient 
red  oake,  running  S.E.  Sec.  to  Neele 
Petersons  cor.  white  oake  upon  Green 
branch,  down  the  same  W.  Sly.  divid- 
ing this  from  land  of  sd.  Peterson  &c 
to  W.  side  of  the  swamp  called  by  the 
name  of  Killmans  Beaver  Dam  Sw.  Sec. 
Trans,  of  3  pers.* 

ROBERT  DAVIS,  700  acs.  at  the 
head  of  Poytresses  Cr.  on  N.  side  of 
Rappa.  Riv.  near  Nanzatticon.  6  Apr. 
1664,  p.  241,  (164).  Granted  to  Vin- 
cent Stanford  16  Oct.  1656,  by  him  de- 
serted &  granted  sd.  Davis  by  order  of 
the  Genii.  Ct.  &  due  for  trans,  of  14 
pers.* 

JOHN  JOHNSON,  155  acs.  James 
City  Co,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  242,  (165). 
Sly.  upon  a  small  br.  of  Archers  Hope 
Cr.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  25  Mar. 
1654. 

DAVID  FOX,  80  acs.  Lancaster  Co, 
20  Mar.  1662,  p.  242,  (165).  N.  side 
of  Rappa.  Riv.  &  S.E.  side  of  1050  acs. 
granted  to  him  2  Apr.  1650,  running 
to  mouth  of  Faire  wether  Cr.  Renewal 
of  former  patent. 

JOHN  COLEMAN,  813  acs.  Chas. 
City  Co,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  242,  (166). 
S.  side  of  Appamatocke  Riv,  200  acs. 
thereof  upon  N.W.  of  Riv,  E.N.E.  upon 
the  other  devdt.  of  600  acs,  Deepe 
Bottom  parting  it,  W.S.W.  unto  a  run 
of  water  parting  this  from  land  of  Na: 
Tatum;  613  acs.  beg.  at  upper  bounds 
of  Mr.  Tunstalls  land  Sec.  Granted  to 
Col.  Water  Giles  25  Oct.  1652  &  by 
him  assigned. 

FRA.  SHERWOOD,  400  acs.  N'amp- 
ton  Co,  14  Jan.  1663,  p.  242,  (166). 
At  Matchotanke  Cr,  bounded  on  W.  by 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


473 


land  of  Nich.  Wadilow,  S.  by  maine  Cr. 
&  running  Nly.  towards  Anancocke. 
Granted  to  Dr.  George  Hacke,  23  Sept. 

1661,  by  him  sold  to  Edward  Baker, 
who  reassigned  to  sd.  Hacke,  who  as- 
signed to  sd.  Sherwood. 

THOMAS  DYER,  100  acs.  in  W. 
branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p. 
243,  (167).  Granted  to  Wm.  Memax  & 
Demetree  Moreene  14  Dec.  1653  &  as- 
signed to  sd.  Sherwood. 

GEORGE  BILLIPS,  750  acs.  upon 
branches  of  Millford  Haven,  beg.  at 
dividing  point  &  running  up  a  Cr. 
dividing  this  &  land  of  John  Sillis.  18 
Mar.  1662,  p.  243,  (167).  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  5  Nov.  1653. 

HENRY  CORBELL,  600  acs.  Gloster 
Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  243,  (168).  On 
N.  &  S.  side  of  a  path  leading  from  the 
now  plantation  of  Col.  Richard  Lee  to 
plantation  of  Mr.  Bremar,  beg.  at  cor. 
by  Jeffery  Bews  land.  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  6  Mar.  1653. 

WM.  GANTLETT,  920  acs.  Yorke 
Co.,  22  Dec.  1662,  p.  243,  (168).  S. 
side  of  Yorke  Riv.  &  S.  side  of  Skimi- 
noe,  bounded  by  sd.  Skiminoe  maine 
Sw.  &  Cr.  to  the  channell  from  the 
mouth  of  Beech  Spring  run  on  the  N., 
by  the  side  of  Gantletts  Landing,  by 
Thomas  Pinkemans  path  on  the  E.  &c. 
Renewal  of  patent  dated  6  May   1654. 

RICHARD  FOSTER,  250  acs.  in  Linn 
haven  Parish,  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  18  Mar. 

1662,  p.  244,  (169).  Beg.  at  the  head 
of  the  broad  Cr.  Renewal  of  patent 
dated  25  Nov.   1653. 

WM.  &  JOHN  HEABERD,  350  acs. 
Wmoreland  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  244, 
(169).  300  acs.  bet.  two  branches  of 
Pasbitansy  Cr.,  the  one  extending  S.S.E. 
dividing  this  &  land  of  Gerrard  Fowke 
&c,  the  other  branch  dividing  this  & 
land  of  Sir  Thomas  Lunsford  commonly 
called  Otter  Hill;  50  acs.  on  S.E.  side  of 
W.most  bnmch  of  Pasbetancy  at  N.most 
cor.  of  land  of  Tho.  Frissell  &  adj.  his 
own  land.  Renewal  of  their  patent 
dated  30  July  1660. 


JNO.  BRYAN,  200  acs.  Upper  Norf. 
Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  244,  (170).  S. 
side  of  the  W.  branch  of  Nancimum 
Riv.  on  both  sides  of  the  Indian  Cr., 
running  by  Mr.  William  Densons  line 
&c.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  20  Mar. 
1659. 

HENRY  SMITH,  Jr.,  200  acs. 
N'umberland  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p. 
245,  (170).  Nly.  upon  land  of  Thomas 
Darrow,  S.E.  upon  Edward  Coale.  Re- 
newal of  patent  dated  9  Dec.  1656. 

RICHARD  HEARBERD  (Heaberd), 
480  acs.  Wmoreland  Co.,  20  Nov. 
1662,  p.  245,  (171).  Nigh  unto  Pasbe- 
tancy Cr.,  N.W.  by  N.  by  land  of  Tho. 
Frissell,  N.E.  by  E.  by  land  of  Wm.  & 
John  Heabeard  &  S.E.  by  S.  with  land 
of  Roger  Perfitt.  Renewal  of  patent 
dated  31  Mar.  1660. 

JOHN  GREENE,  200  acs.  in  W. 
branch  of  Eliz.  Riv,  beg.  at  the  miles 
end  of  his  own  land.  9  Jan.  1662,  p. 
245,  (171).  Renewal  of  patent  dated  1 
June  1655. 

HENRY  BROOKES,  1020  acs. 
Wmoreland  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  245, 
(171).  S.  side  of  Petomecke  Riv.,  on 
N.W.  side  of  a  Cr.  dividing  this  from 
land  of  Danll.  Liston  &  S.E.  with  Cr. 
dividing  this  from  land  of  Lt.  Col. 
Henry  Pope.  Renewal  of  patent  dated 
14  Oct.  1657. 

WM.  HAYWARD,  400  acs.  Gloster 
Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  246,  (172).  Beg. 
by  a  little  branch  of  Bennetts  Cr.  Re- 
newal of  patent  dated  5  June  1654. 

HENRY  WALKER,  480  James  City 
Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  246,  (172).  Adj. 
land  of  Richard  Vardy,  running  S.W. 
by  S.  to  land  of  Lady  Lunsford,  thence 
W.  by  S.  to  Poetan  Sw.  &c.  Renewal 
of  patent  dated  16  July  1654. 

SARAH,  MARGTT.,  JUDETH  & 
ELIZ.  JONES,  100  acs.  Wmoreland 
Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  246,  (173). 
S.Ely,  upon  upper  Machotix  Riv.,  N.Ely 
upon  land  of  Mr.  Xtopher  Boyce, 
S.Wly.  upon  land  formerly  patented  by 


474 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


sd.  Jones  &c.  Granted  to  Nathaniell 
Jones,  deed.,  16  July  1654  &  by  will 
given  to  the  abovenamed. 

WM.  GREEN,  250  acs.  Wmoreland 
Co.,  12  Jan.  1662,  p.  246,  (173).  On 
a  branch  of  Oquina  Riv.,  opposite  land 
of  Samll.  Mattershead  &c,  &  extending 
to  back  line  of  Thomas  Hyett.  Renewal 
of  patent  dated  15  May  1660. 

ROBERT  WEEKES,  50  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  &  part  in  Yorke  Co.,  18  Mar. 
1662,  p.  247,  (174).  Beg.  at  2  cherry 
trees  &  Walnutt  tree,  thence  by  the 
Palisadoes  S.W.  by  W.  &c.  Granted  to 
Francis  Peale  21  May  1654  &  by  him 
assigned  to  sd.  Weeks. 

ANDREW  MONROW,  440  acs. 
N'umberland  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  247, 
(174).  N.E.  upon  a  Cr.  issuing  out  of 
Potomack  Riv.,  S.E.  upon  his  own  plan- 
tation. Renewal  of  patent  dated  9  Nov. 
1652. 

MR.  JOHN  DRAYTON,  2000  acs. 
Wmoreland  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  247, 
(174).  S.  side  of  Potomacke  Riv.,  E. 
&  S.  upon  a  Cr.  dividing  this  &  the 
Doegs  Island,  N.E.  into  the  woods  upon 
a  branch  dividing  this  &  land  of  Mr. 
Thomas  Speake,  N.W.  upon  land  of 
Major  Miles  Cary  &  S.W.  upon 
Ohoquin  Riv.  Renewal  of  patent  dated 
25  Nov.   1654. 

WM.  CORDEROY,  120  acs.  Gloster 
Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  247,  (175).  Up- 
on E.S.E.  side  of  Poropotancke  Cr.,  W. 
N.W.  upon  the  same,  N.N.E.  upon  a 
small  swamp  dividing  this  &  land  of 
Nich.  Jarnew,  E.S.E.  upon  a  branch  & 
swamp  dividing  this  &  land  of  Samll. 
Sollis  &  S.S.W.  upon  Tottopottomoyes 
Cr.  Granted  to  Oliver  Green  24  July 
1653,  assigned  to  Edward  Corderoy, 
who  sold  to  sd.  Wm. 

GEORGE  GOURDEN,  100  acs.  on 
W.  branch  of  Nancimond  Riv.,  18  Mar. 
1662,  p.  247,  (175).  Adj.  land  of 
Wm.  Parker  &  his  own  land.  Granted 
to  Edward  Cooke  17  Mar.  1654  &  as- 
signed  to   sd.   Gourden. 


ARTHUR  MOSELY,  200  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  248,  (176). 
Beg.  on  a  poynt  in  the  broad  Cr. 
Granted  to  Edward  Wilder  6  Mar.  1662, 
sold  to  Nich.  Freeman,  who  assigned  to 
sd.  Mosely. 

PHILLIP  CHESLY,  1000  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  248,  (176). 
On  Rockahock  path,  on  Nly.  side  of 
the  main  br.  of  Skimeno  Cr.,  beg.  at 
the  drinking  swamp  &c.  opposite  the 
hott  water  path  &c.  to  corner  tree  of 
Jno.  Hawkins  &c.  Renewal  of  patent 
dated  5  Apr.  1660. 

JOHN  FLEET,  300  acs.  Gloster  Co., 
18  Mar.  1662,  p.  248,  (177).  N.  side 
of  Yorke  Riv.,  W.N.W.  upon  land  of 
Mr.  Rich.  Jones,  dee'd.,  now  in  posses- 
sion of  Mrs.  Francis  Jones,  the  relict  of 
sd.  Jones  &  S.E.  upon  land  of  Robt. 
Todd.  Granted  to  Col.  Richard  Lee  20 
Mar.  1653,  sold  to  Rich.  Beadle,  who 
sold   to  sd.   Fleet. 

RICHARD  ANDERSON,  200  acs. 
Gloster  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  248, 
(177).  N.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.,  extend- 
ing from  S.E.  side  of  a  small  Cr.  divid- 
ing this  from  land  surveyed  for  Robt. 
Hubbard  &c.  N.E.  upon  Tancks  Cr.  &c. 
Granted  to  Tho.  Leechman  &  Jno.  Ben- 
nett 13  Jan.  1652,  sold  to  Robt.  Jones, 
who  sold  to  sd.  Anderson. 

DANIELL  WILD,  800  acs.  Yorke 
Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  249,  (178).  On 
E.N.E.  side  of  the  old  Mill  Swamp  be- 
ing the  head  of  Queens  Cr.,  running 
Ely.  along  the  back  of  Mr.  Davis'  devdt. 
&c.  by  land  of  Mr.  Daniell  Parkes  to 
the  old  Mill  path  &c,  W.  Nly.  by 
Rockahock  path  &c.  Granted  to  Robt. 
Wild,  16  June  1654  &  given  by  will 
to  sd.  Daniell. 

MR.  WM.  DUDLY,  3000  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  10  Oct.  1664,  p.  249,  (178). 
On  N.  side  of  the  great  Sw.,  beg.  at  an 
Indian  bridge  &  a  great  run  issuing 
into  the  swamp,  running  N.  upon  land 
of  Cutberd  Potter,  W.  upon  land  of 
Jno.  Howard  or  Jno.  Curtis,  &c.  2000 
acs.  by  patent  dated  2  June  1657  & 
1000  acs.  upon  new  survey  found  with- 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


475 


in  the  bounds  thereof  &  due  for  trans. 
of  20  pers:  Thomas  Modd  (or  Mode), 
Wm.  Gray,  Wm.  Young,  Elizabeth  Bed- 
well,  Thomas  Watson,  James  Jnoson, 
Tho.  Berwicke,  Thomas  Baldwin, 
Martha  Dell,  Mary  Bog,  An  Ellis,  Jno. 
Ackey,  Angelo  Jacobus,  Jeremiah  Wale, 
George  Singleton,  Susan  Hide,  Jone 
Rowse,  John  Ale  (?),  Wm.  Griggs, 
James  Mosely. 

ISRAELL  JOHNSON.  200  acs.  near 
the  head  of  the  N.W.  branch  of  Nanci- 
mum  Riv.,  butting  on  land  of  Symon 
Simons  &  land  of  Rich.  Staples.  Re- 
newal of  patent  dated  6  May  1652.  15 
Feb.  1663,  p.  249,  (179). 

JOHN  SOWSEY,  150  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  250,  (179). 
Renewal  of  patent  dated  9  Mar.   1652. 

ELIZABETH  &  JOHN  ROSIER, 
920  acs.  N'umberland  Co.,  18  Mar. 
1662,  p.  250.  (180).  N.E.  upon  Peto- 
mecke  Riv.,  N.W.  upon  land  of  Tho- 
mas Peaks  &  small  branch  of  Up. 
Machotick  Riv.  &  S.E.  upon  land  of 
Thomas  Boyce.  Granted  to  John  Hillier 
19  Oct.  1653  &  by  his  will  given  to  the 
abovenamed. 

ROBERT  BURRELL,  257  acs.  N'um- 
berland Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  250, 
(180).  182  acs.  upon  a  Cr.  dividing 
this  from  land  of  Nich.  Morris,  S.E. 
upon  land  of  John  Essex,  S.W.  upon 
land  of  Geo.  Fletcher,  Gent.,  &c.  N.W. 
upon  the  main  woods.  75  acs.  upon  his 
own  land  &  a  line  of  trees  of  John 
Hewlett.  182  acs.  granted  to  Nich. 
Morris  17  Nov.  1652,  by  him  sold  to 
sd.  Burrell  &  Jno.  Fawsett,  who  wholly 
assigned  to  sd.  Burrell,  &  75  acs.  due 
for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Jno.  Gibson,  Wm. 
Young. 

ROGER  WOMSLEY,  900  acs.  in 
James  City  Co.  &  Chas.  City  Co.,  18 
Mar.  1662,  p.  250,  (181).  Both  sides 
of  Nickadewans  path  above  Pease  hill 
run,  bounded  from  Edw.  Coales  corner 
tee  S.E.  &c.  Trans,  of  18  pers:  Samll. 
Corbell,  Wm.  Lott,  Mary  Jones,  John 
Salmon,  Tho.  Carey,  Edw.  Land,  Tho. 
Sampson,    Wm.    Jones,    Math.    Crouch, 


Wm.  Jackson,  Sarah  Martin,  John  Chin, 
James  Hart,  Tho.  Ward,  Nath.  Bell, 
Walter    Coale,    Jno.    May,    Kath.    Ball. 

CAPT.  MARTIN  PALMER,  608  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  21  Aug.  1665,  p.  251, 
(181).  Upon  branches  of  Black  Cr. 
Beg.  at  cor.  tree  of  Capt.  Rich.  Barn- 
house,  running  W.N.W.  to  land  of 
George  Smith  &  Edmond  Price  &c, 
W.N.W.  near  Westham  path,  N.N.E. 
to  sd.  Cr.  main  run,  down  same  to  Capt. 
Lyddalls  corner  &c.  Trans,  of  13  pers: 
Rebecca  Moore,  Richd.  Wms  (Wil- 
liams), Sarah  Hulett,  Susan  Farsen, 
Frederick  Fartsen,  6  Negroes,  Jane 
Parre. 

THOMAS  PRICKETT,  137  acs. 
Rappa.  Co.,  21  Aug.  1665,  p.  251, 
(182).  N.  side  of  Dragon  Sw.  about 
3  mi.  from  Capt.  Wm.  Clayborne  quar- 
ter, adj.  land  of  Evan  Davis  &  Jno. 
Coale  &c.  running  by  Bestland  path  &c. 
Trans.  3  Negroes. 

ROBT.  JARRATT,  322  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  24  Aug.  1665,  p.  251,  (182). 
Beg.  at  cor.  of  Mr.  Jones  &  Jonathan 
Higly,  formerly  granted  to  Wm.  Pullam, 
running  W.  by  N.,  thence  W.  by  S.  to 
land  of  Rich.  Scrudy  &  Geo.  Gilbrit 
(or  Gilbert)  &c,  along  lyne  of  Mr. 
Tho.  Michell  &c.  near  a  branch  of 
Muskemino  Sw.  between  Westover  path 
&  path  leading  to  Mr.  Jonathan  Newills' 
(or  Nevills)  thence  N.E.  to  beg.  Trans. 
of  7  pers:  Jno.  Thomas,  Wm.  Holman, 
Jno.  Burton,  Henry  Ford,  Wm.  Browne, 
Robt.  Bartlett,  Robt.  Wagg. 

MR.  WM.  BODY,  3350  acs.,  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  12  July  1665,  p.  252, 
(183).  At  the  head  of  the  Cyprus  & 
western  branches,  beg.  by  the  Beaver 
Dam,  running  N.E.  &c.  to  the  Meadow 
which  makes  the  head  of  the  western 
branch  &c.  to  Colemans  corner,  E.  by 
N.  Nly.  to  corner  of  Tho.  Joyner  near 
the  head  of  the  Elme  Sw.  550  acs.  by 
patent  dated  20  Oct.  1661  &  2800  for 
trans,  of  56  pers:  Jno.  Horsmans,  Wm. 
Roberts,  Jno.  Dizen.  Wm.  Painter,  Ed- 
ward Mumpford,  Rich.  Foxen,  Hen. 
Hunt.  Samll.  Lucas,  Fra.  Weekes,  Wm. 
Evans,  Jasper  Fisher,  Jno.  Dan,  Jno. 
Taylor,  Wm.  Hancock,  Evan  Haines  (or 


476 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Hames),  Abram  Andrews,  Hugh  Taylor, 
Wm.  Ranson,  Jno.  Walters,  Jno.  Bun- 
zey,  Sarah  Adams,  Thomas  Demor, 
Robt.  Welch,  Jno.  Rousee,  Hen.  Her- 
bert, Jno.  Morgan,  Jacob  Willoughbie, 
Wm.  Browne,  Jacob  Taylor,  Francis 
Fletcher,  Wm.  Body,  Ann  Body,  Mary 
Body,  Jno.  Downe,  twice,  Mathew  An- 
drews, Wm.  Wenham,  Robt.  Elkes, 
Francis  Heymore,  Eliz.  Wood,  Eliz. 
Wms.  (Williams),  Jno.  Taylor,  Jno. 
Cocer,  Samll.  Porter,  Ed.  Hilman,  Jno. 
Branson,  Wm.  Rickett,  Henry  Homes, 
Mary  Codner,  James  Knott,  Nathall. 
Sharpe,  Wm.  Tinzey,  Tho.  Bugg,  Tho. 
Gorne,  Isaak  Prosser,  Mathew  North, 
Susan  Nore,  Jane  Charratt,  Fortune 
Trevett,  Wm.  Bough,  Eliz.  Lees,  Robt. 
Gues. 

MR.  JNO.  MARSHALL,  700  acs. 
Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  12  July  1665,  p. 
252,  (184).  W.  side  of  the  Wester 
Sw.,  beg.  at  lower  cor.  tree  of  Capt. 
Fulghams  land,  extending  down  Sw.  to 
land  of  Tho.  Harris  &c.  Trans,  of  14 
pers:  "Six  Rights  due  from  the  above- 
said  pattern,  vizt:"  Susan  Nore  (or 
Noree),  Jane  Charratt,  Fortune  Trevett, 
Wm.  Bough,  Eliz.  Lees,  Robt.  Gues, 
Danll.  Murfery,  Ed.  Cooke,  Tho.  Wat- 
son, James  Jnoson,  Tho.  Bawd  (?), 
Tho.  Bauldin,   Martha  Dell. 

CAPT.      ANTHONY     FULGHAM, 

1600  acs.  Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  12  July 
1665,  p.  253,  (184).  Beg.  at  W.  side 
of  a  Meadow  at  the  head  of  the  W. 
branch,  running  W.  by  Mr.  Bodyes 
marked  trees  &c.  Trans,  of  30  pers: 
Wm.  Bressie,  Susan  his  wife,  Eliz. 
Powell,  Jno.  Trupsha,  Ruben  Gladill, 
Jno.  Warborton,  Richd.  Avery,  Thomas 
Walter  8  times,  his  father  &  mother, 
Wm.  &  Jane  Walter,  Jno.  Holly,  Jno. 
Collins,  Richard  Bennett,  Richd.  Seward, 
Anthony  Fulgham,  Jno.  Fulgham,  Joane 
a  Negro,  Ann  White,  Thomas  Cheny, 
Robt.  Edwards,  Jane  Morgan,  Mary 
Harris,  Blanch  Harding. 

EVAN  DAVIS  &  JNO.  COLE,  356 
acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  24  Aug.  1665,  p.  253, 
(184).  N.  side  Peancketancke  about  2 
mi.  from  Capt.  Wm.  Claybornes  quar- 
ter.   300    acs.    granted    them    20    July 


1662   &   56   acs.   for  trans,   of   2   pers: 
Tymothy  Wagg,  Symon  Former. 

JOHN  GARRATT  &  NICHOLAS 
WARE,  386  acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  21 
Aug.  1665,  p.  253,  (185).  N.  side 
Mattapony  Riv.  upon  head  branches  of 
Hartequack  Sw.,  beg.  at  mouth  of  Cat- 
taile  br.  &  crossing  Wolfe  Br.  Trans, 
of  8  pers:  Sarah  Dibdall,  Tim.  White, 
Rowland  Lurs,  (?),  Sa.  Boucher,  Wm. 
Byran,  Fran.  Cooke,  Agnes  Buck,  James 
Haines. 

MR.  ROBT.  PYLAND  &  MAJOR 
JOHN  SMITH,  380  acs.  on  N.E.  side 
of  a  Cr.  dividing  this  from  land  of  Mr. 
Nowell  &  S.E.  side  of  Skithes  Cr.  &c. 
running  W.  by  N.  to  Cr.  dividing  same 
from  land  of  Mr.  Rabnett.  16  Feb. 
1663,  p.  254,  (186).  Granted  to  Capt. 
Nath.  Hurd,  12  May  1653  &  by  him 
sold  to  abovenamed. 

ISRAELL  JOHNSON,  200  acs.  on 
N.W.  branch  of  Nancimond  Riv.,  15 
Feb.  1663,  p.  254,  (187).  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  6  May  1652. 

ROBT.  HUBBERD  &  ROBT. 
WALFE  (or  Wolfe),  533  acs.  War- 
wick Co.,  21  Feb.  1663,  p.  254,  (187). 
At  the  head  of  Skethes  Cr.,  beg.  at 
S.W.  side  of  a  Sw.  falling  into  same  at 
N.W.  by  N.  cor.  tree  of  Capt.  Tho. 
Harwood.  Granted  to  Capt.  Nath. 
Hurd  12  May  1653  &  by  sold  to  above- 
named. 

SAMUELL  COGHILL,  400  acs.  on 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  in  Farnham 
Parish,  beg.  at  miles  end  of  land  of 
Jno.  Meader.  20  Feb.  1662,  p.  254, 
(188).  Trans.  of  8  pers:  Wm. 
Meader,  Mary  Fowles,  Tho.  Fourson, 
John  Martin,  Edward  Mills,  Samll.  Pur- 
ton,  Samll.  Turner,  Joseph  Marlow. 

EVAN  DAVIS  &  THO.  WILLIAM- 
SON, 550  acs.  on  S.  side  Rappa.  Riv., 
bounding  upon  land  of  Cyprian  Bushop. 
16  Dec.  1663,  p.  255,  (188).  Trans, 
of  11  pers:  Jno.  Turner,  Wm.  Hobbs, 
Fra.  Tablet,  James  Saunders,  Peter  Up- 
ton, Martin  Hunt,  Rich.  Granson,  Fra. 
Basnett,  Mary  Paine,  Jno.  Gose,  Charles 
Bryant. 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


477 


MILES  REILY,  400  acs.  N.  side  of 
Rappa.  Co.,  24  Aug.  1664,  p.  255, 
(189).  Bounding  upon  land  of  Capt. 
Geo.  Bryer,  Thomas  Robinson,  Robt. 
Sissell  &  his  own  land.  Trans,  of  8 
pers:  Richard  Price,  Wm.  Page,  Ellinor 
Abbot,  Jno.  Cabowne,  Alexander 
Nicholson,  Jno.  Machany,  Wm.  Bourne. 

RICH.  WHEELER,  300  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  28  Jan.  1663,  p.  255,  (189). 
Adj.  land  of  Robt.  Grymes.  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  15  Dec.  1656. 

MRS.  MARY  BRENT,  1644  acs. 
N'umberland    Co.,    28    Nov.    1662,    p. 

255,  (190).  Ely.  upon  Petomecke  Riv., 
Sly.  upon  Quinough  Riv.  &  Nly.  upon 
land  of  Capt.  Gyles  Brent,  Esqr.  Re- 
newal  of  patent   dated    17   Nov.    1652. 

EDWARD  BROWNE  &  RICHARD 
STERNELL,  1200  acs.  in  Deepe  Cr.,  a 
branch  of  the  S.  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv., 
beg.  on  a  point  at  the  parting  of  the  Cr., 
running  S.  by  W.  by  Bowmans  run  &c. 
Granted  to  Edward  Bowman  &  sd.  Stur- 
nell  9  Mar.  1653  &  the  part  of  sd. 
Bowman  assigned  to  sd.  Browne. 

MR.  ANTHONY  JACKMAN,  700 
acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  21  Sept.  1664,  p.  256, 
(191).  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  on 
N.  side  of  a  great  swamp  running  into 
Peanketanke  Riv.  &c.  520  acs.  due  sd. 
Jackman  in  joint  tenure  with  Rice  Jones 
by  patent  dated  17  May  1658,  &  re- 
newed 12  Jan.  1661  &  by  consent  of 
both  sides  equally  divided;  108  acs.  for 
trans,  of  2  pers:  Kath.  Jones,  John 
Bruntell. 

MR.  DAVID  FOX,  238  acs.  N.  side 
of  Lancaster  Co.,    18   Mar.   1663/4,   p. 

256,  (191).  Bounded  Ely.  by  land  of 
Capt.  Hackett,  John  Senior's  Orphant 
&  Henry  Davis,  Nly.  by  his  own  land, 
Sly.  by  land  of  Anth.  Stephens  &  Wly. 
by  Morattico  path.  Sd.  land  entered  in 
the  office  26  Mar.  1662,  granted  sd. 
Fox  21  Aug.  1663  &  since  resurveyed, 
an  error  being  in  the  first  survey. 

NOTE:  Pages  257  to  262,  inclusive, 
have  been  cut  out  of  Old  Volume  5  and 
the  following  abstracts  are  made  from 
New  Book  5. 


HENRY  AWBERRY,  1050  acs. 
Rappa.  Co.,  9  Apr.  1664,  p.  (192). 
On  the  S.  &  at  the  head  of  Hoskins  Cr., 
beg.  on  the  run  side  at  the  uppermost 
extant  of  land  of  Thomas  Browning. 
Trans,   of   21   pers.* 

ROGER  OVERTON  &  JOHN  LARY 

(or  Lacy),  100  acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  18  Mar. 
1663/4,  p.  (192).  Adj.  land  formerly 
belonging  to  Mr.  James  Bagnall  now  in 
possession  of  sd.  Overton  &  Lary  &c, 
running  near  a  branch  of  Mr.  Tobias 
Smiths  Cr.    Trans,  of  2  pers.* 

LUKE  BULLINGTON,  250  acs. 
Rappa.  Co.,  18  Mar.  1663,  p.  (193). 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  on  Richards  Cr., 
beg.  at  Cedar  point  where  the  Cr. 
divides  this  &  land  of  Robert  Bayly, 
running  along  N.  side  of  the  dividing 
branch  to  the  head  thereof  &c.  to  Mr. 
Gyles  Webbs  Nwd.  line  of  trees  lead- 
ing to  the  mountains  &c.  by  trees  run- 
ning by  house  of  James  Samford  & 
dividing  this  &  Samfords  land  &c. 
Trans,  of  4  pers.* 

FRANCIS  IRONMONGER,  660  acs. 
Gloucester  Co.,  21  Aug.  1665,  p.  (194). 
Near  head  branches  of  Totopotomoy  Cr. 
&  Join's  Cr.,  beg.  at  corner  tree  of 
Major  John  Smith,  running  to  land  of 
William  Corderoy  &c.  over  a  path 
thence  S.  by  W.  to  Richard  Barnards 
corner  tree,  up  line  of  Purton's  devdt. 
&c.    Trans,   of   13   pers.* 

WILLIAM  CARVER,  500  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  4  July  1664,  p.  (194).  300 
acs.  in  S.  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  running 
to  mouth  of  the  broad  Cr;  200  beg. 
near  the  mouth  of  Julians  Cr.  Renewal 
of  patent  dated  15  June  1659. 

JOHN  RICHINS,  400  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  15  June  1663,  p.  (195).  Beg.  up- 
on a  small  branch  of  Briery  Sw.  Trans, 
of  7  pers.* 

MR.  RICHARD  HALL,  150  acs. 
Warwick  Co.,  16  Aug.  1664,  p.  (195). 
100  acs.  S.E.  on  James  Riv.,  beg.  at  a 
creek  parting  this  from  land  of  Merry 
Point,  running  along  the  river  N.W. 
to   a   locust   parting   this   from   land    of 


478 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Mr.  Thomas  Owen,  thence  into  the 
woods  to  Mr.  Robert  Newmans  dam; 
50  acs.  at  Merry  Point,  bounding  S.W. 
on  James  Riv.,  joining  Ely.  to  his  patent 
of  100  acs.  &  Wly.  on  land  of  sd. 
Owen.  100  acs.  renewal  of  patent  dated 
13  Jan.  1661  &  50  acs.  for  trans,  of 
1  pers.* 

THOMAS  MEADER,  Orphan,  450 
acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  9  Apr.  1664,  p. 
(196).  S.  side  of  the  head  of  Hoskins 
Cr.,  beg.  near  an  Indian  path.  Granted 
to  Thomas  Browning  30  Nov.  1657,  as- 
signed to  John  Cooke,  who  assigned  to 
Thomas  Meader,  dec'd.,  &  given  by  will 
to   abovenamed   patentee. 

WILLIAM  CARVER,  890  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  6  Sept.  1664,  p.  (197).  865 
acs.  in  the  S.  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  500 
acs.  thereof  granted  to  Thomas  Holt  by 
patent,  beg.  at  the  river  side  near  a  Cr. 
running  S.W.  by  W.  &c  .to  the  head  of 
Church  Cr.  &c.  to  part  of  the  Old  field 
&c.  25  acs.  on  N.E.  side  of  his  former 
land  in  the  Church  Cr.  500  acs.  pur- 
chased of  sd.  Holt  &  390  acs.  for  trans. 


of 


pers. 


RICHARD  LAWRENCE,  10  acs.  on 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  15  June  1663, 
p.  (198).  Bounded  on  S.  with  a  branch 
of  Grymes'  Cr.  dividing  this  &  land  of 
Dominick  Farriott,  on  W.  with  sd.  Cr., 
on  N.  with  branch  of  same  dividing 
this  &  land  of  Edward  Grymes  now  in 
possession  of  William  Wroughton  & 
on  E.  with  marked  trees  dividing  this  & 
other  land  of  sd.  Grymes  in  possession 
of  sd.  Wroughton  called  Quiaccomake. 
Trans,  of  1  pers.* 

RICHARD  LAWRENCE  &  GEORGE 
BRYER,  1000  acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  26  Sept. 
1664,  p.  (198).  Upon  Rappa.  Cr.  op- 
posite land  of  Col.  Henry  Fleete,  bound- 
ing S.Ely,  upon  Manakin  Cr.,  a  br.  of 
Rappa.  Cr.  Granted  to  John  Stephens 
18  Mar.  1657  by  him  deserted  & 
granted  to  sd.  patentees  by  order  of  the 
General  Ct. 

DANIEL  BOUCHER,  200  acs.  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  24  May  1664,  p.  (199). 
On  the   third   swamp   of  Black  Water, 


beg.  at  cor.  of  Humphrey  Clarkes  land 
in  a  bottom  near  the  swamp,  running 
down  W.  by  S.  &c.  Renewal  of  patent 
dated  20  Nov.  1654. 

EVAN  DAVIS  &  THOMAS  WIL- 
LIAMSON, 900  acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  16 
June  1663,  p.  (199).  Beg.  on  Ewd. 
side  of  a  white  marsh  at  the  head  of  a 
branch  issuing  out  of  the  Dragon  Sw., 
crossing  Mattopony  upper  path,  run- 
ning Sly.  &c.    Trans,  of  18  pers.* 

THOMAS  STEGG,  1280  acs.  on  N. 
side  of  James  Riv.,  25  Jan.  1663,  p. 
(200).  Beg.  about  a  mile  above  the 
falls,  running  into  the  woods  N.  by  E. 
320  perches  to  a  slash  named  Wood- 
wards  labour  &c.    Trans,  of  26  pers.* 

COL.  NATHANIEL  BACON,  Esq., 
1075  acs.  Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  16  Feb. 
1663,  p.  (200).  Upon  a  br.  of  Pagan 
Cr.,  beg.  at  S.most  part  of  Cross  Cr. 
where  Anthony  Jones'  land  begins,  over 
the  Cr.  N.E.  by  N.  &  to  where  William 
Smiths  line  begins,  thence  N.E.  bv  N. 
&c.  to  miles  end  of  John  Sparks  land. 
Renewal  of  patent  dated  23  Mar.  1652. 

RICHARD  LAWRENCE  &  WIL- 
LIAM BALDWIN,  300  acs.  Rappa.  Co., 
15  June  1663,  p.  (201).  Beg.  on  Wwd. 
side  of  the  white  marsh  at  the  head  of  a 
branch  issuing  out  of  the  Dragon  Sw., 
crossing  Mattopony  upper  path  &  run- 
ning W.N.W.  &c.    Trans,   of  6  pers.* 

JOHN  PATE,  1000  acs.  Rappa.  Co. 
31  Dec.  1662,  p.  (201).  On  S.  side  of 
the  main  swamp  of  Mr.  Andrew  Gilsons 
Cr.    Trans,  of  20  pers.* 

ROBERT  SMITH  &  NICH.  SMITH, 

225  acs.,  in  the  forest  bet.  Rappa.  & 
Patomeck  Rivs.,  beg.  on  a  point  bet. 
two  branches  of  Nominy  Riv.  The  sd. 
land  being  surveyed  for  John  Ayres,  by 
him  assigned  to  sd.  patentees  &  due  for 
trans,  of  5  pers.*  28  Jan.  1662,  p. 
(202). 

JOHN  HORSINGTON,  Gent.,  1750 
acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  17  Apr.  1663,  p. 
263,  (202).  Upon  branches  &  main 
swamp  of  Black  Cr.,  beg.  in  the  line  of 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


479 


Thomas  London  by  Westover  path,  run- 
ning nigh  an  Indian  field  &c.  to  Mr. 
Hubberds  land  &c.  Trans.  35  pers: 
Robt.  Horsington,  Thomas  Horsington, 
Dorothy  Cannon,  Dorathy  Horsington, 
Thomas  Millisent,  Wm,  Peirce,  Wm. 
Hemmings,  Jno.  Watts,  Eliz.  Frey,  Jno. 
Iron,  Eliz.  Miles,  Mary  a  Negro,  Joane 
Carter,  Johannah  Rawlings,  Abraham 
Knowles,  Lewis  Griffin,  Joseph  Flower, 
Fran.  Denoware,  Nathaniell  Barker, 
Thomas  Williams,  Dall.  Merrick,  Wm. 
Richardson,  Robt.  Bowene,  George 
Robts.  (Roberts),  Joseph  Blayton,  Jno. 
Adams,  Richd.  Price,  Wm.  Parke,  Sarah 
Parke,  Wm.  Parke,  his  wife,  Wm. 
Swinborne,  Edwd.  Harris,  Wm.  Bea- 
mond,  Rice  a  Welchman. 

SAME.  350  acs.  Yorke  Co.,  18  Mar. 
1662,  p.  263,  (203).  300  acs.  in  the 
parish  of  Marston,  on  N.  side  of  the 
maine  Sw.  of  St.  Andrews  Cr.  by  land 
of  Tho.  Pankerman  &c.  by  Rockahock 
path  &c.  &  50  acs.  on  main  br.  of  sd. 
Cr.,  beg.  at  his  own  land.  300  acs.  as- 
signed to  him  by  Henry  Tyler  &  Danll. 
Parke  &  50  acs.  for  trans,  of  Francis 
Taylor. 

JOHN  BAREFEILD,  150  acs.  in  S. 
branch  of  Nancimond  Riv.,  30  Oct. 
1662,  p.  263,  (204).  Trans,  of  3  pers: 
Susan  Haynes,  Mary  Trotter,  Wm. 
Arnold. 

RICHARD  YATES,  350  acs.  in  Deep 
Cr.,  in  the  S.  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  beg. 
by  the  creek  side,  running  for  length 
N.  by  E.  &c,  butting  on  land  of  Jno. 
Wilkerson.  11  Mar.  1664,  p.  264, 
(204).  Trans,  of  7  pers:  Sail.  Robts., 
Joane  Robts.  (Roberts),  Martha  Holmes, 
Huddy  Chase,  Robt.  Lusby,  Wm. 
Nicholson,  Jno.  Taylor. 

MR.  JOHN  HINTON,  1000  acs.  in 
the  upper  parish  of  Nancimond  Co.,  10 
Apr.  1665,  p.  264,  (205).  On  the  head 
of  Mather  Cr.  Trans,  of  20  pers:  Jno. 
Hinton,  Wm.  Walter,  Ch.  Tones,  Wm. 
Fuller,  G.  Fretwell,  Tho.  Hill,  Bl.  San- 
ders, Ri.  Loyd,  Wm.  Brae  (?),  Wm. 
Green,  Jno.  Harris,  Grace  ReacT,  Math. 
Nickolls,  Tho.  Curie,  Walt.  Thomas, 
Edwd.  Watson,  Tho.  Elkenton,  Jno. 
Ellis,  Wm.  Bateman,  Danll.  O  hind. 


MR.  FRANCIS  SPIKE,  700  acs.  Up. 
Parish,  Nancimond  Co.,  11  Mar.  1664, 
p.  264,  (205).  On  the  head  of  Ma- 
thewes  Cr.,  butting  on  land  of  Wm. 
Eason.  The  following  names  appear, 
without  stating  due  for  trans,  of  same: 
Eliz.  Hamack,  Eliz.  Edins,  Ann  Say, 
Sym.  Haymon,  Jno.  Wms.  (Williams), 
Ann  Moore,  Antho.  Welden,  Walter 
Hedges,  Mary  Stevens,  Walter  Miles, 
Wm.  Henning,  Jane  Harte,  Tho.  Wil- 
liams, Jude  Hans. 

JOHN  TURNER,  300  acs.  Nanci- 
mond Co.,  11  Mar.  1664,  p.  265,  (206). 
200  acs.  on  Wwd.  side  of  the  main  head 
branch  of  Choketuck  Cr.  &  100  acs. 
near  the  head  of  sd.  Cr.,  &  adj.  his  own 
land.  200  acs.  granted  sd.  Turner  & 
Giles  Lawrence  6  Nov.  1651  &  by  Peter 
Mountacue,  Atty.  of  sd.  Lawrence,  as- 
signed his  part  to  sd.  Turner  &  100 
acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Phillip  An- 
drews, Mary  Home. 

JNO.  WILKENSON,  700  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  11  Mar.  1664,  p.  265,  (207). 
350  acs.  in  S.  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  run- 
ning by  Julian  s  Cr;  350  acs.  in  Deep 
Cr.  a  branch  of  the  S.  branch  of  Eliz. 
Riv.  &  adj.  the  aforesaid  tract;  abutting 
land  of  Tho.  White.  350  acs.  renewal 
of  patent  dated  1  Oct.  1661  &  350  for 
trans,  of  7  pers:  Eliz.  Collins,  Jos 
B ,  Ellen  Gallop,  Eliz.  Hones,  Tho- 
mas Abbott,  Jno.  Morley,  Joseph  Mor- 
ley.  Marginal  Note:  "This  pattent 
made  in  Wilkensons  name  now  made  in 
Herberts  being  his  true  name  hee  have- 
ing  assumed  the  name  of  Wilkenson 
falsly." 

MR.  JEREMIAH  RUTTER,  300  acs. 
Nancimond  Co.,  21  Apr.  1665,  p.  265, 
(208).  Beg.  by  Hopkin  Hoells  marked 
trees,  running  N.N.E.  &c.  to  Mr.  Bests 
trees  &c.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Richard 
Marston,  Constance  Sampson,  Elizabeth 
Hoock,  Jno.  Griffell,  Alexander  Allen, 
Nancy  a  Negro. 

MR.  XTOP.  (Christopher)  ACHEL- 
LY,  450  acs.  Nancimond  Co.,  10  Apr. 
1665,  p.  266,  (208).  Adj.  land  he  lives 
on,  beg.  at  cor.  tree  of  Mr.  Spikes  land. 
Trans,  of  9  pers:    Xtop.  Achelly,  Richd. 


480 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Peirce,  fra.  Watts,  Tho.  Prest,  May 
Jones,  Ann  Strong,  Jno.  Smallwood,  Jno. 
Hart,  Wm.  Tabb. 

MR.  HUGH  SANDERS,  400  acs.  Up. 
parish  of  Nancimond  Co.,  8  Mar.  1664, 
p.  266,  (209).  Butting  on  land  of  Wm. 
Denson.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Sa.  Norville, 
Eliz.  Sanders,  Jno.  Roberts,  Mary  San- 
ders, Joane  Rogers,  Henry  Sanders, 
Hugh  Sanders,  Ann  Sanders. 

COL.  EDWD.  CARTER,  Esqr., 
Councellor  of  State,  220  acs.  Nanci- 
mond Co.,  1  Sept.  1665,  p.  266,  (209). 
Lying  at  the  head  of  the  sd.  Col.  Carter 
&c.  running  E.  by  line  of  Wm.  Twice 
(or  Trice),  Tho.  Addison  &  Rich.  Rus- 
sell &c.  Granted  to  Tho.  Carter  20 
Sept.  1661,  by  him  deserted  &  upon 
petition  of  sd.  Col.  Edwd.  Carter 
granted  to  him  by  order  of  Court  30 
Mar.  1664  &  due  for  trans,  of  5  pers: 
Richard  Jones,  Jno.  Cooper,  Anthony 
Cooper,  Abram  Strand,  Henry  Moon. 

JOHN  MOORE,  300  acs.  on  S.  side 
of  the  W.  branch  of  Nancimond  Riv., 
11  Mar.  1664,  p.  267,  (210).  200  acs. 
on  both  sides  of  Indian  Cr.,  running  by 
Mr.  Wm.  Densons  lyne  &c.  100  acs. 
adj.  the  aforesaid  tract.  200  acs.  granted 
to  John  Bryan  18  Mar.  1662,  who.  sold 
to  sd.  Moore,  &  100  acs.  for  trans,  of 
2  pers:  Jno.  Moores  Wife,  &  Jno. 
Clarke. 

FRANCIS  HUTCHINS,  400  acs. 
Nancimond  Co.,  11  Mar.  1664,  p. 
267,  (210).  200  acs.  at  the  head  of 
Bever  Cr.,  a  branch  of  the  W.  branch 
of  Nancimond  Riv.,  beg.  at  miles  end 
of  Wm.  Stories  land,  running  S.  by  E. 
&c,  butting  on  land  of  Mr.  Jno.  Garrett 
&  Mr.  Tho.  Powell;  200  acs.  adj.  sd. 
tract.  200  acs.  renewal  of  patent  dated 
26  Mar.  1656  &  200  acs.  for  trans,  of 
4  pers:  Henry  Chutterbuck,  Robert 
White,  Richard  Harris,  Rich.  Newman. 

WM.  STONE,  750  acs.  New  Kent 
Co.,  15  Apr.  1663,  p.  267,  (211).  S. 
side  of  the  freshes  of  Pomunkey  Riv., 
beg.  at  Mattedecon  Cr.,  running  S.S.W. 
&c.  to  the  devdt.  of  Chemokins  &c. 
Trans,  of  15  pers:    Jno.  Thomas,  Robt. 


Jones,  Mr.  Hary,  James  Rador,  Mary 
James,  Margtt.  Ham,  Jonathan  Harrison, 
Ralph  Robts.  (Roberts),  Jno.  Webb, 
Rice  Jones,  William  Hardick,  James 
Radner,  Jno.  Wise,  Mary  Tompson, 
Wm.  Webberton. 

JAMES  PYLAND,  300  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  19  Feb.  1662,  p.  268, 
(212).  Bounded  Wly.  with  land  of 
John  Olliver  &  Ely.  with  land  of  Xpher. 
Flinton.  Granted  to  Thomas  Green- 
wood 23  Feb.  1652  &  due  sd.  Pyland  as 
marrying  the  relict  of  sd.  Greenwood. 

VALENTINE  ALLEN,  438  acs.  20 
Feb.  1662,  p.  268,  (212).  On  S.  side 
of  Rappa.  Riv.  between  two  branches 
of  a  creek,  running  nigh  land  of  John 
Jenings  &c.  One-half  of  same  granted  to 
Tho.  Page  21  Apr.  1657,  who  assigned 
to  sd.  Allen  &  157  acs.  due  for  trans, 
of  3  pers:  Jno.  Spurstoe,  Edward  Vard- 
true,  Mary  Jennings. 

LT.  COL.  WM.  BARBER,  596  acs. 
Hampton  Parish,  Yorke  Co.,  18  Mar. 
1662,  p.  268,  (213).  S.W.  side  Yorke 
Riv.,  beg.  on  N.W.  side  of  the  head  of 
Felgates  Marsh  &c.  by  the  Indian  feild 
&c.  next  Canoes  land,  by  Creekes  path 
&c.  next  the  French  Ordnary  &c.  to  cor. 
tree  called  Mile  tree  by  John  Overstreet, 
belonging  to  land  of  Mr.  Richard  Jones, 
down  Barbers  Cr.  to  the  mouth  &c.  125 
acs.  by  patent  dated  6  May  1651,  & 
363  acs.,  13  Sept.  1656,  for  trans,  of  2 
pers.,  as  alsoe  by  patent  dated  29  Nov. 
1659:  Wm.  Johnson,  Tho.  Carpenter. 

CHRISTO.  BOOZE,  Junr.,  300  acs. 
W'moreland  Co.,  13  Nov.  1662,  p.  269, 
(214).  N.  sid  of  Oquy  Riv.,  bounded 
on  S.E.  by  a  branch  of  same  which 
divides  this  &  land  of  Capt.  Gyles  Brent 
&  N.W.  by  br.  of  same  dividing  this  & 
land  of  sd.  Brent.  Granted  to  Christo. 
Booze,  deed.  &  due  sd.  patentee  as  son 
&  heir. 

GABRIELL  JONES,  300  acs.  neere 
the  Middle  Plantation,  Yorke  Co.,  8 
Sept.  1664,  p.  269,  (215).  N.W.  upon 
land  of  Mr.  Nich.  Broach,  S.W.  upon 
the  horse  path,  E.  by  N.,  S.W.  &  W. 
by  N.  upon  land  of  Nich.  Sabrell,  N. 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


481 


by  E.  upon  the  Indian  Spring  &  S.E. 
towards  land  of  Samll.  Watkins. 
Granted  to  John  Broach  9  July  1646, 
by  him  sold  to  Wm.  Newman,  who  sold 
to  Richard  Jones,  dec'd.  the  father  of 
sd.  Gabriell.  "And  whereas  the  said 
Broach  dieing  as  Alien  the  said  land 
was  found  to  Escheate  to  his  Majestie 
as  by  an  Inquisition  recorded  in  the 
Secretaries  office  under  the  hand  & 
seale  of  Coll.  Myles  Carey  Esqr.  his 
Maties.  Escheator  Genii,  for  this  coun- 
try And  the  Jury  sworne  before  him  for 
that  purpose  dated  the  23d  Decbr.  1662 
recorded  in  the  Secretaries  office  may 
appeare  And  is  now  granted  to  the  said 
Gabriell  Jones,  his  Mother  Elizabeth 
Jones  haveing  made  her  composition  ac- 
cording to  Act  on  her  sonnes  behalfe." 

WM.  HEABERD  &  WM.  HORTON, 

1600  acs.  W'moreland  Co.,  9  Feb.  1663, 
p.  269,  (215).  S.  side  Patomeck  Cr., 
beg.  at  N.W.most  cor.  of  land  belong- 
ing to  Edward  Carey  &  John  Axton  &c, 
N.  to  land  of  Coll.  Yeo.  Trans,  of  32 
pers:  Tho.  Young,  Nich.  Read,  Jno. 
Vintner,  Milred  May,  Oliver  Druett  (or 
Pruett),  Hugh  Broadwater,  Nich.  Chad- 
well,  Jno.  Chadwell,  Tho.  Collis,  Nich. 
Ruckston,  Ann  Williams,  Mary  Oder- 
way,  Quinton  Behanon,  Mary  Skinner, 
Elinor  Greene,  Jno.  Noble,  Margt.  Ed- 
wards, Grace  Watkins,  Adam  Greene, 
Henry  Milby,  Martha  Newman,  Jno. 
Curtis,  Tho.  Barefoot,  Ann  Underwood, 
Fra.  Gaston,  Edw.  Stephens,  Geo. 
Peirce,  Henry  Tibbut,  Wm.  Tilnsy, 
Humph.  Peck,  Mary  Carter,  Mary  Jones. 

JOHN  WALKER,  238  acs.  2  R.  58 
P.  Rappa.  Co.,  20  Feb.  1662,  p.  270, 
(216).  S.  side  the  Riv.  in  Farnham 
Parish,  beg.  at  cor.  tree  of  Mr.  John 
Cattletts  land,  running  S.  E.  by  E.  &c. 
to  Occupation  Cr.  &c.  including  a  point 
of  land  extending  into  the  Cr.  opposite 
the  house  of  Henry  Berry,  containing 
10  acs.  Assigned  to  him  by  Richard 
Lawson. 

JOHN  SUCKETT,  250  acs.  on  N. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  at  miles  end 
of  land  of  Tho.  Robinson,  running  E. 
by  S.  &c.  by  land  of  James  Samford. 
Due  said  Hugill  for  trans,   of  5  pers: 


Humph.  Booth,  twice,  Math.  Hoare, 
Ann  Redding,  Edw.  app  Lewis.  20  Feb. 
1662,  p.  270,    (217). 

SAME.  Same  date  &  pages.  300  aa>. 
S.W.  side  of  Farnham  Cr.,  running  S. 
W.  by  land  of  John  Williams,  thence  by 
land  of  Luke  Bullington,  thence  by  land 
of  Mr.  Griffith.  Due  said  Hugill  for 
trans,  of  6  pers:  Abra.  Stephens,  John 
Sucket,  Tho.  Freshwater,  Gowyn  Young, 
Mary  Fisher,  Jacob  (a)  Negro. 

JOHN  MARTYN,  268  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.  in  Sittenburne  Parish,  26  June  1663, 
p.  270,  (217).  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
beg.  at  corner  tree  of  Capt.  John  Weir, 
running  E.  by  N.  &c.  by  miles  end  of 
sd.  Weir,  thence  to  his  own  land  pur- 
chased of  Cha.  Snead.  Trans,  of  7 
pers:  Tho.  Fuller,  Mary  Pate,  Jno. 
Young,  Edw.  Ward,  Walter  Hardy, 
James  Tooke,  Jno.  Callamy. 

JOHN  CARY,  400  acs.  Accomacke 
Co.,  23  Feb.  1663,  p.  271,  (218).  At 
Hunting  Cr.,  being  part  of  the  forked 
Neck  granted  to  Fenlaw  Mackwilliam. 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  Math.  Morgan,  Jane 
Grey,  Tho.  Powell,  Mary  Williams, 
Phillip  Farrar,  Jos.  Farnham,  Ed.  Rock- 
by,  Tho.  Mary. 

FRANCIS  HEALE  &  WM.  HEA- 
BERD, 1300  acs.,  bet.  Petomecke  & 
Rappa.  Rivs.,  nigh  branches  of  Pasby- 
tansee  Cr.,  extending  to  land  surveyed 
for  Wm.  &  John  Heaberd,  crossing  the 
Doeggs  path,  crossing  branches  of  Rap- 
pa. Riv.  9  Feb.  1663,  p.  271,  (218). 
Trans,  of  26  pers:  Eliz.  Philips,  Susan 
Porter,  Eliz.  Simmons,  Maudlin  Jones, 
John  Wallis,  Hannah  Morgan,  Geo. 
Bitch,  Isaac  Starling,  Ann  Burditt,  Ja. 
Stanes,  Ann  Morgan,  Joyce  Hales,  Ed- 
ward Foster,  Ellinor  Mellett,  Mary 
Essex,  Anth.  Crisp,  Gerrard  Erington, 
Anth.  Daid,  Ellinor  Sagar,  Edw.  Burris- 
ton,  Ann  Berry,  Fra.  Hailes,  James 
Hailes,  Mary  Sandy,  Isabell  Morgan, 
Samll.  Grymes. 

JOHN  SAVIDGE,  250  acs.  Acco- 
macke Co.,  23  Feb.  1663,  p.  271,  (219). 
Bounding  on  W.  part  of  land  formerly 
granted   to   Col.   Francis    Pott,    then   to 


482 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Lt.  Col.  Wm.  Kendall,  now  in  posses- 
sion of  John  Smith  &  running  towards 
land  of  Arthur  Upshot.  Trans,  of  5 
pers:  Jno.  Watson,  James  Morecraft, 
Jno.  Howell,  Wm.  Hadlington,  Mich. 
Lulifild. 

JOHN,  SARAH  &  MARGT. 
MICHAELL,  150  acs.  N'ampton  Co.,  11 
Mar.  1663,  p.  271,  (219).  Wly.  on 
land  of  Edward  Bibbey,  Ely.  on  Wm. 
Mel  ling,  Nly.  on  Kings  Cr.  &  Sly.  on 
land  of  Capt.  Reaper.  Granted  to  Agnes 
Barnes  4  July  1653  &  sold  to  sd. 
patentees. 

JOHN  BUTTLER,  359  acs.  Wmore- 
land  Co.,  9  Feb.  1663,  p.  272,  (220). 
Beg.  on  S.W.  side  of  the  branches  of 
Beaver  Dams  of  Popes  Cr.,  upon  S.  side 
of  land  of  Tho.  Pope,  Gent.,  extend- 
ing S.  &c.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  Ann 
Vaughan,  Mary  Sharp,  Tho.  Joyner, 
Jacob  Hart,  Tho.  Sherly,  Edw.  Farlow, 
Samll.  Jackson. 

ELIAS  HARTREE,  (Haretree),  600 
acs.  in  Accomacke,  10  Feb.  1663,  p.  272, 
(220).  200  acs.  at  the  head  of  Hungers 
Cr.,  bounded  on  W.  by  land  of  Johna. 
Gyles,  extending  E.N.E.  along  the  Cr. 
&c.  400  acs.  at  Nuswattocks  Cr.,  beg. 
at  E.most  side  of  land  of  John  Walt- 
ham,  extending  150  po.  to  land  of 
Rich.  Jacobs,  bounded  on  the  N.  by 
land  of  sd.  Nuswattocks  Cr.  called  the 
broad  br.  or  Cr.  200  acs.  granted  to 
James  Pereene  14  Nov.  1642  &  by  him 
sold  to  sd.  Haretree;  400  acs.  granted 
to  Tho.  Wyatt  21  July  1640,  by  him 
sold  to  Richard  Smith,  who  assigned  to 
Mich.  Richards,  who  assigned  to  sd. 
Haretree. 

THO.  ORILY,  600  acs.  Accomacke 
Co.,  at  Hunting  Cr.,  23  Feb.  1663,  p. 
272,  (221).  Beg.  at  E.most  part  of 
land  of  John  Lewis  &c.  running  Ely.  up 
sd.  Cr.  Trans,  of  12  pers:  Edw.  Hart- 
fild,  Magdalin  Worship,  Rich.  Hogsden, 
Mary  Long,  James  Druryford,  Geo. 
Midleton,  Wm.  Drury,  Jane  Mathews, 
Ed.  Mosely  (or  Moseby),  Phil.  Everthet, 
Wm.  Stanley,  Jno.  Kirchey. 

RICHARD  HILL,  Senior,  1000  acs. 
Accomack  Co.,  at  Hunting  Cr.,  23  Feb. 


1663,  p.  273,  (221).  Bounded  on  N. 
by  sd.  Cr.,  running  Wly.  down  the  same 
&  Sly.  towards  Deep  Cr.  Trans,  of  20 
pers:  Jno.  Ayres,  Hugh  Turpin,  Geo. 
Quier,  Henry  Dunster,  Tho.  Lilly,  Jno. 
,  Charles  Middleton,  Nora.  Mor- 
gan, Mary  Hatchworth,  Edm.  Townshed, 
Wm.  Browne,  Robt.  Davis,  Ralph 
Ratsell,  Joane  Evans,  Leo.  George,  Jno. 
Daniell,  Isaac  Dickes,  John  Sanders, 
Mary  Bacon,  Oliver  Herbert. 

ROBT.  MARRIOT,  450  acs.  N'amp- 
ton Co.,  23  Feb.  1663,  p.  273,  (221). 
At  the  old  plantation  Cr.,  adj.  to  the 
head  of  land  which  Capt.  Wm.  Rooper 
lived  on  &  bounded  on  the  other  parts 
by  the  "Ancient  Adjacent  devidents." 
Trans,  of  9  pers:  Wm.  Salt,  Morras 
Mathews,  Theo.  White,  Jone  Mills, 
James  Southfeild,  Mary  Williams,  John 
Turner,  JefTry  Marlin,  Tho.  Spann. 

ALEX.  MASSY,  400  acs.  Accomacke 
Co.,  23  Feb.  1663,  p.  273,  (222).  At 
the  head  of  the  N.  branch  of  Muddy 
Cr.,  beg.  at  E.  side  of  a  great  swamp  & 
running  towards  Kecotanke.  Trans,  of 
8  pers:  Tho.  Jones,  Wm.  Willbrooke, 
Mary  Thompson,  JefTry  Whitby  (or 
Whitly),  Edw.  Wallis,  Jno.  Jones, 
Henry  Mathews,  Mathew  Williams. 

LAWRENCE  ROBINSON,  500  acs. 
Accomacke  Co.,  23  Feb.  1663,  p.  273, 
(222).  Part  thereof  being  an  Island 
called  Hills  Choyce,  the  other  being 
upon  the  S.  branch  of  Muddy  Cr. 
Trans,  of  10  pers:  Jno.  Mallowes,  Ed- 
win Mountfort,  Marth.  Milford,  Easter 
Phillips,  Tho.  Mallowes,  James  Trussell, 
Jonas  Robinson,  Wm.  Wright,  John 
James,  John  Apinall. 

WM.  GOWERS,  600  acs.  Accomacke 
Co.,  23  Feb.  1663,  p.  274,  (222).  At 
Hunting  Cr.,  bounding  on  land  of  Rich- 
ard Hill,  Senr.,  running  Ely.  up  the  Cr. 
&  Sly.  towards  Deep  Cr.  Trans,  of  12 
pers:  Tho.  White,  JefTry  Moore,  Margt. 
Mathews,  Evan  Powell,  Tho.  Smith, 
Owin  Hopkins,  Alice  Wilson,  Martha 
Atkins,  John  Walford,  Jone  Powell, 
John  Mackton,  Jno.  Evans. 

CAPT.  WM.  JONES,  300  acs. 
N'ampton  Co.,    23    Feb.    1663,   p.   274, 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


483 


(222).  Near  head  of  Hungers  Cr.,  beg. 
&  bounding  on  the  head  of  a  former 
devdt.  of  sd.  Jones,  bounded  on  N.  by 
a  branch  next  to  John  Vines  &  on  E. 
&  S.  by  former  adjacent  devidents. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Jno.  Dickeson,  Fra. 
Branson,  Mary  Trotman,  Ellin  Porkett, 
John  Celly,  Sarah  Gill. 

JOHN  LEWIS,  1000  acs.  Accomacke 
Co.,  23  Feb.  1663,  p.  274,  (223).  At 
Hunting  Cr.  Trans,  of  20  pers:  Tho. 
Ryle,  Jno.  Rhodes,  Jno.  Creamer,  Eliz. 
Doughty,  Tho.  Smith,  Jno.  Willis,  Jno. 
Browne,  Edw.  Ward,  Robt.  Yallop, 
Gartrad  Morkey,  Clemt.  Onely,  Wm. 
Clavator,  Susan  Berry,  Edw.  Steward, 
Peter  Baxton,  Paul  Lambert,  Ann  Fourd, 
Jno.  Spillman,  James  Cooke,  Maurice 
Peane. 

JOHN  RENNY,  400  acs.  Accomacke 
Co.,  23  Feb.  1663,  p.  274,  (223).  At 
the  N.  br.  of  Muddy  Cr.,  beg.  at  a  great 
swamp,  running  N.  towards  Messango 
Cr.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Tho.  Midleton, 
Wm.  Freeman,  Abra.  Dotson,  Hen. 
Ellens,  Marth.  Eyres,  Ellinor  Jackson, 
Margt.  Hall,  Jno.  Mettick. 

FRANCIS  GREY,  374  acs.  W'more- 
land  Co.,  16  Nov.  1664,  p.  275,  (224). 
Bounded  N.E.  with  land  of  Capt.  Jno. 
Ashton,  Wm.  Northall,  Garrard  Foard 
&  his  own  land.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Wm. 
Jones,  Wm.  Rastell,  John  Barber,  Jane 
Cassy,  Tho.  Bright,  Tho.  Ipley,  Mary 
Hart,  Jno.  Farr. 

CAPT.  JOHN  ASHTON,  783  acs. 
W'moreland  Co.,  16  Nov.  1664,  p.  275, 
(224).  Bounded  N.  with  the  beaver 
dams  of  Attopine  Cr.,  S.  by  Naniatico 
path.  Trans,  of  16  pers:  Wm.  Okey, 
Rice  James,  Jno.  Shaw,  Tho.  Fuller, 
Mary  Yates,  Wm.  Everad,  Tho.  Sharpe, 
Dorothy  House,  Wm.  Markland,  Rich. 
Howden,  Theo.  House,  Tho.  Hughlett, 
Samll.  Finch,  Mary  Hartwell,  Jno.  Put- 
ner,  Samll.  Craw. 

SAME.  543  acs.  same  Co.,  date  & 
pages.  Nigh  to  Upper  Machotick  &  up- 
on branches  of  the  beavor  dams  of  Her- 
ring Cr.,  near  his  other  land  &  running 
N.W.  along  land  of  Henry  Cossum. 
Trans,    of    11    pers:    Johna.    Martmore, 


Fra.  Fowler,  Tho.  Young,  Jervas  Downe, 
Wm.  Snead,  Wm.  Jones,  Tho.  Causey, 
Sarah  Jones,  Margt.  Fuller,  James  Wil- 
son, Samll.  Rotland. 

JOHN  FRISSELL,  104^  acs.  W'- 
moreland Co.,  9  Feb.  1663,  p.  276, 
(225).  63^4  acs.  beg.  nigh  the  head  of 
Fishing  Cr.,  extending  W.N.W.  along 
land  of  Richard  Griffin;  41  acs.  bounded 
S.  with  his  own  land.  Part  of  663  acs. 
granted  to  Richard  Hill  4  Sept.  1661 
&  by  him  sold  to  sd.  Frissell  &  41  acs. 
due  for  trans,  of  Wm.  Mallard. 

MAJOR  WM.  ANDREWS,  1500  acs. 
N'ampton  Co.,  4  Mar.  1663,  p.  276, 
(226).  At  Great  Nuswattocks  Cr.,  beg. 
at  the  4th  necke  up  sd.  Cr.,  parted  by 
a  small  (creek)  from  land  of  Mr.  Parker. 
Renewal  of  patent  dated  24  Feb.  1654. 

THO.  SMITH,  400  acs.  N'ampton 
Co.,  10  Mar.  1663,  p.  276,  (226).  S.W. 
upon  part  of  the  head  of  land  of  John 
Williams  &  part  upon  head  of  land  of 
John  Johnson.  Granted  to  sd.  Johnson 
29  Oct.  1662  &  by  him  assigned  to  sd. 
Smith. 

CHRISTOPHER  BUTTLER,  150  acs. 
W'moreland  Co.,  9  Feb.  1663,  p.  277, 
(227).  Beg.  at  corner  of  land  surveyed 
for  John  Buttler,  extending  W.  by  S. 
&c.  to  branch  &  swamp  of  Popes  Cr. 
&c.  to  land  of  sd.  Buttler  &  Abra.  Field 
&c.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Robt.  Page, 
Robt.  Turner,  Rich.  Hartgrave. 

JOHN  LORD  &  WILLIAM  HOR- 
TON,  2500  acs.  W'moreland  Co.,  9 
Feb.  1663,  p.  277,  (227).  Nigh  to 
Nomeny,  beg.  at  S.most  cor.  of  land 
formerly  belonging  to  Major  Wm. 
Lewis  &  Mr.  Robt.  Hubberd,  deed.,  ex- 
tending along  same  N.W.  &c.  finally  by 
a  line  of  Katharin  Brent,  Orphan. 
Trans,  of  50  pers:  Jno.  Norwood, 
Mary  Wrong,  Jos.  Hartree,  Christo. 
Rivers,  Wm.  Marloe,  Tho.  Shaw,  Fra. 
Fletcher,  Tho.  Cranew,  John  Smith,  Ed. 
Peeters,  Jno.  Lord  3  times,  Wm.  Trewit, 
Margt.  Basse,  Jno.  Bennet,  Tho.  Gib- 
bins,  James  Goodacre,  James  Winter- 
come,  Jno.  Thompson,  David  Chitley, 
Jno.    Marshall,    Minion    Young,    Ann 


484 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Young,  Robt.  Whitehead,  Tho.  Smith, 
James  Valeire,  And.  Hanson,  James 
Costring,  Jno.  Small,  Tho.  Allen,  Henry 
Smith,  Wra.  Brookes,  Fra.  Carter,  Wm. 
Faulkner,  Tho.  Shaw,  Edw.  Spight,  Wm. 
Upton,  Fra  .Killagrew,  Tho.  Hawley, 
Mary  Young,  Susan  Mason,  Tho.  Tow- 
ner, Wm.  Fulgam,  John  Cave,  Gilbert 
Cooper,  Charles  Cogam,  Mary  Spencer, 
Tho.  (a)  Negro,  Wm.  Hawley  (or 
Shawley) . 

JOHN  BUTTLER,  Carpenter,  165 
acs.  W'moreland  Co.,  9  Feb.  1663,  p. 
277,  (228).  Beg.  at  land  of  Christo. 
Buttler  &  Abra.  Field,  on  S.W.  side  of 
a  run  that  falls  into  the  head  of  Popes 
Cr.  &c.  crossing  a  branch  thereof  & 
Managirack  path  &c.  Trans,  of  3  pers: 
Wm.  Jacobs,  Tho.  Parke,  Wm.  Martin. 

THOMAS  TOOKE,  178  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  9  Mar.  1662,  p.  278,  (228). 
Upon  the  head  of  one  of  the  black 
water  branches,  beg.  neere  Tho.  Prich- 
ards  Cart  Way  &c.  Granted  to  James 
Tooke,  deed.,  14  Sept.  1653  &  due  sd. 
Thomas  as  son  &  heire. 

JOHN  LEWIS,  1700  acs.  at  the  head 
of  Poropotanke  Cr.,  on  both  sides  of 
the  swamp,  beg.  at  the  mouth  of  a  br. 
near  the  head  of  sd.  Cr.,  running  W. 
up  a  little  br.  to  the  head  of  the  Swd. 
forke  of  sd.  br.  &c.  to  land  of  Mr. 
Major  &c.  to  Papatico  br.,  thence  E.  by 
N.  to  land  of  Tho.  Hanckes,  down  a 
br.  dividing  this  &  land  of  sd.  Hanckes, 
S.E.  by  E.  to  Poropotanke  Sw.  &c  to 
land  ofGeorge  Austin  &c.  up  Coales  br., 
S.W.  to  Col.  Richard  Lees  land  &c.  to 
the  bridge  swamp  &c.  22  Nov.  1663, 
p.  278,  (229).  120  acs.  granted  to 
Timothy  Lowdwell  &  Tho.  Broughton 
13  Sept.  1651  &  assigned  to  sd.  Lewis 
&  1000  acs.  patented  by  Mr.  Howell 
Price  5  Oct.  1656  &  assigned  to  sd. 
Lewis;  &  600  acs.  for  trans,  of  12  pers: 
David  Jones,  Mary  Crow,  Peter  Brookes, 
Richard  Foxon,  Peter  Story,  Edw. 
Thonall,  Tho.  Arnoll,  Symon  Groves, 
Geo.  Edmonds,  Wm.  Tompson,  Henry 
Hunt,  Wm.  Webb. 

GEO.  MORRIS  &  RICH.  SCRUDGE, 
740  acs.  James  City  Co.,  16  Apr.  1663, 


p.  278,  (230).  Upon  branches  of 
Chickhomeny  Sw.,  beg.  at  tree  in  the 
line  of  Gooch  &  Pullam  below  the 
dwelling  house  or  Quarter  of  Mr. 
Michell,  running  along  land  of  Mr.  Fra. 
Burnell  N.W.N,  to  land  of  Edw.  Price, 
thence  takeing  his  N.N.E.  line  to  corner 
of  sd.  Scrudge  &c.  downe  Towyent  Sw. 
&c.  Trans,  of  15  pers:  Wm.  Jones, 
Jno.  Harvy,  Mary  Hart,  Tho.  Sewell, 
Wm.  Fuller,  Da.  Young,  Tho.  Parker, 
Richard  Dodford,  Sarah  Jones,  Wm. 
Walter,  Tho.  Cary,  Samll.  Young,  Rich. 
Saffin,  Jane  Harmer,  Wm.  Lovell. 

JOHN  TINGEY,  1000  acs.  Cumber- 
land Co.,  1  Dec.  1664,  p.  279,  (230). 
S.  side  of  Yeocomoco  Riv.,  running  by 
a  swamp  dividing  this  &  land  of  Anth. 
Lenton,  &c.  Trans,  of  20  pers:  Jno. 
Bateman,  Robt.  Michell,  Simon  Walker, 
Peter  Richards,  Mary  Harwood,  Alice 
Howell,  Tho.  Mathews,  3  times,  Tho. 
Mathews,  Junr.  5  times,  Pluto,  Toby, 
Fryer,  Jack,  Negroes;  Jno.  Houghton, 
Mathew  Beale. 

JAMES  SAMFORD,  736  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  8  Apr.  1662,  p.  279,  (231).  On. 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  &  Ewd.  side  of 
Totuskey  Cr.,  beg.  near  N.E.  corner  of 
land  which  Thomas  Robinson  now  lives 
on,  running  N.E.  &c.  Trans,  of  15 
pers:  Edw.  Parsly,  Hugh  Taylour,  Wm. 
Palmer,  Jno.  Edger,  Wm.  Serah,  Math. 
Abrall,  Sam.  Lunley,  Fra.  Weekes,  Fra. 
Finch,  Jno.  Treale,  Wm.  Corbell,  Tho. 
Brookes,  Abigail  Seere,  Ann  Elery,  Eliz. 
Stoy  (or  Story). 

THOMAS  HOLMES,  25  acs.  marsh 
land,  opposite  his  present  plantation, 
bounded  N.E.  towards  the  river,  S.E. 
upon  a  Cr.  dividing  this  &  land  of 
Richard  Jackson,  &  N.W.  upon  the 
Hunkepen  poynt.  Renewal  of  patent 
dated  3  July  1653.  18  Mar.  1662,  p. 
279,   (232). 

CAPT.  JOHN  WEIR,  200  acs. 
Rappa.  Co.,  Sittenborne  Parish,  26  June 
1663,  p.  279,  (232).  Beg.  at  upper 
corner  tree  of  land  of  Ja.  Mathews  by 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  &c.  Trans,  of  4 
pers:  Wm.  Marlow,  Jno.  Finch,  Edw. 
Bowdge,   Charles   Harrow. 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


485 


THOMAS  PRESTON,  200  acs.  on 
Wwd.  side  of  the  E.most  Riv.  in  Mock- 
jack  Bay,  beg.  at  3  chessnutt  trees  at  the 
head  of  Chesnutt  Cr.,  running  W.N.W. 
to  land  of  Thomas  Todd  &c,  along  the 
bay  side  including  the  marsh  to  the 
mouth  of  Repulse  Cr.  &c.  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  28  Sept.  1652.  28  Jan. 
1662,  p.  280,  (232). 

DANIELL  CLARKE,  1698  acs.  Chas. 
City  Co.,  28  Jan.  1662,  p.  280,  (233). 
1000  acs.  being  a  neck  of  land  lying  be- 
tween Old  Mans  Cr.  on  N.Ely,  side  & 
Queens  Cr.  on  the  Sly.  side;  698  acs.  at 
the  head  of  Queens  Cr.  between  Seller 
run  &  fiishing  run  in  Charles  Co. 
Granted  to  Capt.  Tho.  Stegg,  24  Nov. 
1653  &  by  him  sold  to  sd.  Clarke. 

CAPT.  JNO.  WEIR  &  THO. 
EWRIN,  250  acs.  18  po.  Rappa.  Co., 
26  June  1663,  p.  280,  (234).  In  Sit- 
tingborne  Parish,  on  N.  side  of  Rappa. 
Riv.,  beg.  on  N.E.  side  of  a  poquoson, 
running  by  land  of  John  Jennings  &c. 
Trans,  of  5  pers:  Wm.  Powell,  Samll. 
Young,  Tho.  Winslow,  Edw.  Jackson, 
Tho.  Carter. 

DAVID  MANSFEILD  &  ROBERT 
FRISTOW,  654  acs.  on  N.  side  of 
Rappa.  Co.,  7  Nov.  1664,  p.  281,  (235). 
342  acs.  coming  upon  a  former  devdt. 
of  sd.  Fristow,  beg.  at  a  white  oak  & 
running  N.E.  &c,  &  312  acs.  bounding 
upon  sd.  devdt.  running  N.W.  &c. 
Trans,  of  13  pers:  Jno.  Mansfeild, 
Margt.  Biggs,  Benj.  Vinson,  Eliz. 
Mould,  Tho.  Newmon,  Margt.  Johnson, 
Anth.  Davis,  Mich.  Jones,  Mary  Bryan, 
Tho.  Scott,  Wm.  Fowles,  Edward 
Young,  Jno.  Savin. 

JOHN  NEWMAN,  600  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  on  N.  side  the  river,  28  Nov.  1664, 
p.  281,  (235).  Betwixt  Moratico  Cr. 
&  Farnham  Cr;  adj.  land  of  Paul  Wood- 
bridge,  running  S.Ely,  to  head  of  land 
belonging  to  Thomas  Stephens'  Orphan 
&c,  adj.  land  of  Charles  Grymes,  Tho- 
mas Griffith,  &  Henry  Wilson.  400  acs. 
in  joynt  tenure  with  Paul  Woodbridge 
by  patent  dated  19  Sept.  1664  &  by 
consent  equally  divided  &  200  acs.  for 
trans,  of  4  pers:  Ann  Bryant,  Sarah 
Martin,  Wm.  Feild,  Eliz.  Parker. 


MR.  ARTHUR  ALLIN,  1000  acs. 
Surry  Co.,  24  Aug.  1665,  p.  282,  (236). 
Lawnes  Cr.  Parish;  W.  upon  a  branch 
issuing  out  of  the  second  swamp  of 
Black  water  which  is  the  division  be- 
tween Robt.  Flakes  land  &  sd.  Allin. 
Trans,  of  20  pers:  Wm.  Dolding,  Tho. 
Smith,  Wm.  Morgan,  Jno.  Leeke  (or 
Lecke),  Tho.  Covington,  Edm.  Howell, 
Wm.  Roswell,  Rich.  Ewcon  (?),  Wat 
Holland,  Dall.  Webster,  Jno.  Kelbye, 
Tho.  Taylor,  Jno.  Dawkes,  Ri.  Cart- 
wright,  Tho.  Cletter,  Jno.  Jones,  Robt. 
Lacye,  Cha.  Corbett,  Robt.  Cartwright, 
Wm.  Hayward. 

MR.  THO.  MICHAELL,  740  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  23  June  1664,  p.  282, 
(237).  Upon  branches  of  Chickahominy 
Sw.,  beg.  in  line  of  Gooch  &  Pullum 
below  the  dwelling  house  or  quarter  of 
sd.  Michell,  running  along  land  of  Mr. 
Francis  Burnell,  N.W.  by  N.  land  of 
Edmond  Price,  N.N.E.  to  line  of  Rich- 
ard Scrudg,  extending  Nly.  thence 
downe  Towyent  Sw.  &c.  Granted  to 
Geo.  Morris  &  Richard  Scrudg  16  Apr. 
1663  &  by  them  assigned  to  sd.  Michaell. 

WM.  COLEBURNE,  350  acs.  N' amp- 
ton  Co.,  28  Jan.  1662,  p.  282,  (237). 
At  the  head  of  Nuswattocks  Cr., 
bounded  on  W.  by  land  of  Nich.  Wad- 
dilow.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  4  Mar. 
1652. 

WILLIAM  AP  THOMAS,  300  acs. 
lieing  in  the  Poquoson  in  Eliz.  City  Co., 
18  Mar.  1663,  p.  283,  (238).  Abutting 
Nly.  upon  land  of  Tho.  Purifoy,  Sly.  & 
Ely.  upon  the  several  lands  of  Wm. 
Hampton  &  Wm.  Armestead.  Sold  by 
Tho.  Seawell  to  Thomas  Harris,  who 
assigned  to  Wm.  ap  Thomas. 

LT.  COL.  ROBT  ABRALL,  1010  acs. 
on  N.N.E.  sicTe  of  Mattapony  Riv.,  18 
Mar.  1662,  p.  283,  (238).  Above  & 
behind  land  of  Mr.  Richard  Barnehouse, 
beg.  at  the  mouth  of  Apotosque  Cr., 
running  up  the  river  N.W.  by  W.  to 
Acquintimack  Cr.,  W.  to  upper  end  of 
an  Indian  field  &c.  Renewal  of  patent 
dated  23  Nov.  1653. 

LT.  COL.  GYLES  BRENT,  1518  acs. 
W'moreland  Co.,  20  Nov.  1662,  p.  283, 


486 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


(239).  768  acs.  N.E.  upon  Petomeke 
Riv.,  S.W.  upon  a  branch  of  Petomeck 
Cr.  &  Nly.  on  Oquio  River;  750  acs. 
N.E.  upon  Petomeck  Riv.  &  N.W.  upon 
his  own  land.  Renewal  of  patent  dated 
27  Nov.  1654. 

DANIELL  WILD  &  FRANCIS 
KIRKMAN,  2000  acs.  W'moreland  Co., 
27  Oct.  1663,  p.  283,  (239).  S.  side  of 
Petomeck  Riv.,  S.W.  side  Yeocomoco 
Cr.  Granted  to  Christopher  Harris  7 
Oct.  1658,  by  him  deserted  &  granted 
to  the  abovenamed  by  order  of  the 
Genrll.  Ct.  21  Sept.  1663  &  due  for 
trans,  of  40  pers:  Wm.  Young,  Jno. 
Taner,  Wm.  Manson,  Sarah  Jones,  Jno. 
Cornix,  Edw.  Wills,  Tho.  Salter,  Mary 
Partin,  Tho.  Powell,  Wm.  Ward,  James 
Pally,  Joseph  Wells,  Marmaduke  Hart, 
Jno.  Puell,  Simon  Tarpin,  Wm.  James, 
Mary  Carter,  Wm.  Morgan,  Tho.  Wood, 
James  Sampson,  Wm.  Morgan,  Fra. 
Warner,  Tho.  Callop,  Wm.  Partner, 
Stafford  Wood,  James  Camdin,  Wm. 
Palmer,  Jno.  Thomson,  James  Fry, 
James  Martin,  Jno.  Marshall  Wm.  Mar- 
shall, Cornelius  Wallop,  Tho.  Melling, 
Wm.  Willis,  Nath.  Slaughter,  Theop. 
Pallinton,  Joseph  Marler,  Jacob  Marma- 
duke, Wm.  Slaughter. 

DANIELL  CLARKE,  200  acs.  on  N. 
side  of  Northermost  br.  of  Seaverne  in 
Mockjack  bay,  running  N.N.W.  to  land 
of  Nich.  Stillwell  &c.  17  Mar.  1663, 
p.  284,  (240).  Granted  to  Abra.  Moone 
20  July  1652  &  by  him  sold  to  sd. 
Clarke. 

MARGARETT  BRENT,  700  acs. 
W'moreland  Co.,  20  Nov.  1662,  p.  284, 
(240).  In  the  freshes  of  the  Petomacke 
Riv.,  beg.  at  the  mouth  of  Hunting  Cr., 
extending  W.  by  N.  &c.  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  6   Sept.   1654. 

WM.  FREEKE,  100  acs.  in  Hallowes 
Cr.  in  Petomecke  Riv.,  bounding  N.  by 
W.  on  his  plantation.  18  Mar.  1662,  p. 
284,  (241).  Renewal  of  patent  dated 
11  Sept.   1653. 

JOHN  WHETSON,  140  acs.  S.  side 
Petomecke  Riv.  N'umberland  Co.,  9 
Apr.   1663,  p.   284,    (241).    On  Upper 


Machoticke  Riv.,  bounded  N.E.  &  S.E. 
with  land  of  Nath.  Jones,  S.W.  with 
Tho.  Blagg.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Noah 
Enoch,  Robt.  Colstone,  Robt.  Day. 

EDWARD  LEWIS,  498  acs.  about  a 
mile  up  the  Ewd.  main  br.  of  Totoskey 
Cr.,  on  Swd.  side  thereof  commonly 
called  the  Crosse  Cr.,  1  June  1663,  p. 
285,  (242).  Running  to  line  of  James 
Samford.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Edw. 
Shewce,  Tho.  Sherwin,  Francis  Phillips, 
Wm.  Fletcher,  Mary  Marthas,  Jno. 
Goodson,  Mary  Horrod,  Tho.  Jones, 
Wm.   Sauell    (or  Savell),  Tho.   Paulet. 

RICHARD  NELMES,  400  acs.  N'um- 
berland Co.,  29  Jan.  1662,  p.  285, 
(242).  S.  upon  Yeocomoco  Riv.,  S.W. 
upon  land  of  Wm.  Walker.  Renewal 
of  patent  dated  25  Nov.  1652. 

WM.  WILLKINS,  886  acs.  lieing 
neere  Jockeys  necke  in  James  City  Co., 
4  Feb.  1662,  p.  285,  (243).  Bounded 
E.  &  N.  upon  the  Secretaries  land, 
E.N.E.  &  N.N.E.  upon  land  of  Mr. 
Secretarie  Kemp,  N.W.  upon  land  of 
Mr.  Geo.  Malum,  S.W.  upon  the  Gleabe 
land  Cr.,  S.  upon  the  Gleabe  land  & 
S.E.  upon  a  cr.  of  Archers  Hope  Cr. 
Granted  Capt.  Tho.  Pettus  11  Apr. 
1643  &  by  him  sold  to  sd.  Wilkins. 

JACOB  COURTANCON,  200  acs. 
abutting  W.  upon  Chikacone  Riv.,  N.E. 
upon  a  Cr.  dividing  this  from  land  of 
Jno.  Trussell.  29  Dec.  1662,  p.  286, 
(243).  Being  part  of  his  patent  of 
600  acs.  dated  25  Nov.  1654  &  now 
renewed. 

JOHN  COURTANCEON,  400  acs. 
on  S.most  side  of  Chickacone  Riv.,  beg. 
at  a  Cr.  dividing  this  &  land  of  John 
Matrom.  29  Dec.  1662,  p.  286,  (243). 
Being  part  of  600  acs.  granted  to  Jacob 
Courtanceon  25  Nov.  1654  &  by  him 
sold  to  sd.  John. 

JAMES  POPE,  1000  acs.  N'umber- 
land Co.,  28  Jan.  1662,  p.  286,  (244). 
Bounding  Ely.  on  Chinkahun  or  Mr. 
Preslies  Cr.,  Nly.  on  land  of  Col. 
Matrum,  sd.  Presly  &  Col.  Trussell, 
Wly.  upon  land  of  Gervase  Dodson  & 
Sly.     towards     Col.     Claybornes     land. 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


487 


Granted  to  Richard  Russell  25  Sept. 
1657,  by  him  deserted  &  granted  sd. 
Pope  by  order  of  the  Genrll.  Ct.  10  Oct. 
1660  &  due  for  trans,  of  20  pers:  John 
Martin,  Sam.  Court,  Mary  Ward,  John 
Hughes,  Wm  Frett,  Samll.  Abbott,  Mary 
Fowles,  Tho.  Turner,  Leo.  Young,  Jno. 
Spann,  Tho.  Crouncher,  Jacob  Newell, 
Jacob  Lewis,  Fra.  Parker,  Tho.  Kirby, 
Wm.  Moulson,  Samll.  Johnson,  Tho. 
Truett,  Jane  Moulson. 

WM.  MICHAELL  &  WM.  THAT- 
CHER, 400  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  on  N. 
W.  side  of  Corotoman  Riv.,  18  Mar. 
1662,  p.  287,  (245).  S.  upon  sd.  River, 
S.Wly.  upon  a  br.  or  Cr.  issuing  out  of 
sd.  Riv.  opposite  land  now  in  tenure 
with  Henry  Davis,  N.Ely  upon  land 
surveyed  for  John  Nichells  called  Now 
Perfect  his  land,  etc.,  the  aforesaid 
parallel  line  dividing  this  &  land  one 
Hale  bought  of  one  Hawker.  Granted 
to  sd.  Thatcher  last  of  Nov.  1656,  part 
of  which   he  assigned   to  sd.  Michaell. 

DANIELL  WHITE,  Gent.,  69  acs.  at 
a  place  called  the  round  hill  nigh  Up- 
per Machotick  Riv.,  W'moreland  Co.,  4 
Sept.  1661,  p.  286,  (244).  Beg.  in 
head  line  of  land  formerly  belonging  to 
Tho.  Boyce,  deed.,  N.W.  to  land  form- 
erly belonging  to  John  Hillier,  dee'd. 
Trans,  of  2  pers.* 

JAMES  CLAUGHTON  &  ANN 
BRADSHAW,  500  acs.  in  Patomeck 
freshes  on  Swd.  side  of  the  first  Cr. 
above  Pascataway.  28  June  1664,  p. 
287,  (245).  Formerly  granted  to  sd. 
Claughton,  5  June  1658  &  the  moyety 
or  halfe  part  thereof  assigned  by  him 
to  the  sd.  Ann  Bradshaw. 

MAJOR  ROBERT  HOLT,  1550  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  8  Jan.  1662,  p.  287, 
(246).  E.  side  of  Chickahominy  Riv., 
beg.  at  W.most  branch  of  Jones  Cr., 
running  to  E.most  br.  of  the  maine 
swamp  to  main  br.  opposite  land  of 
Sr.  Wm.  Berkeley,  to  the  4th  little  br., 
N.  to  head  of  a  Spring,  thence  to  Ricka- 
hock  path  &c.  Renewal  of  patent  dated 
6  Apr.   1654. 

THOMAS  PAGE,  600  acs.  S.  side  of 
Rappa.  Riv.,  adj.  land  of  Howell  Powell, 


20  Feb.  1662,  p.  288,  (246).  Granted 
to  Richard  Coleman  7  Oct.  1652,  as- 
signed to  John  Cattlett,  who  assigned 
to  sd.  Page. 

JOHN  PAINE,  88  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  20  Feb.  1662,  p.  288,  (247).  N. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  abutting  N.  &  by 
W.  upon  land  of  Edward  Harris,  deed., 
S.  by  E.  upon  a  Cr.  dividing  this  from 
land  of  Richard  Coleman.  Granted  to 
Rice  Jones  2  Sept.  1652,  sold  to  Howell 
Powell  &  George  Harris,  who  assigned 
to  Charles  Snead  &  by  him  assigned  to 
sd.  Paine. 

JOHN  BENNETT  &  VINCENT 
COCKE,  600  acs.  N'umberland  Co.,  18 
Mar.  1662,  p.  288,  (247).  S.Ely,  upon 
Yeocomoco  Riv.,  S.Wly.  upon  land  of 
Robt.  Smith  &  N.E.  upon  land  of  Wm. 
Walker.  Granted  to  Richard  Holder  24 
Oct.   1655  &  assigned  to  sd.  patentees. 

ELLINOR  &  MARY  OLLIVER,  100 

acs.  Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662, 
p.  288,  (248).  Wly.  by  land  of  Major 
Fawdon,  Ely.  with  land  of  Tho.  Green- 
wood &c.  Nly.  with  the  main  river. 
Granted  to  John  Olliver,  late  dee'd.,  20 
Feb.  1652  &  given  by  his  will  to  the 
sd.  Ellinor  &  Mary. 

MATHEW  RHODEN,  350  acs.  N'- 
umberland Co.,  9  Dec.  1662,  p.  289, 
(248).  280  acs.  part  thereof  N.E.  upon 
a  swamp  being  a  br.  of  a  Cr.  of  Chicka- 
coone  Riv.,  called  Kings  Cr.,  N.W. 
upon  land  of  Mr.  Hugh  Lee,  &  70  acs. 
S.E.  upon  same.  Renewal  of  patent 
dated  13  Sept.  1654. 

NICH.  JERNEW,  200  acs.  N'umber- 
land Co.,  29  Nov.  1662,  p.  289,  (249). 
S.  side  Petomake  Riv.,  beg.  at  a  persy- 
mon  tree  dividing  this  from  land  of 
Wm.  Renolls,  extending  up  the  main 
river  E.S.E.  &  Sly.  to  a  pehickery  which 
divides  this  &  land  of  John  Earle.  Re- 
newal of  patent  dated  5  Oct.  1654. 

NICHOLAS  WILLIAMS,  200  acs. 
lieing  up  Smiths  fort  Cr.,  neere  the 
head,  in  Surry  Co.,  9  Jan.  1662,  p.  289, 
(249).  Running  along  the  reedy  Sw. 
&c.  to  trees  of  Luke  Misen  &c.  Renewal 
of  patent  dated  12  Oct.  1652. 


488 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


GEORGE  BILLIPS,  250  acs.  Gloster 
Co.,  27  Jan.  1663,  p.  289,  (250).  On 
the  head  of  Gording  Cr.  &  on  S.  side 
opposite  to  land  of  Forrister  &c.  Trans, 
of  5  pers:  Fra.  Blagrave,  Robt.  Severall, 
Jno.  Bayly,  Mary  Bayly,  Hen.  Brand. 

WM.  FREEKE,  600  acs.  W'moreland 
Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  290,  (250).  S. 
E.  side  of  the  head  of  Appamatock  Cr. 
behind  land  of  Lt.  Col.  Nath.  Pope,  beg. 
by  Warwicke  Cr.  Path,  running  W.  by 
N.  by  E.  &c.  to  sd.  Warwicks  quick 
path.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  14  Oct. 
1657. 

GEO.  KEIBLE,  740  acs.  on  S.  side 
of  Peanketanke  Riv.,  beg.  a  mile  &  more 
from  the  river,  running  N.E.  &c.  to  an 
oak  neere  Rappahanock  path,  thence  S. 
by  W.  &c.  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  290, 
(251).  Renewal  of  patent  dated  4  June 
1656. 

RICHARD  ILIFFE,  248  acs.  N'um- 
berland  Co.,  4  Feb.  1662,  p.  290,  (252). 
Wwd.  side  of  the  S.  branch  of  Great 
Wiccocomoco  Riv.,  Sly.  &  S.Wly.  upon 
a  small  branch  issuing  out  of  sd. 
branch  &c,  bounded  E.S.Ely.  &  Wly. 
by  land  claimed  by  Mr.  Peter  Knight 
&  Wly.  by  land  of  James  Pope.  Trans, 
of  5  pers:  Edw.  Jenings,  Tho.  Stow, 
Richard  King,  Danll.  Nibbs,  Hanah 
King. 

WALTER  WEIR  &  JAMES  MA- 
THEWS, 300  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  18 
Mar.  1662,  p.  291,  (252).  On  N.  side 
&  in  the  freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  on 
N.  side  of  Clifts  Cr.  which  divides  this 
&  700  acs.  in  the  occupation  of  John 
Weir,  extending  nigh  the  Riv.  N.  by 
W.  &c.  Granted  to  John  Weir,  the  last 
of  Mar.  1655  &  by  him  sold  to  the 
abovementioned. 

EDWARD  TEALE,  180  acs.  Gloster 
Co.,  27  Jan.  1663,  p.  291,  (252).  S. 
side  of  Weir  Riv.  Swamp,  beg.  on  E. 
side  of  a  little  br.  dividing  this  from 
land  of  Oliver  Greene,  running  down 
same  N.N.E.  &c.  to  the  Indian  branch 
&c.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Tho.  Brasset, 
Stephen  Johnson,  Doro.  Goswell,  Tho. 
Henly. 


GEO.  MARBLE,  y2  ac.  in  James 
Citty,  25  Feb.  1663,  p.  291,  (253). 
Beg.  at  high  water  marke  neere  the 
Mulberry,  then  betweene  sd.  Mulbury 
&  sd.  Marbles  now  dwelling  house, 
N.E.  &  N.  5-5/7  chains  to  cor.  stake 
within  the  Garden,  S.E.  by  E.  3^4  chs. 
to  corner  Locust  stake  in  the  paled 
fence,  then  S.W.  by  S.  5-5/7  chs.  to 
the  River  &  then  N.W.  by  W.  y/2  chs. 
to  beg.  Granted  to  Thomas  Woodhouse 
17  Oct.  1655,  sold  by  him  to  Ann  Tal- 
bot 1  Sept.  1657  &  purchased  by  sd. 
George  of  the  heirs  of  sd.  Ann. 

ROBT.  KING,  100  acs.  N'umberland 
Co.,  4  Feb.  1662,  p.  291,  (254).  S. 
side  of  Great  Wiccocomoco  Riv.  at  the 
head  of  150  acs.  in  the  occupation  of 
Geo.  Clarke,  running  to  land  of  Ger- 
vase  Dodson,  deed.,  Nly.  thence  Ely. 
to  land  of  Richard  Nelmes  &c.  Trans, 
of  2  pers:  Robt.  King,  Sr.,  Robt.  King, 
Jr. 

LT.  COL.  ROBERT  PITT,  1200  acs. 
Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p. 
292,  (254).  Beg.  at  a  branch  of  New 
Towne  haven  Riv.,  running  &c.  W.  by 
S.  to  Mr.  Prestwood  corner  tree  &c.  to 
cor.  tree  of  Mr.  Sewards  line  &c.  Re- 
newal of  patent  dated  7  June  1654. 

JOHN  MATROM,  sonne  &  heire  of 
Col.  Jno.  Matrom,  1200  acs.  N'umber- 
land Co.,  31  Mar.  1662,  p.  292,  (255). 
S.  side  of  Chickacone  Riv.,  beg.  from 
a  poynt  on  the  W.  side  of  the  bridge 
Cr.,  extending  S.  by  W.  to  branches  of 
Gr.  Wiccocomoco  Riv.,  &  E.  by  S.  upon 
branches  of  Chinkahunn  Riv.  Granted 
to  Col.  Matrom  19  Oct.  1653. 

NICHOLAS  GEORGE,  700  acs.  on 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  up  Coratoman 
Riv.  on  the  E.  side  of  the  W.  branch 
thereof,  bounded  up  Nicholls  his  creek 
N.N.E.  &c.  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  292, 
(256).  Renewal  of  patent  dated  15 
Feb.    1652. 

JOHN  WILLIAMS,  100  acs.  Nance- 
mond  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  293,  (256). 
Bounded  Ely.  with  land  of  Robt.  Clift, 
Wly.  land  of  Richard  Young,  Nly.  with 
Robt.    Pitt    &    Sly.    with    New    Towne 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


489 


Haven  Riv.  Granted  to  Thomas  Davis 
16  Nov.  1653  &  assigned  to  sd.  Wil- 
liams. 

ROBT.  HARRISON,  389  acs.  Yorke 
Co.,  6  Dec.  1662,  p.  293,  (256).  S. 
side  of  Charles  Riv.,  on  the  back  side 
of  Mount  Holly,  running  by  land  of 
Charles  Edmond  W.  by  N.  &c.  &  by  a 
branch  of  Ware  Cr.  Granted  to  John 
Houlding  1  Nov.  1653,  assigned  to 
Richard  Croshaw,  who  assigned  to  sd. 
Harrison. 

GEORGE  BRYER,  700  acs.  more  or 
less,  being  the  moyety  or  halfe  of  patent 
of  1400  acs.,  20  Feb.  1662,  p.  293, 
(257).  Beg.  at  a  cedar  tree  on  a  poynt 
at  the  mouth  of  Millbeck  Cr.,  running 
N.E.  by  E.  by  &  above  land  of  Mr. 
James  Williamson  &c.  &  including  the 
plantation.  Sold  to  sd.  Bryer  by  Tho. 
Mead,  who  purchased  the  same  of  Wm. 
Underwood. 

RENATUS  LAND,  eldest  sonne  & 
exor.  of  Fra.  Land,  1020  acs.  in  Lin- 
haven,  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  4  Mar.  1662, 
p.  293,  (257).  400  acs.  N.E.  upon  the 
Chespian  Riv.  alias  Lynhaven,  N.W. 
upon  a  small  cr.  &c.  150  acs.  N.E. 
upon  a  Cr.,  N.W.  upon  land  of  Mr. 
Cobb  Howell;  270  acs.  at  the  head  of 
Francis  Land's  devdt.  of  400  acs.  &c, 
running  W.  by  S.  towards  land  of  Lan- 
caster Lovett,  S.E.  by  S.  to  Tho.  Watts' 
devdt.,  now  Fra.  Land's;  200  acs.  adj. 
same  on  N.W.  &  S.W.  Granted  to 
Fra.  Land  6  June  1654  &  now  due  as 
abovementioned . 

JOHN  DEBARR,  200  acs.  in  W. 
branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  on  the  N.  side 
thereof  beg.  at  a  poynt  by  a  small  creek, 
running  N.W.  &  adj.  land  of  Thomas 
Wright  &c,  up  broad  Cr.  to  land  of 
Rich.  Starling.  9  Jan.  1662,  p.  294, 
(258).  Renewal  of  patent  dated  6  Oct. 
1654. 

MAJOR  JOHN  SMITH,  602  acs. 
N'thumberland  Co.,  8  Dec.  1662,  p. 
294,  (259).  S.E.  upon  upper  Machotix 
Riv.,  Ely.  upon  land  surveyed  for  An- 
drew Farmer.  Granted  to  Christopher 
Boyce  28  Nov.  1653  &  granted  to  Mr. 


Robt.  Pyland,  for  a  debt  due  from  sd. 
Boyce  his  estate,  by  the  Genii.  Court  9 
Oct.  1655  &  by  sd.  Pyland  sold  to  sd. 
Smith. 

WM.  COLEMAN  &  ROBT.  BAYN- 
HAM,  300  acs.  N'umberland  Co.,  29 
Jan.  1662,  p.  294,  (259).  N.E.  upon 
the  head  of  the  plantation  of  Wm. 
Preslie,  S.E.  upon  the  head  of  a  Cr.  of 
Yeocomoco  Riv.  Granted  to  Tho.  Shep- 
pard  &  James  Claughton  6  May  1652  & 
after  severall  sales,  assigned  to  the 
abovenamed. 

MR.  GERARD  FOWKE,  3650  acs., 
part  thereof  in  Wmoreland  Co.  on  S. 
side  of  Patomacke  Riv.,  bounded  S.  & 
S.W.  upon  Patomecke  Cr.  &c.  N.E.  up- 
on a  maine  Sw.  upon  the  head  of  a  br. 
of  sd.  Cr.  dividing  this  &  land  com- 
monly called  the  fort  land;  300  acs. 
more  or  less  in  sd.  county,  upon  the 
head  of  a  branch  of  sd.  Cr.,  N.E.  against 
land  of  Capt.  Brent,  S.E.  upon  land  of 
John  Withers.  28  Nov.  1662,  p.  295, 
(260).  3350  acs.  granted  to  Mr.  Tho. 
Fowke  6  June  1654  &  300  acs.  granted 
to  sd.  Gerrard  30  Mar.  1660  &  now 
renewed. 

WALTER  FOWKE,  1200  acs.  N'um- 
berland" Co.,  23  Dec.  1662,  p.  295, 
(260).  N.  upon  Patomecke  Riv.,  Wly. 
upon  Pasbetancy  Cr.  Granted  to  Geo. 
Foster  1  Sept.  1652  &  by  him  assigned 
to  sd.  Walter. 

THO.  GALE,  WM.  POWELL  & 
ROBT.  HORNING  (or  Herning),  168 
acs.  on  Indian  Cr.  a  branch  of  Nanzi- 
mum  Riv.,  joyning  land  of  Mr.  John 
Garret  &  land  of  Wm.  Story.  18  Mar. 
1662,  p.  295,  (261).  Granted  to  John 
Brian  15  Oct.  1652  &  by  him  assigned 
to  the  abovenamed. 

COLL.  VALL.  (Vallentine)  PEY- 
TON, 650  acs.  Wmoreland  Co.,  18 
Mar.  1662,  p.  295,  (261).  500  acs.  on 
N.  side  of  the  br.  of  Patomecke  Cr.  & 
on  N.E.  side  of  the  land  of  Capt.  Brent; 
150  acs.  upon  head  of  a  br.  of  sd. 
Creek  &  E.  upon  land  of  Capt.  Brent. 
500  acs.  being  the  moyety  of  1000  acs. 
granted    to    John    Withers    &    Stephen 


490 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Gary  &  150  acs.  granted  sd.  Withers  4 
Sept.  1655,  both  of  which  were  sold  to 
sd.  Payton. 

RICHARD  FOSTER,  200  acs.  on  the 
head  of  the  Southerne  Cr.  in  Severne  in 
Mockjack  bay,  running  to  marked  trees 
of  Coll.  Ludlow.  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  296, 
(262).  Renewal  of  patent  dated  1  Apr. 
1655. 

MAJOR  THO.  DAVIS,  500  acs.  in 
Warwick  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  296, 
(262).  100  acs.  at  the  head  of  his 
patent  granted  10  Sept.  1645,  adj.  300 
acs.  granted  him  20  Jan.  1655,  running 
S.W.  towards  James  Riv.  300  acs.  being 
a  ridge  of  land  within  the  Reedy  Sw.  at 
the  upper  end  next  the  head  of  Walters 
Cr.  at  the  innermost  end  of  sd.  Sw.  &c. 
300  acs.  granted  him  20  Jan.  1655  & 
100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Wm. 
Powell,  Tho.  Partin. 

ANDREW  PETTIGREW,  5200  acs. 
W'moreland  Co.,  28  Jan.  1662,  p.  296, 
(263).  At  or  neere  the  head  of  upper 
Machotix  Riv.,  Ely.  upon  1300  acs.  due 
by  purchase  &  patent  unto  Gervase 
Dodson  &  upon  land  of  Nath.  Jones  & 
Christo.  Boyce,  dec'd.,  Nly.  upon  land 
called  Turvey  (or  Turney)  his  land, 
now  in  the  tenure  of  Mrs.  Fowke,  & 
upon  land  of  John  Walton,  Mr.  Merry- 
wether  &  others,  running  about  the  In- 
dian Towne  &  lands  of  John  Williams, 
Stephen  Norman  &  Nich.  Langsden  & 
Major  Tho.  Davis  of  Walters  Cr.  &c, 
part  of  which  land  is  known  by  the 
name  of  Upper  Machotix  Towne. 
Granted  to  Gervase  Dodson  16  Sept. 
1657  &  now  due  sd.  Pettigrew  as  marry- 
ing the  relict  of  Dodson  to  whom  the 
land  was  given  by  will. 

HENRY  BRADSHAW,  255  A.  59 
Chs.,  on  E.  side  of  the  main  branch  of 
Poetan  Sw.  &  in  Sir  Wm.  Berkeley's 
line  &c.  to  Mr.  Effords  line  &c.  Due 
by  purchase  from  Tho.  Kirke.  12  Mar. 
1662,  p.  297,   (264). 

LT.  COL.  ROBT.  ABRAHALL,  1550 
acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p. 
297,  (264).  550  acs.  on  branches  of 
Peanketanke  Sw.,   300  acs.  part  thereof 


beg.  at  Capt.  Claibornes  corner,  run- 
ning S.  by  E.  &c;  250  acs.  beg.  by  an 
Indian  path,  running  N.N.W.  &c.  1000 
acs.  on  S.  side  of  Peanketanke  great 
swamp  near  the  head  thereof  &c.  550 
acs.  granted  him  10  July  1658  &  1000 
acs.  granted  to  Capt.  Wm.  Claiborne 
12  June  1658  &  assigned  to  sd.  Abra- 
hall. 

JOHN  MATROM,  sonne  &  heire  of 
John  Matrom,  dec'd.,  3609  acs.  W'more- 
land Co.,  1  Apr.  1662,  p.  297,  (265). 
2109  acs.  Sly.  upon  Petomake  Riv., 
Ely.  upon  a  great  marsh,  Wly.  upon  a 
bay  &  Nly.  upon  a  Cr.  issuing  out  of 
sd.  bay,  this  tract  being  known  by  the 
name  of  the  Doegs  Island;  1000  acs.  S. 
upon  a  little  Cr.  parting  same  from  the 
sd.  Island  upon  the  western  branch  &c. 
500  acs.  Sly.  upon  sd.  Island,  Wly  upon 
land  of  John  Jenkins,  Ely.  upon  or  to- 
wards land  of  Tho.  Speake.  Granted 
to  Col.  John  Matrom,  dec'd.,  7  Oct. 
1654  &  due  to  sd.  John  as  son  &  heir. 

SYMON  IRONS,  650  acs.  on  In- 
dian Cr.,  a  branch  of  Nancimum  Riv. 
18  Mar.  1662,  p.  298,  (266).  Granted 
the  sd.  Saven  11  June  1653  &  now  re- 
newed. 

THO.  HANKES  (Hanckes),  527  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  8  Apr.  1663,  p.  298, 
(267).  On  head  branches  of  Poropo- 
tanke  Sw.,  beg.  at  a  poplar  standing  on 
the  S.  side  of  sd.  swamp  &c.  Trans,  of 
11  pers:  David  Jones,  Mary  Crow, 
Peter  Brookes,  Rich.  Foxon,  Peter  Story, 
Edward  Thordall,  Tho.  Arncell,  Brown 
Undrix,  Symon  Groves,  Geo.  Edmonds, 
Wm.  Tompson. 

THO.  HANCKES,  530  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  8  Apr.  1663,  p.  298,  (267). 
On  branches  of  Peanketanke  Sw.,  beg. 
at  the  head  of  Col.  Lees  land,  running 
W.N.W.  &c.  by  Colliers  branch  &c. 
Trans,  of  11  pers:  Phill.  Marrin,  Henry 
Benson,  Edw.  Downes,  Jos.  Gregory, 
Wm.  Gray,  Rabecca  Hubberd,  Math. 
Abrall,  Samll.  Linlesse,  Fra.  Weekes, 
Francis  Finch,  Jno.  Freeke. 

JOHN  STITH  &  SAMLL.  EALE,  500 
acs.  Chas.  City  Co.,   15   Feb.   1663,  p. 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


491 


299,  (268).  Being  an  irregular  tract 
of  land  without  the  land  of  Capt.  Henry 
Perry  called  Herring  Cr.  or  Brockland 
&  on  N.  side  of  James  Riv.,  bounding 
S.E.  by  E.  &c.  along  line  of  Capt.  Perry 
&c.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Jno.  Clarke, 
Robt.  Symons,  Watt  Daux,  Alice 
Gibson,  Nicholas  Whiskin,  Alice 
Roomes,  Sam.  Ward,  John  Arro,  Jone 
Makew    (or   Maken),    Marice   Browne. 

THOMAS  TOVER,  450  acs.  Cum- 
berland Co.,  4  July  1664,  p.  299, 
(268).  Beg.  at  a  cor.  oak  &  running 
along  line  of  John  Pers  (?),  N.  by  E. 
to  Kings  Cr.  &c.  to  another  main  br. 
of  Chickacone  &c.  Trans,  of  9  pers: 
Jno.  Webb,  Hen.  Clifford,  Jno.  Baker, 
Peter  Bragg,  Thomas  Stephens,  Jno. 
Ruttler  Jno.  Lewis,  Sarah  South,  Faith 
Cocke. 

JOSEPH  STRATTON,  100  acs.  Den- 
by  Co.,  18  Mar.  1663,  p.  299,  (269). 
Neere  Grangers  poynt,  beg.  at  a  run 
issuing  out  of  a  marsh,  S.E.  on  the 
banke  of  the  River  &c,  S.E.  on  land  of 
John  Browne,  N.W.  on  land  of  Walter 
Padgett  &  S.W.  on  James  Riv.  Trans, 
of  2  pers:    Martha  Hill,  Margt.  Munn. 

LUKE  DINE,  THO.  BEADLE  & 
JOHN  WARD,  330  acs.  Cumberland 
Co.,  1  Aug.  1663,  p.  299,  (269).  N.W.. 
side  of  Yeocomoco  Riv.,  bounded  S.  & 
S.  W.  upon  a  creek  dividing  this  & 
land  of  Jno.  Earle,  deed.,  N.W.  upon 
a  horse  &  foot  path  which  goeth  to 
Yeocomoco  Church,  N.E.  &  N.W.  upon 
land  of  sd.  Beadle  now  lives  on  &  N.E. 
&  E.  upon  a  Cr.  dividing  this  &  land 
patented  by  Ed.  Walker,  dee'd.  Trans, 
of  7  pers:  Samll.  Cary,  Edw.  Walding, 
Mary  Parker,  Jno.  Wood,  Wm.  Walker, 
Nath.  Shaw,  Wm.  Cally. 

CAPT.  MATHEW  EDLOW,  850 
acs.  James  City  Co.,  &  part  in  Chas. 
City  Co.,  16  Feb.  1663,  p.  300,  (270). 
S.W.  side  of  the  head  of  Chickahominy 
Riv.,  beg.  on  Namans  Runn,  N.E.  on 
Richard  Williams  land,  W.  on  the 
Celler  Run,  S.  on  Mumfords  path,  E.  on 
Robt.  Peakes  land  &c.  E.N.E.  to  the 
poplar  br.  of  Namans  Run.  550  acs. 
purchased  of  Robert  Peake  &  300  acs. 


for  trans,  of  6  pers:  Rich.  Elliot,  David 
Gray,  James  Gentleman,  Elizabeth  Scott, 
Jobit  Applefoard,  Edward  Francis. 

MR.  WM.  BALL,  300  acs.  at  the 
head  of  a  small  br.  proceeding  out  of 
the  S.W.  side  of  Narrow  Neck  Cr.,  both 
of  which  divides  this  &  land  in  posses- 
sion of  Tho.  Rootes  formerly  belonging 
to  Edward  Grimes,  dee'd.  &c.  to  next 
Cr.  proceeding  out  of  Coratoman  Riv. 
&c.  Granted  to  David  Fox  1  Nov. 
1653,  assigned  to  Tho.  Hobkins,  &  by 
him  sold  to  sd.  Ball.  18  Jan.  1663,  p. 
300,    (270). 

RALPH  ELLIS  &  ANDREW  WALL- 
WOOD,  792  acs.  between  Eackatoncke 
&  W.  branch  of  Nansimum,  beg.  at 
corner  tree  of  Effin  Griffin,  running 
N.E.  &c.  by  Francis  Spikes  head  line, 
thence  by  Margt.  Ryes  side  line  &c.  to 
Thomas  Mallards  cor.  tree  &c.  to  Wm. 
Popes  line  &c.  23  Nov.  1663,  p.  300, 
(271).  Trans,  of  16  pers:  Margary 
Cope,  Jno.  Cope,  John  Adam,  Hugh 
Mackdunah.    (Other  names  not  listed.) 

ROBT.  TOMLYN  &  WM.  MOSSE, 
600  acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  on  N.  side  Rappa. 
Riv.,  25  May  1663,  p.  301,  (271).  Beg. 
on  Swd.  side  of  a  slash  behind  land  of 
Mathias  Tomlyn,  dee'd.,  running  over 
several  branches  that  runs  into  Mr. 
Taylors  Beavor  Damms  &c.  to  br.  be- 
longing to  Chestuxen  run  &c.  Trans, 
of  12  pers:  Wm.  Langdaule,  Edw. 
Blackburne,  Jno.  Mainyard,  Jno.  Meed- 
grew  (?),  Wm.  Gunn,  Jno.  Harris, 
Elizabeth  Fosseting,  Geo.  Morrell,  Tho. 
French,  John  Catten,  Jno.  Murr,  Diana 
Mainshaw. 

ROBT.  CASTLE,  1/2  ac.  James  Citty, 
25  Feb.  1663,  p.  301,  (272).  Beg.  at 
high  water  mark  neere  the  S.E.  end  of 
a  15  ft.  house,  up  James  Riv.  N.W.  by 
W.  3^2  chs.,  thence  N.E.  by  N.  5-5/7 
chs.  to  cor.  locust  stake  in  the  paled 
fence,  thence  S.E.  by  E.  3^  chs.  to  cor. 
stake  against  Mr.  Fitchets  house,  then 
S.W.  by  S.  5-5/7  chs.  to  beg.  Granted 
to  Thomas  Woodhouse  17  Oct.  1655  & 
sold  to  sd.  Castle  6  Feb.  1662. 

WM.  HEATH,  250  acs.  Chas.  City 
Co.,    5    Mar.    1663/4,    p.    301,    (273). 


492 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Beg.  at  white  oak  standing  in  the 
Swamp  which  parts  Surry  &  Chas.  City 
Co.,  thence  N.W.  &c.    Granted  to  Wm. 

Lee    6    Feb.    1654,    assigned    to    

Rutherford  &  Micum  Curry  &  granted 
by  patent  17  Feb.  1659  &  by  sd.  Ruther- 
ford assigned  to  sd.  Heath. 

THOMAS  HARRIS,  40  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  9  June  1664,  p.  302,  (273). 
At  head  of  one  of  the  branches  of 
Pagan  Cr.,  his  own  land  on  N.E.  & 
land  of  Francis  Smith  on  theS.W.  Re- 
newal  of  patent   dated    19  Aug.    1652. 

JAMES  LONG,  300  acs.  in  W. 
branch  of  Nancimum  Riv.,  beg.  at  a 
marked  Sipris  standing  by  the  branch 
side  &c.  8  Feb.  1663,  p.  302,  (274). 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Hen.  Gay,  Simon 
Lee,  Jno.  Ardy,  Robt.  Briggs,  Eliz. 
Collings,   Jno.   Williams. 

JAMES  SYMONS,  100  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  22  Mar.  1663,  p.  302,  (274). 
Trans,  of  2  pers:  James  Towerson,  Jno. 
Webster. 

GODFERY  HUNT,  600  acs.  Nanci- 
mum Co.,  5  Apr.  1664,  p.  302,  (274). 
Beg.  at  miles  end  of  Jno.  Turnes  land, 
W.N.W.  joyning  miles  end  of  Andrew 
Walwood,  Ralph  Ellis  &  Wm.  Poopes 
land,  butting  on  land  of  Richard  Staples. 
crossing  a  white  marsh,  butting  on  land 
of  Hopkin  Howell  &c.  Trans,  of  12 
pers:  Wm.  Sneed,  Susan  Jacob,  Edw. 
Powell,  Mary  Watkins,  Geo.  Duram, 
Jno.  Street,  Eliz.  Lewis,  Wm.  Jones, 
Hugh  Frerick,  John  Huchins,  Eliz. 
Phillips,  James  Pemount. 

RICHARD  STURMAN,  2000  acs. 
W'moreland  Co.,  4  Oct.  1664,  p.  303, 
(275).  Upon  branches  of  Nomeny, 
bounded  W.  with  land  of  Col.  Val. 
Peyton,  N.W.  with  branches  of  Coss 
Coss,  N.E.  with  land  of  Danll.  Hutt, 
Tho.  Dyous  &  Mrs.  Ann  Brodharst. 
Trans,  of  40  pers:  Patrick  Wilky,  Wm. 
Blake,  Wm.  Walker,  Joane  Hoben, 
Robt.  Clarke,  Mary  Colloway,  Tho. 
Abbott,  John  Harris,  Christo.  Laquire, 
Martha  Redford,  Mary  Thompson,  Robt. 
Berry,  Joseph  Godard,  Tho.  Sturman, 
Ann  Sturman,  Richard  Sturman  3  times, 


Jack  a  Negro,  Jno.  Brent,  Edward  Gray, 
Mary  Fuell,  Tho.  Gray,  Samll.  Jones, 
Jane  Shaw,  Jno.  Faulkner,  Tho.  Mul- 
lerd,  Edw.  Williams,  Rich.  Parker,  Wm. 
Hart,  Tho.  May,  Sarah  Walfe,  Fra. 
Carter,  Wm.  Youl,  Tho.  Turner. 

CAPT.  DANLL.  PARKE,  528  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  24  Mar.  1662/3,  p. 
303,  (275).  W.  side  of  Rickahock 
path,  Nly.  on  the  Cart  path  that  goes 
from  Mr.  Sorrells  to  Mr.  Bakers,  Ely. 
on  Rickahock  path,  S.E.  on  Col.  Pettus 
&  S.W.  on  the  path  that  goes  to  Chicka- 
hominy  Gate  &  on  Mr.  Sorrells  land. 
Part  thereof  sold  by  Christopher  Harris 
&  the  residue  assigned  to  him  by  Mr. 
Robt.   Sorrell. 

HENRY  VINCENT,  400  acs.  W'- 
moreland Co.,  3  Oct.  1664,  p.  303, 
(276).  200  acs.  beg.  at  a  pehickery 
dividing  this  &  his  other  land,  extend- 
ing S.E.  &c.  to  branch  of  a  Cr.  of 
Machotix  Riv.  &c.  200  acs.  N.W.  upon 
a  devdt.  upon  which  he  now  lives,  S.E. 
upon  land  of  Mr.  Isaac  Allerton,  S.Wly. 
&  N.Wly.  upon  land  of  Mr.  John  Hos- 
kins  &  Richard  Wells,  deed.,  &  N.Ely, 
upon  land  of  Capt.  Richard  Wright. 
200  acs.  renewal  of  patent  dated  20 
July  1660  &  200  acs.  for  trans,  of  4 
pers:  Wm.  Harvy,  Tho.  Jarvis,  Ed- 
mond  Morgan,  Mary  Wells. 

DENNIS  EYES  &  DENNIS   CON- 

NAWAY,  270  acs.  N'umberland  Co., 
11  Mar.  1662,  p.  303,  (276).  N.  side 
of  the  main  br.  of  Great  Wiccocomoco 
Riv.  about  halfe  a  mile  distant  from 
same,  thence  S.  by  W.  &c.  Trans,  of 
6  pers:  Wm.  Jolly,  Mary  Turner,  Ed- 
ward Card,  Samll.  Partin,  Robt.  Ivey, 
Wm.    Hallowes. 

COL.  JOHN  BLAKE,  300  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  8  Mar.  1663,  p.  304,  (277). 
In  Deep  Cr.,  a  br.  of  the  S.  br.  of  Eliz. 
Riv.,  beg.  at  Manimass  Cr.,  running  E. 
by  S.  &c.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Jno. 
Pound,  Mich.  Armategue,  Wm.  Zaines 
(or  Eaines)  twice,  Tho.  Gaines,  Wm. 
Rawlings. 

MAJOR  WM.  HARRIS,  450  acs. 
Henrico    Co.,    22    Jan.    1663,    p.    304, 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


493 


(278).  N.  side  of  James  Riv.,  Ewdly. 
side  of  the  Poplar  Cr.  &  Ewdly.  run  of 
4  Mi.  Cr.  &  called  by  the  name  of  the 
Slashes,  bounded  S.  on  the  head  of  land 
formerly  in  possession  of  Danll.  Lewel- 
lin,  E.  on  Maborne  hills  &  S.W.  on 
land  of  Brian  Smith,  Trans,  of  9  pers: 
Morgan  Williams,  Adam  Rosse,  Mar- 
gary  Forgott,  Mary  Bourne,  Nich. 
Gyles,  Tho.  Deere,  Wm.  Blackman, 
Margt.  Floyd,  Ann  Gay. 

JOHN  STITH,  550  acs.  Chas.  City 
Co.,  29  July  1664,  p.  304,  (278).  N. 
side  of  James  Riv.  &  Wly.  side  of 
Colemans  run.  Trans,  of  11  pers: 
Hen.  Cheseman,  Eliz.  Whitehead,  Roger 
Bell,  Tho.  Greene,  Jno.  Chambers, 
Richard  Walker,  Teague  Hinsha,  Ralph 
White,  Alice  Smith,  Wm.  Mahitt,  Eliz. 
Probatt. 

THO.  MUDGETT,  520  acs.  Chas. 
City  Co.  &  part  in  Surry  Co.,  19  Dec. 
1663,  p.  305,  (278).  Upon  W.  br. 
of  upper  Chapojces  Cr.,  beg.  at  a 
great  poplar  in  sd.  br.,  thence  S.E.  by 
S.  at  the  head  of  George  Burchers  land 
320  po.  to  red  oak  nigh  the  Spring 
Bottom,  thence  S.W.  by  W.  &c.  Trans, 
of  5  pers:  Jno.  Brasbridge,  Richard 
Dorrington,  Wm.  Pinion,  Eliz.  Stacey, 
Edw.  Genings,  Ellinor  Read,  Tho.  Gre- 
gory, Rose  Bird,  Wm.  Gregory,  Roger 
Best,  Mary  Fluell. 

THOMAS  BLAKE,  240  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  8  June  1664,  p.  305,  (279). 
Beg.  at  a  br.  of  a  swamp  that  falls  into 
the  first  swamp  of  the  Blackwater,  run- 
ning N.E.  &c.  Trans,  of  5  pers: 
Christo.  Pembrooke,  Tho.  Ratcliffe, 
James  Poster  (or  Pester),  Edith  Patch, 
Wm.  Taylour. 

SAMUELL  PARRY,  200  acs.  lieing 
backwards  in  the  woods  on  S.E.  side  of 
Pascatticon  Cr.,  beg.  at  upper  cor.  of 
his  own  land.  2  Jan.  1663,  p.  305, 
(279).  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Jno.  Webb, 
Mary  Garret,  Jane  Hornesby,  Wm. 
Jones. 


Cow  Cr.,  running  W.  by  trees  of  An- 
thony Gregories  land,  then  S.  by  land  of 
Mr.  Francis  Camfeild  &  adj.  land  sd. 
Read  lives  on.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Robt. 
Edge,  Wm.  Rand,  Tho.  West. 

RICHARD  JONES,  100  acs.  1  R.  5 
Po.,  Eliz.  City  Co.,  5  Feb.  1663,  p. 
306,  (280).  Bounded  Ely.  on  land 
purchased  of  Thomas  Ceely,  Wly.  on 
land  of  Rich.  Allen,  Nly.  on  land  of 
Edw.  Riddle,  Sly.  on  the  Poquoson  to  a 
pine  neere  a  branch  of  the  Drinking 
place.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Rich.  Jones, 
Jane  Jones. 

FRANCIS  FLEETWOOD,  200  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  7  Apr.  1663,  p.  306, 
(281).  Up  Puzzell  Point  Cr.  on  the 
W.  side  called  Jacobs  Well.  Trans,  of 
4  pers:  Tho.  Buck,  Morgan  Watkins, 
Eliz.  Wastcoat,  Jno.  Harris. 

DENNIS  EYES  &  DENNIS  CONA- 
WAY,  400  acs.  N'umberland  Co.,  11 
Mar.  1662,  p.  306,  (281).  Nwd.  side 
of  the  main  br.  of  great  Wiccocomoco 
Riv.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Tho.  Fuell, 
James  Duke,  Tho.  Carter,  Math.  Wood, 
Jane  Marsh,  Tho.  Tally,  Tom  &  Wm., 
Negroes. 

WILLIAM  CALVERT,  300  acs.  at 
the  head  of  the  New  Poquoson  Riv., 
Chas.  River  Co.,  26  Jan.  1663,  p.  307, 
(282).  Bounding  Sly.  on  head  of  John 
Heaward,  dec'd.,  running  Wly.  &c. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  James  Lisburne  (or 
Cisburne),  Wm.  Marchant,  Robt. 
Cockner,  Morter  Sillimore,  Ellinor 
Jenings,  Eliz.  Dittford. 

PETER  ADAMS,  594^  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  307,  (282). 
N.W.  side  of  the  main  br.  of  blacke 
water  Cr.,  including  Thomas  Maskes 
100  acs.,  making  594^  acs.,  beg.  in  sd. 
br.,  thence  up  Waynoke  Sw.  N.W.  by 
N.  &c.  to  hickory  dividing  this  from 
Henry  Patemans  land  &c.  Purchased  of 
Wm.  Pullam  out  of  a  grand  pattern  of 
1000  acs.  granted  20  Jan.  1657. 


JOHN  READ,  145  acs.  Gloster  Co., 
18  Mar.  1662,  p.  306,  (280).  In  Ware 
Parish.    Beg.    by    the    main    branch    of 


RICHARD  KING,  200  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  5  Dec.  1662,  p.  307,  (283). 
150    acs.   beg.    at   corner   tree   of   John 


494 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Johnsies  land,  running  S.  by  W.  &c. 
50  acs.  running  Sly.  up  to  Wm.  Wil- 
sons stake  &  Wly.  along  Dann.  Mur- 
ries  trees,  &c.  Renewal  of  patent  for 
150  acs.  dated  9  Mar.  1652  &  50  acs. 
for  trans,  of  Robt.  Mackrery. 

HENRY  BOGGUS,  130  acs.  N'um- 
berland  Co.,  24  Aug.  1664,  p.  307, 
(283).  From  a  poynt  by  a  main  br.  of 
Wiccocomoco,  Sly.  along  trees  of  Mr. 
Knight,  Wly.  to  James  Popes  Swamp 
&c.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Wm.  Cooke, 
Wm.  Griffin,  Geo.  Norman. 

HENRY  NICHOLAS,  580  acs.  more 
or  less,  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  between 
the  head  of  Mr.  Burnhams  Cr.  & 
Pyanketanke  Sw.  11  Dec.  1663,  p.  308, 
(284).  Granted  to  Tho.  Pattison  & 
Robt.  Chowning  &  assigned  to  sd. 
Nicholls. 

THO.  GASCOM  &  HENRY  MOYSE 
(Moye),  512  acs.  N'umberland  Co.,  14 
Jan.  1663,  p.  308,  (284).  S.  side  of 
Gr.  Wiccocomoco  Riv.,  opposite  land 
of  Richard  Nelmes  &  Wm.  Downeing, 
W.N.W.  on  a  creek  dividing  this  from 
land  of  Mr.  Peter  Knight,  formerly 
called  Mr.  Flints  land,  E.S.E.  upon  the 
land  of  Edw.  Cockshead,  running  S.S.W. 
to  land  of  David  Kyffin,  including  a 
small  peninsula  commonly  called  the 
Iseland.  Granted  to  James  Pope  27 
Sept.  1659,  assigned  to  Nich.  Morris, 
who  assigned  to  sd.  Gascome  &  Moys. 

MARY  CAPPS,  300  acs.  at  the  head 
of  W'most  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  running 
along  land  of  Peter  Rigilsworth  &c.  to 
a  reedy  swamp  &c.  16  Mar.  1663,  p. 
308,  (285).  Granted  to  Robt.  Grymes 
6  May  1652,  assigned  to  Robt.  Capps  & 
due  sd.  Mary  as  daughter  of  sd.  Robt. 

JOHN  ADAMS,  220  acs.  New  Kent 
Co.,  16  Feb.  1662,  p.  308,  (285).  50 
acs.  adj.  devdt.  of  John  Basbies  (or 
Busbies)  of  350  acs.,  running  W.  by 
N.  to  Arrow  Reed  Sw.,  thence  N.N.E. 
&c.  170  acs.  N.E.  on  sd.  Basbies  land, 
E.  &  S.E.  on  Stephen  Pettus  land,  S.W. 
on  Mathew  Williams  land  &  N.W.  on 
Rickahock  path  &  the  young  Knights 
land  &  N.Ely,  on  the  reedy  swamp.    50 


acs.  granted  to  Jno.  Barsby  28  Dec. 
1657  &  170  acs.  for  trans,  of  4  pers: 
Wm.  Young,  Jno.  Taylor,  Mary  Ward, 
Wm.  Hart. 

WM.  WYATT,  400  acs.  Gloster  Co., 
16  Mar.  1663,  p.  309,  (286).  S.E.  side 
of  Mattapony  Riv.,  7  mi.  or  thereabouts 
up  the  same,  bounded  from  a  br.  which 
divides  this  &  tract  surveyed  for  Wm. 
Guisey  (or  Ginsey)  &c.  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  20  Dec.  1653. 

THOMAS  GLASCOCK,  600  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  11  Mar.  1663,  p.  309, 
(286).  N.W.  side  of  Moratico  Cr., 
about  a  mile  up  the  same,  beg.  on  N.E. 
side  at  the  mouth  of  N.N.W.  br.  of 
Moratico  Cr.  &c.  S.E.  parallel  to  the 
branch  upon  land  of  Nicholas  Ferman 
(or  Forman),  Sec.  Renewal  of  patent 
dated  20  July  1652. 

MR.  JAMES  WARRADINE,  1070^ 
acs.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  309,  (287). 
470^  acs.  of  land  &  swamp  W.S.W. 
upon  the  woods  next  Jno.  Chaplins  &c, 
N.E.  to  a  bottom  which  lyeth  at  the 
head  of  Richards  land  &c.  600  acs.  34 
po.  on  S.  side  of  James  Riv.  in  Chas. 
City  Co.  from  his  own  trees  S.  by  W. 
&c,  cross  an  Indian  feild  commonly 
called  Mr.  Mathews  upper  Indian  feild 
&c.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  13  Oct. 
1652. 

JNO.  BUTLER,  475  acs.  on  S.  side 
of  Yorke  Riv.,  behind  Jno.  Nursires 
land,  abutting  Mr.  Choshaws  land  in 
the  Narrows  &c.  Renewal  of  patent 
dated  17  Feb.  1652.  18  Nov.  1663,  p. 
309,    (288). 

ROBERT  LOVELL  &  PATRICK 
NORTON,  1000  acs.  W.  side  of  Rappa. 
Cr.  nigh  land  of  Lt.  Col.  Henry  Fleet, 
beg.  by  a  branch  side,  extending  itself 
W.  a  mile  &c.  2  Dec.  1663,  p.  310, 
(288).  Renewal  of  patent  dated  26 
May.    1660. 

EDWARD  SIMPSON,  100  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  310,  (288). 
Beg.  by  Pepetico  Cr.  Renewal  of  patent 
dated  15  Feb.   1654. 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


495 


EDW.  BOSWELL,  200  acs.  on  S. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  about  14  mi.  up 
the  same,  bounded  N.E.  by  N.  upon 
Sanderland  Cr.  &c.  Dated  2  Dec.  1663, 
p.  310,  (289).  Granted  to  Betram 
Obert  2  Oct.  1649  &  assigned  to  sd. 
Boswell. 

CAPT.    THOMAS   HACKETT,    800 

acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  18  Mar.  1663,  p. 
310,  (289).  N.W.  side  of  Corrotoman 
Riv.,  abutting  N.E.  upon  land  of  Mr. 
Jno.  Senior  &  S.W.  upon  land  of  Wm. 
Clapham,  now  in  possession  of  Tho. 
Powell.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  9 
June  1652. 

JNO.  JOHNSON,  737  Acs.  145 
perches,  lying  in  the  freshes  of  Rappa. 
Riv.  on  S.  side  of  Occpason  Cr.,  beg. 
on  the  lower  end  of  land  of  Wm.  Hall, 
extending  S.W.  &c.  nigh  land  of  Augus- 
tine Blithenbird  &c.  nigh  miles  end  of 
Lawsons  Island.  Granted  to  Jno.  Bar- 
row 23  Mar.  1659,  who  sold  to  sd. 
Johnson.    10  Dec.  1663,  p.  311,  (290). 

HENRY  PAYTON,  1000  acs.  W- 
moreland  Co.,  6  June  1664,  p.  311, 
(290).  Upon  the  head  of  Oquy  Riv. 
upon  S.  &  N.  sides  thereof  &c,  W.S.W. 
along  land  of  Richard  Codsford  &c. 
Granted  to  Valentine  Payton  6  June 
1654,  who  sould  to  sd.  Henry. 

THOMAS  KEENE,  527  acs.  Cum- 
berland Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  311, 
(291).  N.W.  upon  the  severall  lands 
of  Ralph  Horsley  &  Edw.  Coppedge, 
S.S.E.  upon  Claytons  Cr.  &  N.E.  upon 
Cherry  poynt.  Renewal  of  patent  dated 
13  Oct.  1653. 

JOHN  DAVIS,  750  acs.  Gloster  Co., 
24  May  1664,  p.  311,  (291).  On  both 
sides  of  Chescake  path  leading  towards 
Mattapony  Riv.  &  between  Poqueto  & 
Raqueto  branches,  beg.  from  Leonard 
Chamberlines  W.S.W.  line  &  running 
S.S.E.  &c.  Granted  to  Ashwell  Batten 
13  Oct.  1653  &  by  him  sold  to  sd. 
Davis. 

ROBT.  PYLAND  &  MAJOR  JNO. 
SMITH,  144  acs.  on  S.E.  side  of 
Skeates  Cr.,  running  N.W.  by  W.  along 


side  of  a  run  which  cometh  from  Jacobs 
Well  dividing  this  from  land  of  Mr. 
Wm.  Rabnett.  16  Mar.  1663,  p.  312, 
(292).  Granted  unto  Capt.  Nathaniel! 
Hurd  12  May  1653  &  by  him  assigned 
to  the  abovenamed. 

SYMON  SYMMONS,  100  acs.  in  the 
N.W.  branch  of  Nancimond  Riv.,  beg. 
by  the  Mill  dam  &c,  butting  on  land  of 
Peter  Mallerus  (or  Mallerns)  land  &c. 
15  Feb.  1663,  p.  312,  (293).  Renewal 
of  patent  dated  3  June  1656. 

JAMES  CLAUGHTON  (Clayton), 
345  acs.  N'umberland  Co.,  18  Mar. 
1662,  p.  312,  (293).  N.E.  on  Matta- 
pony Riv.,  Nly.  upon  Tanx  Yeocomico 
Riv.,  N.W.  upon  land  of  Law.  Dameron, 
S.E.  upon  land  of  Robt.  Bradshaw  (or 
Bradshall).  Granted  to  Robt.  Bradshall 
29  Nov.  1657  &  sold  to  Edw.  Williams, 
who  sold  to  sd.  Clayton. 

GEORGE  BARKER,  51  acs.  in  Jock- 
ies  Neck  in  James  (City)  Co.  in  Vir- 
ginia, now  in  the  occupation  of  sd. 
Barker,  27  Oct.  1663,  p.  312,  (293). 
Beg.  at  a  persimon  tree  standing  on  a 
poynt  &  extending  along  a  small  swamp 
N.N.W.  to  the  Secretary's  Land  &c. 
Granted  to  Col.  Tho.  Pettus,  who  sold 
to  sd.  Barker. 

GEORGE  HASPLOCK,  200  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  17  Mar.  1663,  p.  313, 
(294).  On  Rappa.  Riv.,  on  head  of 
land  formerly  surveyed  for  Mr.  James 
Williamson,  &  on  Totoskey  Cr.,  run- 
ning for  breadth  from  a  marked  white 
oak  100  po.  N.E.  by  N.  by  the  Cr.  side 
to  a  small  branch  deviding  this  &  the 
land  allotted  to  the  Rappa.  Indians,  & 
thence  for  length  &c.  Granted  to  Jno. 
Surlock  15  Nov.  1653,  who  sold  to  sd. 
Hasplock. 

LAREY  GRIFFIN,  1064  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  10  Feb.  1663,  p.  313,  (295). 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  &  W.  side  of 
Farnham  Cr;  beg.  on  Ewd.  side  of  a 
branch  dividing  this  &  land  of  Col. 
More  Fantleroy,  running  N.E.  for 
breadth  &c.  Granted  to  Thomas  Griffin, 
dec'd.,  4  July  1653,  &  now  due  sd. 
Larey  as  his  son  &  heire. 


496 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


REBECCA  JACKSON,  400  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,  on  S.W.  side  of  Yorke  Riv., 
18  Mar.  1662,  p.  313,  (295).  Beg.  at 
the  mouth  of  the  Channell  of  Taskanosk 
Cr.  &c.  Granted  to  Wm,  Gantlett  4 
Apr.  1654  &  by  him  sould  to  sd. 
Rebecca. 

SAMUELL  HAYWARD,  200  acs. 
Wmoreland  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p. 
313,  (296).  On  the  head  of  Choe- 
tanck,  beg.  at  a  pockhikery  deviding 
this  &  land  of  Jno.  Waken  (or  Walter) 
&  Richard  Turney  &c,  W.  to  land  of 
Mr.  Fowke  &c.  Granted  to  Robt. 
Maple  25  June  1660,  who  sould  to 
Oliver  Bolfe,  who  sould  to  sd.  Hayward. 

MR.  ROBT.  BRYAN,  276  acs.  Glos- 
ter  Co.,  p.  314,  (296).  No  date  given. 
On  N.  side  of  Burts  Cr.,  beg.  at  a 
little  branch,  running  N.W.  by  N.  &c. 

MARTHA  GOFFE,  650  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  18  Feb.  1663,  p.  314,  (297). 
N.  side  of  Mattapony  Riv.  &c,  behind 
and  backing  a  pine  neck  parte  of  a  great 
devdt.  belonging  to  Mr.  Edwd.  Diggs, 
Esqr.  &c.  Granted  to  Wm.  Goffe  22 
July  1659,  assigned  unto  John  Maddi- 
son,  who  assigned  to  sd.  Martha. 

THOMAS  FLAUNDERS,  50  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,  18  Nov.  1663,  p.  314, 
(297).  In  Blisland  Parish,  beg.  from 
Mr.  Barnhouse  his  marked  maple  in 
Mathemeed  swamp  &c.  Granted  to  Tho. 
Dunkerdun,  13  Oct.  1653  &  now  due 
sd.  Flaunders  as  marrying  the  Relict  of 
sd.  Dunkerdun. 

EDMOND  PETEERS,  442  acs.  Glos- 
ter  Co.,  16  Mar.  1662,  p.  315,  (298). 
At  the  head  of  Timber  Neck  Cr.,  342 
acs.  beg.  at  Capt.  Perries  land,  running 
N.W.  &c,  adjoining  100  acs.  patented 
by  sd.  Peteers,  thence  E.S.E.  &c.  to  Wm. 
Alsops  land  &c.  100  acs.  beg.  on  S.E. 
side  of  a  branch  of  the  sd.  creek,  S.E. 
by  E.  &c.  nere  land  of  Mr.  Lewis  Bur- 
well,  dec'd.  Renewal  of  patent  dated 
22  Mar.  1659. 

MR.  ROBT.  VAULX,  6000  acs. 
Wmoreland  Co.,  24  Mar.  1662,  p.  315, 
(299).    S.   side  of  Petomecke  Riv.  be- 


hind the  Clifts  of  Curawoman,  beg.  on 
W.  side  of  a  great  deep  run  being  the 
head  of  Gr.  Rappa.  Cr.,  opposite  to 
1200  acs.  surveyed  for  Tho.  Broughton 
&c.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  1  Mar. 
1655. 

THO.  DISTON,  386  acs.  3  R.  &  16 
po.  Surry  Co.,  5  Mar.  1662,  p.  315, 
(299).  S.  side  of  James  Riv.  &  S.W. 
side  of  upper  Chepokes  Cr.,  bounded 
from  Geo.  Burchers  trees  along  the 
western  branch  &c.  to  the  southern  runn 
&c.  Granted  to  Wm.  Lowedan  (or 
Lovedan),  15  May  1660  &  by  him  as- 
signed to  sd.  Diston. 

MAJOR  DAVID  CANT,  912  acs.,  1 
Oct.  1663,  p.  316,  (300).  600  acs.  on 
S.  side  of  Peanketanke  Riv.,  bounded  on 
E.S.E.  with  br.  of  same,  W.N.W.  upon 
land  of  Capt.  Stephen  Gill,  dec'd.,  &c. 
312  acs.  on  S.  side  of  sd.  Riv.,  adj. 
devdt.  he  is  now  seated  on,  beg.  at  the 
mouth  of  the  Stoare  (or  Score)  branch 
&c.  to  Stephen  Gills  land  &c.  to  Mr. 
Ludlowes  corner  Sickamore  tree  &c. 
600  acs.  granted  to  Thomas  Ballard  14 
Oct.  1657  &  assigned  to  sd.  Cant  & 
312  acs.  for  trans,  of  6  pers:  Fra.  Hart, 
Wm.  Callis,  Mary  Partin,  Tho.  Jones, 
Wm.  Crump,  Edw.  Lewre. 

ROBT.  CHOWNING,  448  acs.  16 
Dec.  1663,  p.  316,  (301).  Beg.  at  his 
own  &  land  of  Tho.  Pattison,  running 
E.  &c.  Part  hereof  containing  53  acs. 
granted  to  sd.  Chowning  in  joynt  tenure 
with  Thomas  Pattison,  &  300  acs.  part 
belonging  to  sd.  Chowning  by  patent 
not  yet  taken  out  of  the  records  "but 
entered  as  I  am  informed  in  the  yeare 
1658  or  in  the  beginning  of  the  year 
1659"  &  95  acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers: 
James  Power,  Tho.  Delke  (or  Deske). 

SAME.  550  acs.  Lancaster  Co..  16 
Dec.  1663,  p.  317,  (302).  S.  side  of 
Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  on  a  poynt  where 
Burnhams  alias  Sunderland  Cr.  devides 
itself  into  2  branches,  running  up  the 
S.W.  br.  &c,  adj.  land  of  Henry 
Nicholls,  N.W.  &c.  to  cor.  tree  of  Tho- 
mas Pattyson,  thence  N.W.  &c.  to  land 
of  Richard  Lewis  upon  a  br.  of  Cope- 
lands  Cr.    450  acs.  formerly  belonging 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


497 


to  sd.  Ch owning  by  two  patents,  dated 
the  last  day  of  June  1653  &  8  Feb. 
1658  &  100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers: 
Wm.  Jones,  Tho.  Tarley. 

THOMAS  LUCAS,  JR.,  934  acs.  on 
S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  on  E.  side 
of  a  Cr.  about  2  mi.  above  Poretobacco 
towne;  640  acs.  thereof  granted  sd. 
Lucas  &  Valentine  Allen  28  Sept.  1657 
&  by  Allen  wholly  assigned  to  sd.  Lucas 
&  294  acs.  for  trans,  of  6  pers:  Tho. 
Barker,  Tho.  Coleman,  Peter  Shewood, 
And.  Young,  Ed.  Hill  (or  Hall),  Wm. 
Jones.    20   Feb.    1662,    p.    317,    (302). 

HENRY  NICHOLLS,  194  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  15  Aug.  1663,  p.  317, 
(303).  Beg.  upon  Sunderland  Cr.  at  a 
branch  dividing  this  &  land  of  Edw. 
Boswell,  &c.  to  land  of  Evan  Davis. 
Granted  to  Dennis  Coniers  30  Mar. 
1653,  assigned  to  sd.  Nicholls  &  Evan 
Davis  &  by  Davis  sould  to  sd.  Nicholls. 

THO.  EVERIDGE,  450  acs.  in  the 
S.  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  18  Mar.  1662, 
p.  318,  (304).  250  acs.  on  Nwd.  side 
of  the  head  of  little  Cr.,  a  br.  of  the  S. 
Br.  of  sd.  Riv.  &c.  running  on  land  of 
Tho.  Marsh  &c.  200  acs.  beg.  at  miles 
end  of  Thomas  Wight  &c.  250  acs. 
granted  to  John  Clarke  20  Oct.  1648, 
assigned  to  Jno.  Browne,  who  assigned 
to  Everidge,  &  200  acs.  granted  to  sd. 
Everidge  20  Oct.   1661. 

PATRICK  MILLER,  400  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  18  Mar.  1663,  p.  318,  (305). 
S.  side  Rappa.  Riv.  about  6  mi.  up  the 
same,  bounded  E.N.E.  on  the  Riv., 
W.N.W.  on  land  of  Nich.  Dale  &  E. 
S.E.  on  a  Cr.  dividing  same  from  land 
of  James  Bonner.  Granted  to  Nicholas 
Merryweather  10  Feb.  1653,  assigned  to 
Humphrey  Hagget,  who  assigned  to 
Cuttbert  Potter,  who  assigned  to  James 
Marman  &  by  him  assigned  to  sd. 
Myler. 

JOHN  BOWLES,  350  acs.  on  W. 
br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  15  Feb.  1663,  p.  318, 
(305).  Beg.  by  Allingtons  Cr.,  run- 
ning W.N.W.  &c.  adj.  Capt.  Wm. 
Tuckers  land  &c.  15  Feb.  1663,  p.  318, 
(305).    Granted    to    Richard    Jones    18 


Oct.  1655,  assigned  to  Robt.  Peele  (or 
Poole)  &  Jno.  Waite  (or  Watte)  & 
then  assigned  to  sd.  Bowles.  Renewed 
12  Oct.  1675. 

ISRAELL  JOHNSON,  400  acs.  neere 
the  head  of  the  W.  br.  of  Nancimun 
Riv.,  100  acs.  on  Ewd.  side  of  the 
branch  &  300  on  W.  side  of  the  branch, 
beg.  at  a  Cypresse  standing  by  the  br. 
side,  running  for  length  Ely.,  adj.  land 
of  Simon  Symons  &c.  23  Jan.  1664,  p. 
319,  (306).  200  acs.  granted  sd. 
Johnson  15  Feb.  1663  &  200  acs.  for 
trans,  of  4  pers:  Tho.  Underwood, 
Rich.  Walter,  James  Pricklow,  Simon 
Fussell. 

THO.  ROBINSON,  700  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  on  N.  side  of  sd.  Riv.,  23  Feb. 
1663,  p.  319,  (307).  S.  side  of  Totos- 
key  Cr.,  beg.  on  a  poynt  by  sd.  Cr.,  run- 
ning E.  by  S.  &c.  to  an  Indian  field, 
then  N.  by  E.  &c.  Assigned  to  sd. 
Robbinson  by  Col.  Moore  Fantleroy. 

THOMAS  HOLLOWELL,  450  acs. 
300  acs.  being  a  neck  of  land  on  the 
W.  Br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  S.W.  on  broad 
Cr.  &  a  br.  of  same  called  sedge  br.  on 
the  N.E.,  running  to  a  reedy  swamp 
which  twarts  the  sd.  necke;  150  acs.  in 
Allentons  Cr.  a  br.  of  the  W.  br.  of  sd. 
Riv.,  running  N.E.  &c,  adj.  land  of 
Richard  Jones  &  his  own  land.  18 
Mar.  1662,  p.  319,  (307).  300  acs. 
granted  sd.  Holloway,  11  Jan.  1652  & 
150  acs.  for  trans,  of  3  pers:  Alice 
Coly,   Sarah   Nemerall,   Margtt.   Royall. 

ROGER  DELKE,  1000  acs.  at  Lawnes 
Cr.,  Surry  Co.,  15  Feb.  1663,  p.  320, 
(308).  Nly,  upon  land  of  Wm.  Peirce. 
Granted  to  Nich.  Reynolds  26  Aug. 
1637  &  "since  become  justly  due  to  the 
said  Delke." 


THOMAS  WILLIAMS,  son  &  heire 
of  Obedience  Williams,  440  acs.  Yorke 
Co.,  18  Nov.  1663,  p.  320,  (309).  Beg. 
between  land  of  Henry  Aswell  &  Richd. 
Parchmouth  on  a  poynt  bet.  two  bot- 
toms, running  up.  sd.  Riv.  N.W.  by  W. 
&c.  Granted  to  Obed.  Williams  6  May 
1654  &  due  sd.  Thomas  as  above. 


498 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


WM.  COOKE,  JNO.  POTTER,  ED- 
WARD KING  &  SAMUELL  GOOCH, 
450  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  on  E.most  br.  of 
Corotoman  Riv.,  12  Dec.  1663,  p.  320, 
(309).  E.  upon  land  of  Tho.  Chet- 
wood,  running  E.  &c.  Granted  to  Col. 
Jno.  Carter,  Esqr.,  20  Sept.  1661,  as- 
signed to  Tho.  Marshall,  who  assigned 
to  Wm.  Cooke,  Jno.  Potter  &  Wm. 
Hutchins,  &  by  Hutchins  assigned  to 
sd.  King  &  Gooch. 

THOMAS  PATTISON  (Patteson), 
&  WM.  DENBY,  504  acs.  Rappa.  Co., 
3  Dec.  1663,  p.  321,  (310).  S.  side 
of  Rappa.  Riv.,  part  thereof  lying  by 
the  river  side  &  part  upon  the  back  line 
of  Mr.  Thomas  Paine  &  Mr.  James 
Bagnall,  deed.,  beg.  at  Mr.  Tobyas 
Smiths  cor.  tree  by  the  river  side,  run- 
ning W.S.W.  &c.  along  land  of  Jno. 
Sharpe  &c.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  James 
Kirke,  Wm.  Sale,  Jane  Griffith,  Fra. 
Gregory,  Tho.  Pond,  Mich.  Long,  Wal- 
ter Ray,  Rebecca  Major. 

HENRY  NEWCOMB,  387  A  2  R., 
Chas.  City  Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Appomat- 
tox Riv.,  along  line  of  Samll.  Woodward, 
S.  by  E.  &c.  to  W.  br.  of  Baylies  Cr., 
thence  N.  by  W.  to  a  swamp  called  the 
head  of  the  Citty  Cr.,  thence  W.  &c.  15 
Feb.  1663,  p.  321,  (311).  Trans,  of 
8  pers:  Alice  Cammell,  Wm.  Bacon, 
Jno.-  Murry,  Edwd.  Davis,  Tho.  Cran- 
nidge,  Jno.  Luen,  Thomas  Young. 

EDWARD  CO  ALE,  three  score  &  ten 
acs.,  heretofore  called  Phillips  Island, 
on  W.  side  of  Chickhomeny  Riv.,  N. 
on  Phillips  bay,  E.  on  certain  drowned 
marshes  lieing  bet.  the  Island  &  sd. 
River,  S.  on  a  great  tract  of  marsh  & 
Creekes  &  W.  on  a  slipp  of  marsh 
separating  sd.  peninsula  or  island  from 
the  high  land  then  untaken  up.  Granted 
to  Thomas  Stampe  8  July  1653,  assigned 
to  Samll.  Paine,  who  assigned  to  sd. 
Coale.    18  Mar.    1662,   p.   321,    (311). 

ISAAK  WATSON,  &  SAMLL. 
MOTTORSHED,  400  acs.  bee  it  more 
or  less,  Wmoreland  Co.,  1  June  1663, 
p.  322,  (312).  Bounded  on  S.S.E.  side 
with  land  of  Edward  Parker,  N.N.E. 
upon  the  head  of  a  Cr.   dividing  this 


from  1000  acs.  of  Mr.  Valentine  Payton 
&  down  the  Cr.  to  beg.  Granted  to 
Rich.  Codsford,  20  Aug.  1655,  since 
deserted  &  granted  the  above  by  order 
of  court,  31  Mar.  1662. 

WM.  BURFORD,  JR.,  640  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  3  Feb.  1663,  p.  322,  (312). 
N.  side  of  Mattapony  Riv.  upon  Tymber 
Br.  of  Peancketanck,  beg.  at  a  poplar 
belonging  to  land  of  Jno.  Pigg  &  Jno. 
Maddison  upon  N.W.  of  sd.  branch, 
running  W.  by  S.  along  land  of  David 
Dale  &c.  Trans,  of  13  pers.*  Mar- 
ginal note:  Relinquished.  Six  of  the 
sd.  rights  transferred  to  John  Coles  patt. 
in  the  year  1667.    Phil  Ludwell. 

CAPT.  JNO.  LEAR,  18  acs.  at  the 
head  of  Majors  Cr.,  lying  between  land 
of  Edward  Major  &  Mr.  Jno.  Garratt. 
29  Nov.  1663,  p.  322,  (313).  Due  in 
right  of  his  wife  Mrs.  Mary  Bastard 
(or  Baslard)  &  for  trans,  of  Wm. 
Dawly. 

THOMAS  WILLIS,  300  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co.,  last  of  August  1664,  p.  323, 
(314).  N.E.  side  of  a  great  swamp, 
beg.  on  upper  side  of  land  of  Wm. 
Dudly,  S.E.  upon  same,  N.E.  upon  Tho. 
Pattison  &  Robt.  Chouning  &c.  Trans. 
of  6  pers:  Jno.  Randall,  Rich.  Gold- 
stone,  Doro.  Blunt,  Marg.  Holden,  Ann 
Lockey,  Edw.  Morgan. 

SAME.  Same  county,  date  &  pages. 
700  acs.  beg.  on  S.  side  of  Bryry  Br., 
running  N.N.E.  &c.  Trans,  of  14  pers: 
5  Negroes ;  Tho.  Shirt,  Mary  Ward,  Fra. 
Freeman,  Tho.  Tourner,  Edward  Fowles, 
Jno.  Ward,  Kath.  Cooper,  Wm.  Follor, 
Tho.   Canter. 

COL.  GUY  MOULSWORTH,  Esqr., 
1465  acs. — 1015  acs.  part  in  Chas.  City 
Co.  &  part  in  James  City  Co.,  beg.  at 
land  formerly  Mr.  Jno.  Bisshops,  run- 
ning along  the  back  of  his  own  first 
devdt.  &c.  by  an  ancient  line  of  trees 
dividing  this  from  land  of  Nicholson, 
to  Mosses  run  &c,  trees  dividing  this 
from  land  of  Jno.  Cole  &c;  450  acs.  of 
land,  marsh  &  creeks  in  Chas.  City  Co., 
on  N.  side  of  James  Riv.  &  W.  side  of 
Jones  Cr.,  beg.  at  the  mouth  of  sd.  Cr., 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


499 


running  up  the  Riv.  to  division  line 
bet.  his  own  &  land  of  Robt.  Nicholson 
&c.  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  323,  (314).  750 
acs.  by  patent  30  Oct.  1651  &  the  resi- 
due for  trans,  of  15  pers:  Robt.  Mead, 
Samll.  Pomfrett,  Jno.  Smith,  Jno.  Farro 
(or  Farrs),  Tho.  Wms.,  (Williams), 
Tho.  Faikes,  James  Banborne,  Abram 
Starkey,  George  Bayly,  Samll.,  Reforma- 
tion, Hoby,  Peter  &  Wm.,  Negroes,  Jno. 
Burman. 

WM.  COOKE,  Jr.,  360  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  3  Feb.  1664,  p.  324,  (315). 
Beg.  in  a  meadow  at  the  head  of  a  br. 
of  the  black  water,  running  S.W.  &c. 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  Ann  Dichfeild,  Jno. 
Wall,  James  Turpin,  Jno.  Legar,  Wm. 
Jordan,  Tho.  Harper,  Wm.  Fuell,  Jone 
Legg. 

MR.  HENRY  SOANES,  500  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  28  Mar.  1662,  p.  324, 
(316).  At  the  head  of  Chickahominy 
Riv.,  beg.  on  a  great  run,  down  the  same 
W.  &  S.W.  thence  to  Rich.  Williams 
&c.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Nich.  Read, 
Jno.  Vintner,  Mihill  May,  Olliver 
Druett,  Hugh  Water,  Mich.  Chad  well, 
Tho.  Collis,  Moses  Skinner,  Ellinor 
Greene,  Jno.  Noble. 

MR.  HENRY  RANDOLPH,  800  acs., 
beg.  at  a  white  oak  marked  4  ways, 
running  E.  &  by  S.  320  po.  to  the  Swift 
Cr.  on  S.  side  of  Appamatock  Riv.,  S. 
by  W.  along  John  Wilson  to  a  pohikery 
marked  4  wayes  hard  by  a  great  Rock 
upon  an  Elbow  of  the  old  Towne  Cr., 
W.  by  N.,  N.  by  E.  to  Swift  Cr.,  con- 
tinuing the  same  course  180  po.  to  beg. 
29  Jan.  1663,  p.  324,  (316).  Trans,  of 
16  pers:  Jno.  Taylor,  Robt.  Robinson, 
Xtoper.  Oxfor,  Jno.  Latrop,  Robt. 
Crouch,  Robt.  Freith,  Wm.  Pue,  Ann 
Sanders,  James  Hardware  (?),  Jno. 
Ludson,  George  Oliver,  Henry  Hoper, 
Robt.  Levitt,  Jno.  How,  Jno.  Read, 
Clemt.  Whidon. 

ABRAHAM  ELLETT,  250  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  25  Mar.  1664,  p.  325,  (317). 
Nly.  upon  land  of  Wm.  Ship,  Wly. 
crossing  a  small  Cr.,  butting  the  Gleab 
Land  &c.  Trans,  of  5  pers:  Abra. 
Ellett,  Alice  Ellett  his  wife,  Alice  Ellett 
his  daughter,  Eliz.  Ellett,  Wm.  Ligsby. 


THOMAS  DIOS  (Dyos),  450  acs. 
N'umberland  Co.,  9  Apr.  1663,  p.  325, 
(317).  S.  side  Potomack  Riv.  nigh 
Nomeny,  beg.  at  S.most  cor.  of  land  of 
Daniell  Hutt,  Merchant,  S.E.  along  back 
line  of  Wm.  Overred,  thence  W.S.W. 
&c.  Trans,  of  9  pers:  Jane  Moses,  Ann 
Lewis,  Margaret  Colly,  Tom,  Tom,  Jno. 
Negroes;   John   Sussett,    Fra.   Newman. 

STEPHEN  NORMAN,  750  acs.  S. 
side  of  Potomack  Riv.,  nigh  to  Nomeny, 
upon  branches  of  Harring  (Herring) 
Cr.,  beg.  on  S.  side  of  the  E.  br.  of  same 
which  divides  this  from  land  of  Mr. 
Hawlie,  extending  up  same  E.  &c.  27 
Mar.  1663,  p.  325,  (318).  Trans,  of 
15  pers:  James  Orland,  Fra.  Bruton, 
John  Homes,  Mary  King,  Edward  Ward, 
Mary  Kemp,  Samll.  Slaughter,  Wm. 
Jones,  Tho.  Munson,  Simon  Hart,  Jno. 
Bowles,  Thomas  Hallowes,  Wm.  Fruell. 

JOHN  CURTIS,  420  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  19  Nov.  1664,  p.  325,  (318).  N. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  at  the  head  of 
Morattico  Cr.,  beg.  on  main  br.  side 
thereof  &c.  S.S.E.  on  land  formerly  Tho. 
Chetwoods,  thence  220  po.  to  John  New- 
mans &c.    Trans,  of  9  Negroes. 

THOMAS  SMITH,  480  acs.  up  the 
W.most  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  beg.  at  Muddy 
Cr.,  running  along  trees  of  Thomas 
Sparrow  S.E.  to  the  main  swamp  &c. 
11  Feb.  1663,  p.  326,  (319).  Granted 
to  John  Finch  1  Oct.  1652  &  by  sd. 
Finch  &  the  Court  of  Lower  Norf.  as- 
signed to  sd.  Thomas. 

WM.  TOWNSEND,  33  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  neere  the  head  of  KifTs  Cr.  in 
Martins  hundred,  commonly  called  Halls 
land,  11  Feb.  1663,  p.  326,  (319). 
Bounded  N.  &  W.  upon  land  of  Robt. 
Hudson,  S.  by  W.  upon  Mr.  Staffords 
land  &  E.  upon  sd.  Cr.  Granted  to 
Richard  Barnehouse  23  Nov.  1653,  as- 
signed to  sd.  Townsend,  who  assigned 
to  John  Coale  &  by  him  reassigned  to 
sd.  Townsend. 

JAMES  &  GEORGE  RANSON,  sonns 
of  Peter  Ranson,  dec'd.,  1100  acs.  on 
the  North  River  in  Mockjack  bay,  at  the 
Isle  of  Wight  Cr,  Nly.  parallel  to  the 


500 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


River,  unto  a  Cr.  dividing  this  &  land 
in  possession  of  Richard  Dudley.  10 
Feb.  1663,  p.  326,  (320).  Granted  to 
sd.  Peter  9  June  1653  &  given  by  will 
to  the  abovenamed. 

THOMAS  ADAMS  &  RICHARD 
RISE,  700  acs.,  2  June  1664,  p.  326, 
(320).  400  acs.  bet.  two  main  branches 
at  the  head  of  Chickacone  Riv.  &  300 
acs.  beg.  by  the  main  branch  called 
Tuckahow  Swamp.  Trans,  of  14  pers: 
Jno.  Poore,  James  Man,  Erasmus  Penny, 
Mary  Smith,  Wm.  Cooke,  Jno.  Jenny, 
Samll.  Parks,  Mary  Jones,  James  Ward, 
&  6  Negroes. 

WM.  MOSELY,  1300  acs.  at  Occu- 
pation Cr.,  beg.  upon  N.most  br.  there- 
of called  Wassananson.  20  Jan.  1663, 
p.  327,  (321).  Granted  to  John  Phillips 
14  June  1655,  assigned  to  Richard  Cole- 
man, who  assigned  to  sd.  Mosely. 
Note:  "This  land  was  by  Col.  Moore 
Fantlaroy,  Admr.  of  the  abovesaid 
Phillips,  assigned  to  sd.  Robt.  Coleman 
&  by  Coleman   (as  above)    to  Mosely." 

JOHN  POTLING,  50  acs.  upon  the 
New  Poquoson  Riv.,  9  Feb.  1663,  p. 
327,  (321).  Bounded  by  a  br.  of  Har- 
woods  Cr.  which  divides  it  from  land 
of  Tho.  Harwood  &c.  &  a  br  of  sd.  Cr. 
dividing  from  land  of  Tho.  Jackson, 
deed.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  12  May 
1650. 

ANN  REYNOLLS,  daughter  of  Wm. 
Reynolls,  92  acs.  N'umberland  Co.,  9 
Feb.  1663,  p.  327,  (322).  At  the  verry 
head  of  Mattapony  Riv.,  Wly.  &  Sly. 
upon  the  main  br.  of  same  &  Nly.  upon 
another  br.  of  sd.  Riv.  Granted  to  Wm. 
Reynolds  13  Oct.  1653,  &  by  Richard 
Clare,  Exor.,  assigned  to  sd.  Ann. 

LT.  COL.  THO.  GOODRICH,   600 

acs.  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  neere  miles 
end  of  a  patent  of  1350  acs.  taken  up 
by  Bartho.  Hoskins,  beg.  on  the  side  of 
Hoskins  Cr.,  parallel  to  land  of  John 
Gillet  &c.  18  Sept.  1663,  p.  327,  (322). 
500  acs.  by  patent  1  Aug.  1652  to 
Clement  Thrush  &  100  acs.  by  patent 
10  June  1657,  for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Jno. 
Golding,  Tho.  Reeves. 


RICHARD  PARKER,  400  acs.  on 
S.  Br.  of  Nancimum  Riv.,  18  Mar. 
1662,  p.  328,  (323).  Adj.  land  of  Wm. 
Wright.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  4  Oct. 
1654. 

ANTHONY  NORTH,  200  acs.  Rap- 
pa.  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  328,  (324). 
On  the  head  of  Hoskins  Cr.,  beg.  by 
the  Poquoson  of  sd.  Creek  at  or  nigh 
the  miles  end  of  land  of  Clement 
Thrush.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Jane  Willis, 
Alice  Thompson,  Lidia  Sares,  Jno. 
Rumball. 

HUMPHRY  GIBBS,  40  acs.  War 
wicke  Co.,  11  Feb.  1663,  p.  328,  (324) 
On  Swd.  side  of  the  blacke  Swamp,  beg 
at  tree  of  Mr.  Bullocks,  running  S.S.W 
&c.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  10  Aug 
1654. 

THOMAS  BRERETON,  1500  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  28  Nov.  1662,  p.  328, 
(325).  N.  side  Mattapony  Riv.  upon  a 
br.  of  Whore  Cocke  Cr.  on  the  W.  side 
thereof,  adj.  land  formerly  belonging  to 
Anthony  Haines.  Trans,  of  30  pers: 
Wm.  Young,  Sail.  (Samuell  ?)  Sherly, 
Mary  Harper,  Tho.  Wood,  Jane  Pike, 
Samll.  Partin,  Nath.  Burd,  Jno.  Woad 
(?),  James  Newton,  Tho.  Courtman, 
Wm.  Snelling,  Francis  Puel,  Tho. 
Billips,  Mary  Turner,  James  Wood  (or 
Woad),  Jacob  Young,  Emll.  Wallop, 
Jno.  Pallin,  Wm.  Fuell,  Edward  Read, 
Charles  Harlow,  Sarah  Spratt,  Wm. 
Watson,  James  Cander,  Simon  Andrews, 
Joseph  Bake,  Wm.  Baker,  Thomas  Mar- 
shall, Wm.  Farmer,  Joseph  Marlow. 

DANIELL  HUTT,  850  acs.  N'umber- 
land Co.,  9  Dec.  1662,  p.  329,  (325). 
500  acs.  on  S.  side  of  Petomake  Riv., 
upon  S.  side  of  Herring  Cr.,  adj.  land 
of  Mr.  Robt.  Yeo;  350  acs.  nigh 
Nomeny,  beg.  at  W.most  corner  of  land 
of  sd.  Hutt  &  on  S.E.most  side  &  nigh 
the  head  of  Coss  Coss  &c.  500  acs. 
Granted  to  Mr.  Geo.  Read  9  June  1653, 
assigned  to  Margt.  Myles  &  afterward 
sold  to  sd.  Hutt,  &  350  acs.  for  trans, 
of  7  pers:  Tho.  Rosewell,  Ellinor  Bur- 
ton, Tho.  Morris,  Margt.  Lewis,  Thomas 
Burton,  Jno.  Wood,  Jno.  Snoke. 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


501 


ROWLAND  WILLIAMS,  300  acs., 
150  acs.  part  purchased  by  Charles  Hill 
of  Edward  Lucas  &  assigned  to  Samll. 
Hattaway,  being  on  S.  side  of  Garden 
Cr.  Granted  to  Samll.  Hattaway  by 
patent  dated  15  Mar.  1658  with  150  acs. 
residue  granted  to  Jno.  Hampton,  by 
him  &  his  heires  deserted  &  granted  sd. 
Hill  by  order  of  court  15  Mar.  1658  & 
assigned  to  Geo.  Mosely,  who  assigned 
to  Robt.  Jones  &  by  him  assigned  to  sd. 
Williams.  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  329,  (326). 

WM.  LANDMAN,  200  acs.  N'um- 
berland  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  329, 
(327).  S.E.  side  Yeocomoco  Riv., 
bounding  N.E.  upon  land  of  the 
Orphants  of  George  (or  John)  Knott, 
deed.  &  S.W.  upon  land  of  Anthony 
Lenton.  Being  part  of  a  patent  of  400 
acs.  granted  to  Hugh  Lee  28  Mar.  1660, 
since  sold  to  John  Landman  &  now  due 
sd.  William  as  brother  &  heire  to  sd. 
John. 

THO.  WILSFORD,  Gent.,  50  acs,  be 
it  more  or  less,  Wmoreland  Co,  18 
Mar.  1662,  p.  330,  (327).  N.W.  side 
of  Hallowes  Cr,  adj.  his  own  &  land  of 
Andrew  Munrow.  Renewal  of  patent 
dated  4  Sept.  1655. 

FRANCIS  GREY,  1000  acs.  on  S. 
side  of  Petomake  Riv,  18  Mar.  1662,  p. 
330,  (328).  675  acs.  on  the  head  of 
Rosiers  Cr,  running  N.E.  to  the  round 
hill,  abutting  land  of  Mr.  Tho.  Boyer 
&  Mr.  John  Hillier;  250  acs.  N.E.  upon 
sd.  Riv,  S.E.  upon  sd.  Cr,  75  acs.  Ely. 
upon  sd.  250  acs,  Wly.  upon  sd.  675 
acs.  &  Sly.  upon  sd.  Cr.  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  16  July  1654. 

ALEX.  BAYNHAM,  300  acs.  N'um- 
berland  Co,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  330, 
(328).  Nly.  upon  Hollis  Cr,  N.E.  up- 
on a  small  Cr.  dividing  this  from  land 
of  Jno.  Cooke.  Granted  to  Wm.  Freeke 
19  Oct.  1653,  assigned  to  Tho.  Hawkins 
&  by  his  Atty.  Seth  Foster  assigned  to 
Wm.  Willdey,  who  assigned  to  sd. 
Baynham. 

HENRY  WILSON,  450  acs.  Rappa. 
Co,  15  June  1664,  p.  330,  (329).  N. 
side  the  river  at  the  head  of  Farnham 


Cr.  &  on  the  S.  side  of  the  E.  main  br. 
of  same,  beg.  neere  the  side  of  a  small 
Indian  feild,  adj.  land  of  Samll.  Griffin 
&  Tho.  Griffith.  Trans,  of  9  pers:  Eliz. 
Tofthead,  Tho.  Newman,  Wm.  Miller, 
Mary  Harry,  Jone  West,  Wm.  Hebditch, 
Sarah  Wilson,  Eliz.  Wilson,  Tho.  Tof- 
head. 

GREGORY  RAWLINGS,  sonne  of 
Gregory  Rawlings,  deed,  476  acs. 
Surrey  Co,  12  Feb.  1663,  p.  331,  (330). 
S.  side  of  James  Riv.  &  S.E.  side  of 
Chapokes  Cr,  bounded  on  the  head  of 
Richard  Hides  land  from  a  poynt  of  the 
Burchen  Sw,  S.S.E.  &c.  along  Wm. 
Symons  trees  &c.  Renewal  of  patent 
dated  10  June  1653. 

GEO.  CATCHMAID,  3333  acs.  on 
the  N.  side  of  Roanoke,  abutting  Sly.  on 
sd.  Sound,  Ely.  on  Katotin  Riv,  Wly. 
on  Pequimons  Riv.  which  issueth  out  of 
the  sd.  Sound  &  Nly.  on  Owaseake  Cr. 
which  issueth  out  of  Pequimons  Riv. 
1  Apr.  1663,  p.  331,  (330).  Trans,  of 
67  pers:  Wm.  Gwin,  Rich.  Purden  (or 
Purdew),  Arth.  Burnell,  Wm.  Young, 
Jos.  Parry,  Jno.  Wickam  (or  Witham), 
Jno.  Lee,  Sam.  Denies  (or  Deins), 
Gyles  Prout,  Jarvis  Dodridge,  Roger  Up 
Robt.  (Roger  ap  Robt.),  Jno.  Sale,  Jno. 
Gallile,  Nich.  Stall,  Wm.  Folke,  Henry 
Goodman,  Tho.  Terrall,  Edward  Higby, 
James  Harrison,  Edw.  New,  Em. 
Absolon,  Geo.  Gore,  Jno.  Cutts,  Tho. 
Powell,  Hen.  Aires,  Charles  Druit,  Wm. 
Blucke,  Rich.  Bancks,  George  Thomp- 
son, Jno.  White,  Samll.  Baker,  Rich. 
Jones  Anth.  Winckle,  Peter  Blething, 
Walter  Laramore,  Gyles  Pitt,  Edw. 
Curman,  Jno.  Griffin,  Za.  South,  Jane 
Martin,  Eliz.  Parker,  Mary  Price,  Doro- 
thy Parrott,  Ann  Sills,  Jane  Wood, 
Mary  Fleet,  Robt.  Beall,  Humph.  Poole, 
Kath.  Stoakes,  Han.  Snow,  Mary  Staines, 
Dan.  Floyd,  Jno.  Barton,  Wm.  Fletcher, 
Geo.  Gray,  Danll.  Humber,  Edw.  Hum- 
phries, Edw.  Humphries,  Rich.  Young, 
Rich.  Flewelling,  Morg.  Paile,  Ann 
Jones,  Eliz.  Bembridge,  Margt.  Jones, 
Sarah  Barnes,  Jno.  Tyler,  Jno.  Sharpe, 
Wm.  Power,  Mary  Watts. 

ROBERT  BOWERS,  100  acs.  in  the 
W.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv,  28  Jan.  1663,  p. 


502 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


331,  (330).  Renewal  of  patent  dated 
17  Mar.  1654. 

WM.  PEAWDE  &  GEORGE  SAN- 
DERS, 1000  acs.  James  City  Co.,  11 
Feb.  1663,  p.  332,  (331).  S.W.  side  of 
Chickahominy  Riv.,  beg.  in  the  mouth 
of  Mattahancks  Necke,  over  the  same  to 
Webbs  Run  &c.  to  Nickadewans  path 
&c.  along  Teakins  br.  to  the  back  of 
Mr.  Hains  land  &c.  to  head  of  Nicka- 
was  run  &c.  to  edge  of  Muskowt  run 
to  E.  side  of  a  little  Cr.  which  includes 
a  small  Indian  feild  in  the  bottom  of 
Muskowt.  Granted  to  Tho.  Towner  18 
Mar.  1662  &  given  by  his  will  to  the 
abovenamed. 

DENNIS  SWILLIVANT,  1446  acs. 
Rappa.  Co.,  2  Feb.  1663,  p.  332,  (332). 
On  S.most  br.  of  Totoskey  Cr.  Renewal 
of  patent  dated  23  May  1660. 

ROBT.  CHOWNING,  300  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  26  Feb.  1663,  p.  332,  (332). 
On  the  head  of  Sanderland  Cr.  alias 
Barneham  Cr.,  beg.  at  a  Sly.  cor.  tree 
of  his  own  &  land  of  Tho.  Paddison, 
running  E.  along  land  of  Robt.  Middle- 
ton  &c.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  21 
Jan.  1652. 

PETER  GILL  &  HENRY  WHITE, 

1,000  acs.  Chas.  City  Co.,  15  Feb.  1663, 
p.  333,  (333).  S.  side  of  Chickehominy 
Maine  Sw.,  beg.  at  upper  Westover  path 
by  a  great  branch,  running  down  the 
same  &c.  to  upper  side  of  land  of  Tho. 
Spencer  &  Hickman  &c.  Trans,  of  20 
pers:  Tho.  Gregory,  Jane  Aldridge, 
George  Williams,  Sarah  Barlow,  Wm. 
Jones,  Wm.  Robinson,  Fra.  Stagg, 
Lewis  Davis,  Jno.  White,  Tho.  White, 
Hersy  (?)  Jones,  Tho.  Lee,  Jno.  Russell, 
Wm.  Alexander,  Jno.  Cobbett,  Geo. 
Dawson,  Tho.  Parford,  Edw.  Scarfe, 
Tho.   Bettford,  Wm.  Brittlin. 

ROBT.  LEE,  542  acs.  Gloster  Co., 
23  Dec.  1662,  p.  333,  (333).  Beg.  by 
Mr.  Thorntons  path,  running  S.S.E.  &c. 
by  Col.  Lees  horse  path,  then  S.W.  by 
W.  to  the  barrens  by  sd.  path,  then 
W.N.W.  to  the  Dogwood  valley  &c.  to 
a  branch  by  sd.  Lees  plantation,  down 
the  same  to  a  little  fork  &  up  the  br. 


that  makes  the  forke  to  Mr.  Thorntons 
land.  Granted  to  Col.  Rich.  Lee  17 
May  1655,  assigned  to  sd.  Robt.  25  Feb. 
1657  &  340  acs.  for  trans,  of  7  pers: 
Jno.  Bucknell,  Eliz.  Williams,  Valent. 
Smith,  Abra.  Smith,  Jno.  Folcner  (?), 
Tho.  Roulston,  Robt.  Haniger,  Tho. 
Clay. 

COL.  ROBT  ABRALL,  500  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  26  Apr.  1664,  p.  333,  (334). 
N.  side  of  Mattapony  Riv.,  adj.  his  an- 
cient devdt.,  beg.  at  Anth.  Haines  cor. 
tree  in  Acquintenokes  Swamp  opposite 
land  of  Richard  Tunstall,  running  down 
the  same  &c.  to  land  of  Johna.  Parsons, 
formerly  Major  Lewis',  &c.  Trans,  of 
10  pers:  Tho.  Gregory,  Susan  Wood, 
Fra.  Bloys,  Jno.  Lilley,  Jno.  Massey, 
Jno.  Bird,  Giles  Rogers,  Wm.  Ball,  2 
Negroes. 

MR.  WM.  THOMAS,  250  acs. 
N'umberland  Co.,  30  Mar.  1663,  p. 
334,  (335).  In  Yeocomoco  Neck,  run- 
ning E.  by  N.  to  Richard  Holdings  land 
&c.  W.  by  S.  to  Knotts  Cr.  Granted  to 
Mr.  Wm.  Bacon  28  Aug.  1657  &  as- 
signed to  sd.  Thomas. 

THOMAS  RIVES,  300  acs.  Gloster 
Co.,  18  Feb.  1663,  p.  334,  (335).  Up- 
on the  head  of  Fentons  Cr.  issuing  out 
on  S.E.  side  of  Mattapony  Riv,  beg.  on 
S.  side  of  Araciaco  Sw.,  extending  S.W. 
upon  land  of  Edward  Simpson,  S.E.  up- 
on land  of  Leonard  Chamberline  &  Ash- 
well  Batten  &c.  Granted  to  Abraham 
Moone  1  Nov.  1654  &  assigned  to  sd. 
Rives.  Marginal  Note:  "Examined  with 
the  Book  Transcribed  July   17,    1796." 

JOHN  MARTIN,  1400  acs.  in  Lyn- 
haven  parish,  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  18  Mar. 
1662,  p.  334,  (336).  Bounded  on 
N.W.  with  Bennetts  Cr.,  on  W.S.W. 
with  a  small  branch,  on  S.  with  line  of 
trees  running  to  Symon  Barrows  land, 
on  N.E.  with  land  of  Adam  Thorogood 
&c.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  2  Oct. 
1654. 

FRANCIS  CARPENTER,  1000  acs. 
N'umberland  Co.,  2  Dec.  1662,  p.  334, 
(336).  N.  side  Kings  Cr.  Swamp.  Re- 
newal of  patent  dated  24  Sept.  1664. 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


503 


JAMES  PADDAM,  203  acs.  Chas. 
City  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  335,  (336). 
At  the  head  of  Wm.  Ditties  (Ditty) 
land  which  he  bought  of  James  Warra- 
dine  commonly  called  &  known  by  the 
name  of  the  high  peake  on  S.  side  of 
Baylies  Cr.,  running  S.  by  E.  by  Mr. 
Jno.  George.  Granted  to  Wm.  Ditty  7 
Oct.  1653,  assigned  to  Joseph  Parsons, 
who  assigned  to  sd.   Paddam. 

PETER  GREENE,  350  acs.  Surrey 
Co.,  21  Feb.  1663,  p.  335,  (337).  S. 
side  of  James  Riv.  &  W.  side  of  the 
head  of  Lawnes  Cr.  (This  said  land 
being  formerly  old  trees  &  purchased  of 
Wm.  Leas  &  now  in  possession  of  sd. 
Greene),  beg.  at  Maj.  Buttlers  line  of 
trees,  running  up  the  head  of  sd.  Cr.  &c. 
Said   land  assigned   as   abovementioned. 

ROBT.  BEDWELL,  640  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  20  Feb.  1662,  p.  335,  (337).  In 
Farnham  Parish,  on  N.  side  of  Rappa. 
Riv.,  beg.  on  N.E.  side  of  land  of  John 
Williams,  running  N.E.  &c.  to  a  br.  of 
Totoske  called  the  Beavor  Dams  Br.  &c, 
including  some  certain  poynts  of  land 
between  this  land  &  the  sd.  branch  con- 
taining 87  acs.,  making  in  all  727  acs. 
640  acs.  granted  to  sd.  Bedwell  &  Rich- 
ard Powell  10  Sept.  1661  &  since 
wholly  due  sd.  Bedwell  &  87  acs.  due 
for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Wm.  Parson,  Mary 
Wood,    (or  Waad.) 

CAPT.  WM.  HAY,  1695  acs.  48  chs. 
52  dec.  points  at  the  Paquosons  in 
Yorke  Co.,  16  Dec.  1663,  p.  336,  (338). 
Beg.  at  N.W.  end  of  a  ridge  butting 
upon  Smoake  Hamack  on  E.  side  of 
Rays  Cr.  &c.  to  a  percimon  at  the 
bottom  of  the  ridge  butting  upon  Black- 
walnut  Necke  &c.  between  long 
Hamocke  &  Lewis'  Necke,  up  the  same 
N.E.  by  S.  &c.  to  a  Mirtle  bush  neere 
the  edge  of  the  main  branch  &c.  to  the 
horse  path  at  the  head  of  Ravs  Cr. 
marsh  &c.  to  a  pine  in  a  homack  of  5 
remarkable  pines  &c.  neere  the  bancke 
of  Chesapiake  bay  &c.  to  mouth  of 
Bennetts  &  Rays  Creeks  &c.  100  acres  of 
sd.  land  being  due  by  assignment  of  a 
patent  dated  27  May  1637  &  knowne  by 
the  name  of  black  Walnutt  necke  &  sev- 
eral hamocks  upon  the  Maine  Marsh ;  600 


acs.  by  assignment  of  patent  dated  13 
Aug.  1639  &  995  Acs.  48  chs.  52  dec. 
pts.  due  for  trans,  of  20  pers.* 

SIMON  SIMONS,  300  acs.  on  N.W. 
branch  of  Nancemun  Riv.,  beg.  by  a 
reedy  branch,  running  for  length  N.W. 
&c.  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  336,  (340).  Re- 
newal of  patent  dated  3  June  1656. 

ROAREE  MACOTER  &  ARGABELL 
READ,  224  acs.  N'umberland  Co.,  18 
Mar.  1662,  p.  337,  (340).  N.W.  upon 
Metapony  Riv.,  S.E.  upon  land  of  John 
Chambers,  N.E.  upon  land  of  John 
Earle.  Granted  to  Francis  Symons  9 
July  1653  &  by  him  assigned  to  sd. 
Macoater  &  Read. 

RICHARD  POOLE,  400  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  towards  the  head  of  the 
master  branch  of  Sam.  Bennets  Cr.,  18 
Mar.  1662,  p.  337,  (341).  Beg.  at  a 
small  reedy  br.  on  S.E.  side  of  the 
master  br.  of  Bennetts  Cr.  neere  about  a 
mile  above  John  Gookins  Landing  place 
&c.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  22  Aug. 
1652. 

MR.  ALEX.  FLEMING,  800  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  337,  (341). 
On.  N.  side  &  within  the  freshes  of 
Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  next  to  land  of  Wm. 
Yarrett,  extending  E.  S.  E.  &  E.  by  S. 
along  the  river  to  an  oak  dividing  this 
&  land  surveyed  for  Toby  Smith  &c. 
Granted  to  Walter  Dickeson  6  Sept. 
1654  &  by  Tohn  Merredith,  his  Any., 
sold  to  sd.  Fleming. 

EDWARD  GILL  A.  200  acs.  Tames 
City  Co.,  18  Jan.  1663,  p.  337,  (342). 
On  E.  side  of  Chickahominy  Riv., 
bounded  S.W.  on  Tyascun  &  S.E.  on 
land  of  Thomas  Brookes.  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  6  June  1654. 

EDWARD      TRAVERS,       (Travis), 

sonne  &  heire  of  Edward  Travers, 
dec'd.,  326  acs.  James  City  Is.,  10  Feb. 
1663,  p.  338,  (342).  Lying  neere  black 
noynt;  196  acs.  N.  upon  the  backe  river, 
E.  upon  the  same,  S.  upon  land  of  Mr. 
Chiles  &  Goose  hill  Marsh  &  W.  upon 
David  Elliott  &  Mr.  Crosbies  land.  130 
acs.  more  or  less,  part  beinrr  marsh,  lie- 
ing  Sly.  from  his  now  dwelling  house  & 


504 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


devdt.  of  his  land,  bounded  by  Pars- 
mores  Cr.  &  Cockets  neck  &  the  residue 
being  high  land  lieing  Wly.  from  his 
house  &  bounded  on  Wwd.  with  land  of 
Lanselet  Eley  &c.  Granted  to  sd.  Ed- 
ward Travels,  deed.,  10  Mar.  1653  & 
now  due  as  above. 

GEORGE  GILL,  JR.,  2000  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  last  of  Mar.  1663,  p.  338, 
(343).  1100  acs.  on  the  S.  side  the 
freshes  of  Yorke  Riv.,  bounded  on  the 
N.N.E.  with  sd.  Riv.,  on  N.W.  with 
Pouncies  line  of  trees  from  an  old 
Spanish  oak  on  the  cliffe  of  the  Riv.  to 
a  new  marked  maple  &c.  to  chesnutt  in 
Mr.  Tho.  Gibsons  line  of  trees  neere 
peach  tree  field  path;  900  acs.  common- 
ly called  the  Hogg  Penn  Neck  in  Yorke 
Riv.,  300  acs.  being  a  necke  bounded 
with  the  river  on  the  S.E.  side,  on  the 
N.W.  by  the  Cr.  from  the  necke  along 
the  river  &c.  700  acs.  granted  him  21 
Jan.  1650;  900  acs.  granted  to  John 
Pownsey  8  Dec.  1652  &  400  acs.  for 
trans,  of  8  pers:  Robt.  Waller,  Rich. 
Hull,  David  Landon,  Rich.  Hodson, 
Math.  Collins,  Joane  Holding,  Ellinor 
Harris,  Ann  Dods. 

JOHN  FEILD,  400  acs.  Henrico  Co., 
known  by  the  name  of  Cham,  24  Mar. 
1662/3,  p.  338,  (344).  Bounded  from 
Almonds  Cr.  "upwards  to  Chenck  Cr.  or 
farther  soe  far  forth  as  the  land  shall 
extend  upwards  towards  the  falls  of 
James  River."  Being  part  of  1000  acs. 
granted  to  John  White,  by  him  sold  to 
Tho.  Fry  &  by  the  sd.  Fry  his  Exors. 
sold  to  sd.  Feild. 

THOMAS  BRICE,  1650  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  339,  (344). 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  being  part  of 
an  Indian  habitation  called  old  Moratti- 
con;  beg.  at  a  red  oak  standing  on  a 
poynt  on  the  river  side  &  on  Nwd.  side 
of  the  mouth  of  Harris  Cr.,  running 
E.  N.  E.  adj.  land  of  Edward  Harris  &c. 
to  Swd.  br.  of  dividing  Cr.  which  be- 
longs to  Cottawoman  Riv.,  running 
down  the  same  to  the  first  dividing 
poynt  &c.  to  Ewd.  side  of  the  middle  br. 
of  Fairewethers  Cr.  &c,  crossing  Brices 
Cr.  to  beg.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  27 
Oct.  1652. 


COL.  JNO.  CARTER,  Esq.,  2160  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  24  June  1663,  p.  339, 
(345).  1600  acs.  upon  N.  side  of  Rap- 
pa.  Riv.  from  the  mouth  of  Corrotoman 
Riv.,  extending  along  Rappa.  Riv.  S.E. 
&  E.S.E.  upon  a  Cr.  commonly  known 
as  Slaughers  (Slaughters)  alias  Johns 
Cr.  &c,  N.W.  upon  a  br.  of  Corroto- 
man Riv.  near  a  tract  of  land  in  posses- 
sion of  Wm.  Clapham,  Sr.,  &c.  560  acs. 
upon  N.  W.  side  &  towards  the  head  of 
St.  (?)  Johns  Cr.  &c.  1600  acs.  by 
patent  dated  6  Sept.  1654  &  560  acs. 
granted  to  Jno.  Meredeth  10  Oct.  1652 
&  by  him  sold  to  George  Marsh,  who 
sold  to  sd.  Carter. 

JAMES  JONES,  250  acs.,  Chas.  City 
Co.,  1  Mar.  1663,  p.  340,  (346).  S. 
side  of  James  Riv.  &  on  E.  side  of  the 
head  of  Powells  Cr.  neere  the  old 
Towne,  bounding  W.  on  land  of  Charles 
Sparrow  &  Richard  Tie,  N.  on  head  of 
sd.  Cr.  &  E.  on  the  pine  Sw.  Granted 
to  Thomas  Tanner  27  Nov.  1657  for 
the  importation  of  5  pers.*,  &  by  him 
transferred   to   sd.  Jones. 

NICH.,  GEO.,  &  THO.  TABERER  & 
HUMPHRY  CLARKE,  900  acs.  at  the 
mouth  of  the  N.  side  of  a  branch  where 
Francis  Englands  land  endeth  at  a  little 
oak  &  running  up  the  sd.  branch  E.  &c. 
5  Feb.  1663,  p.  340,  (347).  Renewal 
of  patent  dated  14  Aug.  1652. 

JOHN  BAREFEILD,  150  acs.  in  the 
S.  branch  of  Nancimum  Riv.,  30  Oct. 
1662,  p.  340,  (347).  Beg.  by  the 
branch  side,  running  for  length  S.W. 
bv  S.  &c.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Martha 
Rice,  John  Bird,  Ellinor  Bird.  Note: 
"The  abovesaid  pattern  was  granted  to 
Barefeild  by  Coll.  Fra.  Moryson  esqr. 
Governor  &c,  Sr.  Wm.  Berkeley  not 
being  in  the  Countrey  at  the  Date 
thereof." 

WM.  HANDCOCKE,  300  acs.  in 
Lvnhaven  Parish  in  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  18 
Mar.  1662,  p.  341,  (348).  200  acs. 
beg.  at  the  head  of  Mr.  Moselies  land 
neere  the  head  of  Fareham  Cr..  runnins; 
N.N.E.  &c.  nere  a  place  called  Turkey 
ridge,  thence  S.S.W.  towards  John 
Carrawaies  land  &c.    100  acs.  as  by  bill 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


505 


of  sale  being  bought  of  Tho.  Moult. 
Granted  to   Sarah   Handcocke  23   Nov. 

1657  &  assigned  to  sd.  Wm. 

COL.  FRA.  EPPS,  280  (or  285)  acs. 
Chas.  City  Co.,  17  Feb.  1663,  p.  341, 
(349).  S.  side  of  James  Riv.  &  S.  side 
of  Appamatuck  Riv.,  Sly.  on  Capt.  Batts, 
Nly.  upon  the  head  of  Walter  Brooke, 
Nath.  Tatum  &  John  Bakers  land  &  Ely. 
to  the  head  of  his  own  1700  acs. 
Granted  to  sd.  Epps  23  Jan.  1653  & 
now  renewed. 

RALPH  GREENE,  650  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  24  Jan.  1663,  p.  341,  (349). 
S.E.  side  of  Arrakieco  Sw.,  running  up 
the  same  N.E.  &c.  500  acs.  by  patent 
dated  13  Nov.  1656  &  100  acs.  for 
trans,  of  2  pers.* 

CHARLES  EDMONDS  &  WM. 
PULLAM,  2520  acs.  in  New  Kent  Co., 
18  Mar.  1662,  p.  341,  (350).  Beg.  by 
Chickahominy  Sw.,  running  N.E.  by  E. 
&c.    Renewal    of    patent    dated    4    May 

1658  ("And  since  by  consent,  Charles 
Edmonds  hath  made  choyce  of  the  lower 
pt.  of  this  Devident  and  Wm.  Pullam,  of 
the  upper  pt.  bounding  on  Wm.  Smith"  ) . 

RALPH  HARWOOD  &  BENJAMIN 
BIRCH,  600  acs.  Gloster  Co.,  5  Feb. 
1663,  p.  342,  (350).  S.W.  side  of 
Crany  Cr.  Swamp,  running  up  the  same 
Nly.  &c.  to  trees  dividing  this  from  land 
of  Geo.  Pole  &  Edward  Freman  &c. 
Granted  to  Jeffry  Bew  13  May  1652  & 
by  him  assigned  to  the  abovenamed. 

MR.  EDWARD  WAAD  (or  Wood), 
150  acs.  according  to  the  ancient  lawful 
bounds  thereof,  in  Yorke  Co..  18  June 
1663,  p.  342,  (351).  Sd.  land  lately  in 
possession  of  Wm.  Cainhoe,  dec'd.  & 
by  an  inquest  found  to  escheat  to  his 
Majesty  &  now  granted  sd.  Waad  who 
hath  made  his  composition  according  to 
Act. 

MR.  ROBT  BRISTOW,  1000  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  29  Sept.  1663,  p.  342, 
(351).  In  Fleets  Bay,  abutting  Nly. 
upon  Haddawaies  Cr.  dividing  this  & 
land  of  Abra.  Moone,  S.  upon  another 
Cr.  about  4  mi.  from  the  land  of  Jno. 


Taylor  &  Wly.  down  sd.  Cr.  till  it 
cometh  to  the  maine  bay.  Granted  to 
Humph  Tabb  22  Mar.  1654  &  by  Tho. 
Tabb,  his  son  &  heir,  assigned  to  Mr. 
Phill.  Mallory,  who  assigned  to  sd. 
Bristow  &  Edm.  Welch  &  sd.  Welch 
wholly  assigned  to  sd.  Bristow. 

GEORGE  GILBERT,  (Gilburt),  400 
acs.  James  City  Co.,    10  Oct.   1664,  p. 

342,  (352).  Beg.  at  a  cor.  tree  on  the 
head  of  the  Spring  br.  on  Hickmans 
line,  W.  S.  W.  &c.  to  Dyascun  (Tyas- 
cun),  up  the  same  to  Mattaquince 
Swamp  &c.  300  acs.  being  part  of  a 
patent  of  1200  acs.  granted  to  Capt. 
Wm.  Underwood,  25  Nov.  1661  &  by 
him  sold  to  sd.  Gilbert,  &  100  acs.  due 
for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Jno.  Hany,  Wm. 
Bucke. 

JOHN  BRADY,  (Braddy),  180  acs. 
Surry  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  343,  (352). 
Bounded  from  the  Mill  Sw.  side  W.  by 
S.  to  the  head  of  Besses  Sw.,  along  same 
N.N.E.  &c.  Granted  to  sd.  Braddy  & 
Jno.  Spiltimber  in  a  joynt  patent  for 
325  acs  15  Mar.  1653  &  now  equally 
divided  between  them. 

CHARLES  WOOD,  268  acs.  Wmore- 
land  Co.,  1  Feb.  1663,  p.  343,  (353). 
Wly.  with  land  of  John  Axton  &  John 
Browne,  Sly.  with  Patomecke  Cr.,  Ely. 
with  a  Sw.  parting  same  from  land  of 
Tho.  Fowke,  Gent.  Granted  to  Mr. 
Gerrard  Fowke  15  May  1660,  assigned 
to  John  Rosier  &  by  him  assigned  to  sd 
Wood. 

JOHN  SHURLOCKE  (Sherlocke), 
410  acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  14  Mar.  1663,  p. 

343,  (353).  210  acs.  at  Totoskey  Cr., 
running  for  breadth  W.N.W.  &c.  to  a 
branch  dividing  this  from  land  of  the 
Indians  Sec.  &  200  acs.  lieing  at 
Totoskey  Cr.  beg.  on  a  point  at  a  gutt 
or  small  Cr.  mouth,  running  for  breadth 
parallel  with  the  Cr.  &.  &c.  by  Indian 
feilds.  W.  N.  W.  &c.  200  acs.'  granted 
him  23  Nov.  1657  &  200  acs.  granted 
Lennord  Jones  23  Nov.  1657  &  assigned 
to  him. 

PETER  FORD  &  EWARD  (Edward), 
RACLE  (Rackley),  640  acs.  New  Kent 
Co.,  18  May  1663,  p.  344,   (354).    N. 


506 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


side  of  Mattapony  Riv.,  upon  Timber 
branch  of  Draggon  Sw.  beg.  near  the 
head  of  same,  running  S.E.E.  &c.  over 
Chespaiack  path  &c.  Trans,  of  13  pers: 
Mary  Yeomans,  John  Span,  Edw.  Mar- 
low,  Jno.  Crantle,  Wm.  Hawlet,  Wm. 
Johnson,  Fra.  Cotten,  Jaco  Labour,  Wm. 
Frich,  Jane  Sampson,  Tho.  Walker. 

JOHN  PIGG,  365  acs.  Rappa.  Co., 
11  Mar.  1662,  p.  344,  (355).  In  a 
fork  of  Pianketanke  Sw.  some  4  mi. 
from  Rappa.  Riv.,  adj.  land  of  Capt. 
Wm.  Claiborne  called  Bestland.  Trans. 
of  8  pers:  Eliz.  Langfree,  Jno.  Greene, 
Dan.  Clemens,  Wm.  Rivers,  Gill  De 
Leere,  Fra.  Potter,  Wm.  Parsons,  Margt. 
Steele. 

WM.  PEIRCE,  1200  acs.  N'umber- 
land  Co.,  31  Dec.  1662,  p.  344,  (356). 
250  acs.  on  E.most  side  of  Nomeny 
Riv.  opposite  land  of  Mr.  Lewis  Bur- 
well,  beg.  at  a  swamp  dividing  this  & 
land  of  Gabriell  Odier  &c.  600  acs. 
beg.  where  the  former  land  ends  upon  a 
br.  of  Nomeny  Riv.  opposite  to  Mr. 
Rosiers  land  running  W.  &c.  &  350 
acs.  beg.  betwixt  land  of  sd.  Odier  & 
this  land,  running  S.  &c.  Granted  to 
John  Woodby  12  Oct.  1653  &  renewed 
in  name  of  sd.  Peirce. 

LUKE  BULLINGTON  &  JAMES 
TUNE,  386  A.  2  R.  &  20  P.  "to  which 
since  added  270  acs.  (in  the  County  of 
Rappahanocke  at  the  head  of  Farnham 
Creeke")  lieing  between  this  &  land  of 
Ro.  Bedwell,  the  bounds  of  which 
joyntly  are:  beg.  at  cor.  tree  of  Robt. 
Bayly  &  on  the  land  of  John  Williams, 
running  S.  &c.  neere  branches  of  Totos- 
key  Cr.  &c.  18  Nov.  1663,  p.  345, 
(357).  Trans,  of  14  pers:  Jno  Searle, 
Wm.  Partin,  Jno.  Young,  Fra.  Clay, 
Wm.  Wroth,  Mary  Shell,  Jno.  Tune, 
Cornelious  Young,  James  Short,  Tho. 
Ceely,  Jno.  Mount,  Mary  Hartwell,  Sam. 
Cornix,  Jane  Fisher. 

MAJOR  DAVID  CANT,  100  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  13  Oct.  1663,  p.  345, 
(357) .  Upon  the  head  of  Nimcocke  Cr. 
about  V/z  mi.  from  the  water,  beg.  at 
tree  of  Mr.  Potter  standing  by  Matta- 
pony path   side,   running  N.   E.  &c.   to 


land  of  Abraham  Moone  &c.    Trans,  of 
2  pers:    Tobias  Ceely,  Tho.  Boone. 

WM.  JONES,  353  acs.  New  Kent 
Co.,  Stratton  Parish,  1  Jan.  1663,  p.  345, 
(358).  Beg.  on  N.W.  side  of  Arrakeco 
Sw.,  joyning  land  of  Leanord  Chamber- 
line,  running  N.W.  &c.  Trans,  of  7 
pers:  Edw.  Mathews,  Tho.  Jones,  Ed. 
Morland,  Wm.  Anderson,  Jno.  Ellies, 
Jno.  Thompson,  Tho.  Langley. 

WM.  CRUMPE  (Crump),  300  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  16  Feb.  1663,  p.  346, 
(359).  N.  side  of  the  E.  branch  of 
Coratoman  Riv.,  beg.  on  E.most  side  of 
a  small  creek  of  same  dividing  this  & 
land  of  Elias  Edmonds.  Trans,  of  6 
pers:  Tho.  Wood,  Wm.  Purton,  Mary 
Badg,  Jno.  Fawden,  Sarah  Johnson,  Tho. 
Ward. 

HENRY  SOANES  &  JOHN  LING, 
600  acs.  James  City  Co.,  18  Mar.  1663, 
p.  346,  (359).  N.E.  side  of  Chick- 
hominy  Riv.  &  on  S.W.  side  of  Tyas- 
cunn  main  Sw.,  bounding  N.W.  on 
John  Lings  devdt.,  N.E.  on  sd.  swamp, 
S.E.  on  Hickory  Quarter  land  &  S.W. 
on  Mr.  Henry  Soanes  devdt.  purchased 
of  Alex.  Shephard.  Trans,  of  12  pers: 
Tho.  Morgan,  Jno.  Bell,  Robt.  Man- 
nings, Jno.  Slaughter,  Martin  Coale, 
Jno.  Tompson,  Tho.  Langley,  Wm. 
Linsey,  Ann  Thomas,  Ann  Peeter,  Ja. 
Hart,  Jno.  Marlow. 

FRANCES  PRICHARD,  700  acs.  on 
N.  side  of  Lancaster  Co.,  29  Oct.  1663, 
p.  346,  (360).  Running  to  a  main  br. 
of  Curratoman  Riv.,  thence  to  a  pehick- 
ery  which  was  formerly  a  corner  tree  of 
one  Dennis  Hackers.  Trans,  of  14  pers: 
Fra.  Weekes,  twice, ;  Sam.  Weekes,  Ann 
Barlow,  Anth.  Reily,  Jno.  Hunt,  Peter 
Smith,  Sam.  Hardacur,  Eliz.  Browne, 
Alice  Hollick,  Wm.  Ran,  Jno.  Marshall, 
Wm.  Barbery,  Lea.  Yeo. 

STEPHEN  TARLTON,  394  acs.  2  R. 
New  Kent  Co.,  30  Aug.  1664,  p.  346, 
(360).  N.  side  main  br.  of  black  water 
Cr.,  beg.  neer  the  run  of  sd.  branch, 
N.W.  by  N.  to  a  hickory  dividing  this 
from  land  of  Peter  Adams  &c.  Due  by 
purchase  from  Henry  Pateman  dated  19 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


507 


Nov.  1663,  who  purchased  of  Wm. 
Pullam  out  of  a  patent  of  1000  acs. 
dated  20  Jan.  1657. 

JOHN  HUDNALL,  500  acs.  N'um- 
berland  Co.,  4  Mar.  1662,  p.  347, 
(361).  N.  side  of  Gr.  Wiccocomoco 
Riv.,  being  part  of  a  devdt.  of  land 
granted  to  Tho.  Saffall  1  June  1654; 
upon  resurvey  beg.  at  the  mouth  of  a 
small  cr.  formerly  styled  St.  Stephens 
Cr.,  which  divides  this  from  350  acs. 
being  the  residue  of  the  sd.  former 
patent,  "of  which  John  Wood  hath  the 
fee  Simple,"  running  E.S.E.  to  Saffalls 
Cr.  which  divides  this  from  land  of 
Math.  Wilcocks  &c.  Assigned  by  sd 
Saffall. 

THO.  GREENE,  400  acs.  Low.  Norf. 
Co.,  18  Mar.  1663,  p.  347,  (362).  S. 
side  of  the  W.  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv., 
between  land  of  Capt.  John  Sibbs  &  Mr. 
Cornelious  Loyd.  Granted  to  Edward 
Loyd,  who  assigned  to  Richard  Owens 
&  by  him  assigned  to  sd.  Greene. 

ARTHUR  UPSHOTT,  2000  acs.  in 
Matchapungo  Neck,  Accomack  Co.,  29 
Sept.  1664,  p.  348,  (362).  Bet.  the  sea 
on  the  S.  side  &  sd.  neck  on  the  N.W. 
side  beg.  at  the  S.  point  or  bottom  of 
the  Neck,  running  thence  N.E.  towards 
Matchepungo  unto  N.E.  side  of  Ann 
Dimons  (?)  feild  &c.  including  all  the 
feme  &  Pastoridge  Marsh.  Granted  to 
Lt.  Col.  Kendall  29  May  1661  &  as- 
signed to  sd.  Upshott. 

JOHN  LEVISTON,  453  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  30  Aug.  1664,  p.  348,  (363). 
N.W.  side  of  Poropotanke  Cr.,  adj.  John 
Thomas'  land,  running  S.W.  by  S.  &c. 
to  Timothy  Landells  land,  thence  W.  by 
N.  &c.  400  acs.  granted  him  the  16 
Dec.  1653  &  53  acs.  for  trans,  of  2 
pers:    Joane  Browne,  Henry  Pratt. 

THOMAS  CARTWRIGHT,  300  acs. 
neere  the  E.  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  beg. 
at  a  red  oak  double  markt,  being  one  of 
Jno.  Porters  trees  at  the  miles  end  neere 
the  main  swamp,  running  W.  by  S.  by 
sd.  Porter  &  Humph.  Belts  miles  end 
&c.  21  1664,  p.  348,  (363).  Re- 
newal of  patent  dated  1  Nov.  1652. 


GEO.  BAYLY,  50  acs.  James  City 
Co.,  12  Mar.  1662,  p.  348,  (364).  Run- 
ning from  Poetan  Bridge  along  Walter 
Coopers  trees  E.S.E.  &c.  to  the  back 
river  Cr.  &c.  Granted  to  Geo.  Gilbert 
29  Sept.  1643  &  afterwards  became  due 
to  Sir  Wm.  Berkeley,  Knight,  &  by  him 
assigned  to  sd.  Bayly. 

MR.  JOHN  BREWER,  300  acs.  in 
Stanly  hundred,  vizt:  180  acs.  between 
the  miles  end  of  the  land  of  sd.  Brewer 
&  James  River,  &  120  acs.  of  marsh 
land  bet.  sd.  Brewer  &  Warwick  Riv. 
18  Mar.  1663,  p.  349,  (364).  Granted 
to  George  Lobb  12  Mar.  1653  &  as- 
signed to  sd.  Brewer. 

WM.  HITCHMAN,  1000  acs.  more 
or  less,  James  City  Co.,  18  Dec.  1663, 
p.  349,  (365).  Nly.  side  of  the  head 
of  Chickahomany  Riv.,  Nly.  on  Charles 
Freeman,  Ely.  on  Wm.  Wigg,  S.W.  on 
Mr.  Goug  (?),  &  Wly.  on  Mr.  Thomas 
Marston.  Trans,  of  20  pers:  Mary 
Gardner,  Maudlin  Irish,  Francis  Smith, 
Eliz.  Smith,  Mary  Curly  (or  Curby), 
Elinor  Palmer,  jane  Fowby,  Sibilla 
Darby,  Margtt.  Powell,  Jno.  Fulcher, 
Robt.  Atkins.  Rice  Rogers,  Tho.  Fufflett, 
Jno.  Rudds,  Jno.  Hoyles,  Robt.  Wittaker, 
Robt.  Porter,  Tno.  Watley,  Samll.  Jor- 
dan, Stephen  Cowgell. 

THOMAS  WILLIS,  450  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co.,  5  Feb.  1663,  p.  349,  (365). 
S.E.  &  E.  on  land  of  the  Ladv  Chechlv, 
N.  upon  land  of  Bertrum  Obert,  W. 
upon  the  hills.  S.  upon  land  of  Arthur 
Donn  (?),  assignee  of  Abram  Moone. 
Renewal  of  patent  dated  20  Aug.  1655. 

TOHN  PORTER,  Sr.,  300  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  in  Lvn  haven  parish,  16  Mar. 
1663,  p.  349,  (365).  S.  side  of  the  E. 
branch,  beg.  at  cor.  of  land  he  now 
seates,  running  E.  by  N.  to  Jno.  Carra- 
wayes  land,  thence  S.  by  E.  &c.  Renewal 
of  patent  dated  8  June  1653. 

RICHARD  HILL,  200  acs.  Accomack 
Co.,  23  Feb.  1663,  p.  350,  (366).  In 
the  woods  neere  the  head  of  Occahan- 
nock  Cr.  adj.  a  great  swamp  separating 
this  from  land  of  Wm.  Tavlor.  Trans. 
of  4  pers:    George  Glascocke,  Thomas 


508 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Cambell,   Jno.    Stenninns    (?),    Andrew 
Reynolds. 

HERCULES  FLOOD,  72  A  3  R.  24 
P.,  on  S.  side  of  Appomattox  River,  beg. 
nigh  the  line  of  Samuel  Woodward, 
running  S.S.  E.  56  perch,  thence  E.  186 
per.  to  Jno.  Sturdivant  his  lyne  which 
runneth  to  the  head  of  the  Citty  Cr., 
then  N.W.  &  by  N.  96  per.,  then  W. 
&  by  S.  178  per.  to  beg.  29  Nov.  1663, 
p.    350,    (366).    Trans,    of   2   Negroes. 

JACOB  SMITH,  300  acs.  Low.  Norf. 
Co.,  25  May  1663,  p.  350,  (367). 
Bounded  with  a  br.  of  Smiths  Cr.  that 
parts  it  from  land  of  Xtopher.  Wil- 
liams, formerly  the  land  of  Thomas 
Sayer,  at  the  head  of  the  S.  branch  &c. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  James  Wilson,  Sr., 
Johanna  Ives,  James  Wilson,  Jr.,  Ellen 
his  wife,  Ann  Wilson,  Arthur  Isam  ( ? ) . 

JOHN  TAYLOR,  50  acs.  Yorke  Co., 
18  Nov.  1663,  p.  351,  (367).  On  N. 
side  of  the  Mill  Swamp  beg.  on  a  small 
run  &c.    Trans,  of  1  per.* 

MR.  EDWARD  WADE  (Waad), 
350  acs.,  being  part  of  a  devdt.  of  2000 
acs.  belonging  to  Mr.  Francis  Burwell, 
beg.  at  a  tree  adj.  land  of  John  Johnson 
&  Adam  Miles,  running  S.W.  by  S.  &c. 
Due  by  assignment  from  Burwell.  18 
Mar.  1662,  p.  351,   (368). 

RICHARD  MAJOR,  1350  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  9  Feb.  1663,  p.  351,  (368). 
N.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.,  400  acs.  N.W. 
by  N.  upon  Perrings  Cr.  which  divides 
this  &  land  of  Ashwell  Batton,  N.E.  & 
E.  upon  land  of  Tho.  Bell  &  S.E.  & 
S.W.  upon  the  river;  600  acs.  upon  the 
head  of  another  devdt.  of  sd.  Major, 
N.W.  with  a  swamp  upon  the  head  of 
Perrins  Cr.  &c.  extending  S.E.  near  a 
br.  of  Poropotancke  Cr.,  S.W.  upon 
land  of  Jno.  Major  &  from  thence  N.W. 
upon  sd.  swamp  upon  the  head  of  sd. 
Cr.,  dividing  this  &  land  of  James  Hold- 
ing; 350  acs.  on  E.  side  of  Sympsons 
Sw.,  beg.  at  a  corner  of  same,  running 
S.  by  E.  &c.  Renewal  of  patent  dated 
last  of  June  1656. 

ROBT.  COLEMAN,  110  acs.  Gloster 
Co..  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  352,   (369).    On 


main  branch  of  Burts  Cr.,  beg.  at  Danll. 
Clarkes  land,  running  N.W.  by  N.  &c. 
to  Richard  Fosters  land,  then  N.  &c.  to 
another  devdt.  of  his  own  &c.  Trans, 
of  3  pers:  Gabriell  Bradmeed,  Tho. 
Follit,  Ann  Madden. 

JOHN  LEWIS,  137  acs.  Warwick 
Co.,  10  Dec.  1663,  p.  352,  (370).  Beg. 
at  Cuckold  quarter,  Sly.  on  land  of  Col. 
Mathews,  running  N.E.  on  main  br.  of 
sd.  quarter,  Ely.  towards  land  of  Jno. 
Hayward  &  Wly.  on  land  of  Col.  Cary. 
Trans,  of  3  pers:  Tho.  Hayles,  George 
Haynes,  Jno.  Robbinson. 

GEORGE  BLOW,  600  acs.  Surry  Co., 
3  Aug.  1663,  p.  352,  (370).  Beg.  on 
S.  most  side  of  the  bridge  swamp  nigh 
unto  the  bridge  that  leads  to  Major 
Sheppards  plantation,  thence  S.  by  W. 
&c.  Trans,  of  12  pers:  Garratt  Hewes, 
Wm.  Hedge,  Eliz.  James,  Wm.  Taylor, 
Edwd.  Ingleton,  Marm.  Kittson,  Edw. 
Hunt,  Mary  Gibson,  Susan  Luggett, 
Robt.  Ingersell,  Sarah  Inkersell,  Wm. 
Hinderson. 

RALPH  AMBREY  (Ambery),  183 
acs.  in  Gloster  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p. 
353,  (371).  On  branches  of  Poropo- 
tancke Sw.,  beg.  at  the  mouth  of  a  little 
branch  on  the  N.  side  of  Coles  br.,  run- 
ning N.E.  by  E.  &c.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
Wm.  Tassy,  Gabriell  Michaell,  George 
Webb,  Samuell  Cunny. 

ROBERT  BALIS  (Ballis),  153  acs. 
on  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  betwixt 
Totoskey  &  the  head  of  Richards  his 
Cr.,  Rappa.  Co.,  3  Dec.  1663,  p.  353, 
(371).  Beg.  from  a  stump  in  an  Indian 
feild,  being  the  beg.  corner  land  marke 
of  land  belonging  to  Thomas  Robyson 
&c.  running  to  land  of  Jno.  Canida. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  James  Wilkeson, 
Antho.  Browne,  Ann  Wms.  (Williams), 
Jno.  Baker. 

GEORGE  PLEY,  225  acs.  Rappa.  Co., 
upon  Occupason  Cr.,  20  Feb.  1662,  p. 
353,  (372).  Beg.  by  the  Cr.  side,  run- 
ning S.E.  by  S.  &c.  to  land  of  Wm. 
Hall,  thence  S.W.  by  W.  &c.  Said  land 
purchased  of  Henry  Berry. 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


509 


JAMES  POPE,  1000  acs.  W'moreland 
Co.,  28  Jan.  1662,  p.  354,  (373).  Near 
a  creek  commonly  called  And.  Iviunrows 
Cr.  at  Appomattock,  bounding  E.N.E. 
upon  land  of  Andrew  Munroe,  running 
from  his  Wwd.  corner  tree  W.N.W. 
from  the  run  &c.  "including  the  tymber 
Land  white  oakes  and  others  and  some 
plantable  good  Land"  &c.  Trans,  of  20 
pers:  Hen.  Dallison,  Jno.  Fleet,,  Robt. 
Cooke,  Sarah  Wright,  Jno.  Erlby,  Rich. 
Johnson,  Tho.  Yarnell,  Wm.  Mathews, 
Tho.  Wright,  Eliz.  Wright,  Tho. 
Wright,  Wm.  Frissell,  Eliz.  Nicholls, 
Susan  Nicholls,  Ann  Michell,  Wm. 
Follow,  Samll.  Share,  Tho.  Tooke,  Jno. 
Lover,  Jno.  Sampson. 

ALEX.  TIRE  &  JAMES  READ,  313 
acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p. 
354,  (373).  Beg.  in  Warreny  lyne,  run- 
ning N.E.  &c.  to  near  Rockahoe  path, 
thence  along  lyne  dividing  this  from 
Mr.  Burwells  land  S.W.  &c.  near  Edwd. 
Reeads  Spring,  thence  N.W.  by  N.  &c. 
Due  by  purchase  from  Wm.  Agakee  & 
Jno.  Jopson,  who  purchased  it  of  Fran. 
Burwell,  to  whom  it  was  granted  in  1655. 

MR.  JOHN  PATE,  1000  acs.  in 
Patomeke  freshes,  31  Dec.  1662,  p.  354, 
(374).  500  acs.  part  thereof  about 
Pascataway,  bounding  upon  land  of  Ed- 
ward Wms.  (Williams),  extending  up 
the  river  N.E.  &c.  500  acs.  on  the 
Nwd.  of  the  Cr.  above  Pascattaway,  ex- 
tending along  the  river  N.  by  E.  &c. 
Granted  to  Edward  Williams,  Sr.  & 
Ewd.  Williams,  Jr.,  by  two  patents  dated 
5  June  1658,  by  them  deserted  & 
granted  to  sd.  Pate  by  order  of  the 
Genrll.  Court  27  Sept.  1661  &  due  for 
trans,  of  20  pers:  Tho.  Crone,  Jno. 
Conier,  Tho.  Fisher,  Jno.  Creed,  Danll. 
Jones,  Rich.  White,  Simon  Stubb,  Jno. 
King,  Mary  Bates,  Eliz.  White,  Geo. 
Staines,  Walter  Brad  (or  Brae),  Wm. 
Farmer,  Susan  Time,  Mary  Grone, 
Timothy  Fines,  Anth.  West,  Wm.  Crone, 
Ralph  Lenor,  Anth.  Jones. 

HENRY  BRADLY,  450  acs.  Nanci- 
mond  Co.,  6  Mar.  1662,  p.  355,  (375). 
On  E.  side  of  the  N.W.  branch  of 
Nancimond  Riv.,  being  part  of  an  In- 
dian Towne,  beg.  by  the  branch  side  & 


running  for  length  S.W.  by  W.  &c. 
Granted  to  James  Arthur  &  John  Bran- 
don 24  Nov.  1654  &  by  the  latter  sold 
to  sd.  Bradly. 

SAME.  100  acs.  in  same  county,  6 
Mar.  1662,  p.  355,  (376).  Opposite  to 
an  Indian  Towne.  Granted  &c.  as 
above. 

RICHD.    LITTLEPAGE    &    JAMES 

TURNER,  400  acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  14 
Mar.  1663/4,  p.  355,  (376).  Upon  S. 
side  of  the  freshes  of  Pomunkey  Riv., 
beg.  at  a  cor.  hickory  belonging  to  land 
of  Capt.  Anthony  Langstone  in  the  main 
swamp  of  Tottopottomoyes  Cr.  &c. 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  Ellin  Ward,  Judith 
Turner,  Jno.  Dike,  Grace  Hues,  Ann 
Browne,  Gregory  Perry,  Wm.  Hard, 
Mary  Jones. 

MR.  JOHN  PATE,  200  acs.  in  Glos- 
ter  Co.,  on  N.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.  &  E. 
side  of  Porototanke  Cr.,  31  Dec.  1662, 
p.  355,  (377).  Bounding  Wly.  on  land 
formerly  granted  to  Mr.  Jernew,  Sly.  on 
Wm.  Ginseys  land  &  Nly.  on  his  own 
land.  Granted  to  Michaell  Grafton  2 
Nov.  1658,  by  him  deserted,  &  granted 
sd.  Pate  by  order  of  court  &  due  for 
trans,  of  4  pers:  Jno.  Mobbs,  Geo. 
Ceely,  Henry  Chittwood,  Fra.  Michaell. 

PETER  HULL,  400  acs.  Isle  of  Wight 
Co.,  17  Dec.  1663,  p.  p.  356,  (377). 
On  the  W.  side  of  the  first  branch  of 
the  black  water,  beg.  at  the  swamp  side 
which  line  parts  this  &  land  of  George 
Hardies  &  Tho.  Womball,  running  N. 
&c.  Part  of  a  patent  of  1100  acs. 
granted  sd.  Hull,  Geo.  Hardy  &  Tho. 
Womball,  dated  15  July  1651. 

EDWARD  PITTA  WAY,  250  acs.  in 
Surrey  Co.,  Southwarke  Parish,  18  Mar. 
1662,  p.  356,  (378).  Betwixt  the  two 
main  branches  of  Crouches  Cr.  Sold  to 
sd.  Pittaway  by  Richard  Hart  &  further 
due  for  trans,  of  5  pers:  Wm.  Andrews, 
Alex.  Browne,  Anth.  Wmson  (William- 
son), Robt.  Brookes,  Tho.  Attkins. 

RICHARD  JONES,  750  acs.  in  the 
Southerne  Cr.,  a  br.  of  the  S.  br.  of 
Eliz.  River,  running  S.  by  E.  &c.  by  the 


510 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Poquoson  side,  thence  W.  N.  W.  &c  3 
Apr.  1663,  p.  356,  (378).  350  acs.  part 
granted  to  Peter  Sexton,  the  last  of 
March  1653  &  assigned  to  sd.  Jones; 
200  acs.  granted  to  Robt.  Eyre  22  May 
1642  &  by  him  assigned  to  Wm.  Pell, 
who  assigned  to  sd.  Jones;  &  200  acs. 
due  for  trans,  of  4  pers:  Tho.  Taylour, 
Mary  Jones,  Edw.  Partin,  Tho.  Spann. 

JAMES  TURNER  &  RICHARD  LIT- 
TLEPAGE,  1143  acs.  New  Kent  Co., 
24  Mar.  1663,  p.  357,  (379).  Upon  S. 
side  the  freshes  of  Pamonkey  Riv.,  be- 
tween an  ancient  devdt.  of  sd.  Turner 
&  Capt.  Anth.  Langstones  path,  White- 
ings  Sw.  &  Matterdam  Cr;  beg.  by  sd. 
Swamp  on  the  S.W.  of  sd.  path,  run- 
ning up  the  swamp  W.  by  S.  &c.  Trans, 
of  23  pers:  Jno.  Bradly,  Jno.  Harelin 
(?),  Arth.  Crompton,  Luke  Harper, 
Jane  Langly,  Sarah  Langley,  Agnes 
Langly,  Ralph  Langly,  Jr.,  Joseph  Lang- 
ley,  Jane  Langley,  Jno.  Dicke,  Wm. 
Walker,  Humph.  Williams,  James 
SherifFe,  Geo.  Jones,  Ann  Browne,  Geo. 
Perry,  Wm.  Ward,  Mary  Jones,  Robt. 
Harris,  Thomas  Hutchinson,  Rich.  Lit- 
tlepage  5  times,  Ralph  Ranley  (this,  no 
doubt,  should  be  Langley) . 

MATHEW  RHODAM,  393  acs. 
N'umberland  Co.,  8  June  1664,  p.  357, 
(380).  100  acs.  Nly.  upon  Hugh  Lees 
land.  Sly.  upon  an  old  Indian  feild  & 
Wly.  upon  land  of  James  Clayton;  288 
acs.  S.E.  upon  the  head  of  a  swamp  of 
Kings  Cr.,  N.E.  toward  land  of  Col. 
John  Matrom;  &  5  acs.  at  the  head  of 
the  aforesd.  land  &  betwixt  land  of 
Capt.  Rogers  called  Col.  Matroms  land 
&  land  of  Col.  Jno.  Trussell.  Granted 
to  Hugh  Lee  5  Apr.  1660  &  assigned 
to  sd.  Rhodam. 

JOHN  STAKES  &  WM.  SMITH,  189 

acs.  N'umberland  Co.,  2  Tune  1664,  p. 
357,  (380).  Nly.  upon  Hollis  Cr.,  Ely. 
upon  land  of  John  Tomkinson  &  Wly. 
upon  land  of  Tohn  Hallows.  Granted  to 
Tho.  Blagg  15  Sept.  1651,  by  him  as- 
signed to  John  Knott,  who  assigned  to 
Tohn  Walton,  who  assigned  to  John 
Dinely  &  by  him  assigned  to  sd.  Wal- 
ton, who  assigned  to  Tho.  Frissell  &  by 
him  assigned  to  the  abovenamed. 


ALEXANDER  WALKER  &  RICE 
JONES,  94  acs.  17  chs.  in  Yorke  Co., 
18  Mar.  1662,  p.  358,  (381).  Beg.  in 
the  forke  of  the  main  br.  of  the  Mill 
Swamp,  S.E.  by  S.  to  the  mouth  of  an- 
other br.  on  the  S.W.  side  of  the  main 
branch,  up  the  same  W.  by  S.  &c.  to 
cornet  of  Daniell  Wilds  land  &c.  Due 
by  conveyance  from  Tho.  Smith,  being 
part  of  a  grand  patent  to  Major  Joseph 
Croshaw  for  700  acs.  dated  2  Mar.  1653. 

ROBERT  PEAKE,  1600  acs.  James 
City  Co.,  26  May  1663,  p.  358,  (382). 
At  the  head  of  Chickhomeny  Riv.,  beg. 
on  Rich.  Williams  line,  S.E.  &c.  to  head 
of  Lees  Run,  down  the  same  to  the 
head  of  Wm.  Frys  land,  thence  to  Rich- 
ard Williams  cor.  tree  to  beg.  Trans, 
of  32  pers:  Edw.  Wallis,  Mary  Young, 
Tho.  Carter,  Wm.  Far,  Jno.  Hart,  Samll. 
Waller,  Edward  Harlow,  James  Safeild, 
Anth.  Horton,  Jacob  Lagon,  Charles 
Ward,  Wm.  Snallop,  Emll.  Jones, 
Symon  Irons,  Tho.  Ward,  Jno.  Marlow, 
Wm.  Fuell,  Samll.  Cornix,  James  Lan- 
ton,  Robt.  Yeoe,  Martin  Moone,  Wm. 
Fuell,  Tho.  Salton,  Wm.  Hunt,  James 
Young,  Tho.  Cant,  Arth.  Sherlow,  Mary 
Fowke,  Wm.  Harper,  Tho.  Shaw,  Jane 
Marke,  Fra.  Fleet,  Edw.  Sheerman,  Sam. 
Cornix,  Edward  Jones,  Tho.  Carpenter, 
Fardinando  Floyd. 

THO.  SPERY,  100  acs.  Eiiz.  City  Co., 
30  Aug.  1664,  p.  358,  (382).  Sly.  up- 
on the  head  of  the  long  ponds.  Part 
of  200  acs.  granted  to  Symon  Thorow- 
good  -8  Apr.  1653  &  assigned  to  sd. 
Spery. 

WILLIAM  WHITE,  172  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  on  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
18  Tan.  1663,  p.  359,  (383).  Beg.  at 
the  head  of  Parting  Cr.  on  the  W.  side, 
running  W.N.W.  alongst  land  of  John 
Merriman,  thence  N.E.  &c.  along  part 
of  Tho.  Hewards  land  which  now  be- 
longs to  Charles  King  Orphant.  Part  of 
this  land  surveyed  for  Wm.  Wroughton 
&  assigned  to  sd.  White  &  26  acs.  resi- 
due for  trans,  of  Tho.  Young. 

NEALE  PETERSON,  220  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  2  Dec.  1663,  P.  359,  (383).  To- 
wards  the  head   of   a  br.   that   runneth 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


511 


into  Ralphs  Cr.  issuing  from  Pascatti- 
con,  nigh  adj.  to  the  Swd.  line  "of 
Killmans  outward  or  Eastward  Devi- 
dent,"  thence  S.  &c.  to  Burchen  br., 
down  the  same  &c.  to  the  Greene  Sw. 
Trans,  of  5  pers:  Tho.  Corben,  Jno. 
Edlington,  Wm.  Legg,  Files  Croffts, 
Barnaby  Wills. 

LT.  COL.  WM.  HOCKADAY,  5470 
acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  3  June  1663,  p. 
359,  (384).  3550  acs.  on  S.  side  of 
Yorke  Riv.,  (the  devdt.  he  is  now 
seated  on)  bounded  on  N.  by  N.E.  with 
the  main  river,  S.E.  with  Ware  Cr.  to 
the  mouth  of  the  third  branch  &c.  to 
Indian  feild  path,  thence  N.W.  by  N. 
line  to  Wareny  Cr.  &c,  1920  acs.  on  S. 
side  sd.  Riv.  &c.  3350  acs.  granted  him 
1  Aug.  1655  &  1920  acs.  15  Apr.  1661, 
1280  acs.  of  sd.  1920  acs.  granted  to 
Francis  Kirkman  by  order  of  the  Gen. 
Ct.  &  by  him  assigned  to  sd.  Hockaday. 

ANDREW  ROBINSON  &  PELEG 
DUNSTAND,  30  acs.  more  or  less, 
Surry  Co.,  20  July  1663,  p.  360,  (386). 
Nly.  from  Major  Sheppards  plantation 
about  3  mi.,  being  on  a  br.  of  the  black 
water,  from  the  Indian  path  N.W.  &c. 
Trans,  of  7  pers:  Wm.  Easter,  Jno. 
Rowell,  Jno.  Smith,  Sarah  Adimore, 
Danll.  Prichard,  Samll.  Elery,  Hen. 
Garrard. 

EDMOND  PALMER,  900  acs.  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  21  June  1664,  p.  360, 
(386).  Beg.  at  his  own  cor.  tree  which 
parts  his  from  land  of  Anthony  Mathews, 
running  W.  by  N.  &c.  to  a  line  of  trees 
marked  for  a  path,  by  the  same  N.E. 
by  N.  &c.  700  acs.  by  former  patent 
(no  date)  &  200  acs.  for  trans,  of  4 
pers:  Sebastian  Nero  (a  Negro  ?),  Jno. 
Prest,  Ann  Badlam,  Richd.  Harvy. 

MARY  CURRY,  daughter  to  Macum 
(?)  Curry,  dec'd.,  250  acs.,  being  one- 
half  of  a  parcel  of  land  granted  sd. 
Curry  &  Jno.  Rutherford,  Chas.  City 
Co..  5  Mar.  1663,  p.  360,  (387).  Beg. 
on  W.most  side  of  a  swamp  that  parts 
Chas.  City  Co.  &  Surry  Co.,  opposite  to 
Tho.  Feltons  plantation,  thence  N.W. 
by  W.  &c.  Granted  to  Wm.  Lee  6  Feb. 
1654  &  sold  to  sd.  Currv  as  by  patent 
17  Mar.  1659  &  now  renewed. 


NICHOLAS  SABRELL,  200  acs.  nere 
the  Middle  plantation,  Yorke  Co.,  10 
Feb.  1663,  p.  361,  (387).  Nly.  upon 
land  of  Richd.  Davis  &  Wm.  Watts,  S. 
upon  land  of  Mr.  Jno.  Broach,  W.  upon 
the  greate  swamp  &  E.  upon  the  Maiden 
Sw.  150  acs.  granted  sd.  Sabrell  30 
July  1638  (or  1658)  &  50  acs.  adj.  by 
patent  dated  30  Jan.  1652. 

NICHOLAS  CUMMINGS  (Com- 
ings), sonn  of  Nicholas  Cummings,  400 
acs.  Chas.  River  Co.,  25  Apr.  1663,  p. 
361,  (388).  Beg.  near  the  head  of 
Uties  Cr.,  running  N.  by  W.  &c.  unto 
the  Horse  path  &c.  200  acs.  granted  sd. 
Cummings  1  Sept.  1659  &  200  acs. 
granted  to  Robt.  Pittawy  (Pitway)  24 
Feb.  1638,  by  him  sold  to  Jno.  Mendam, 
who  assigned  to  sd.  Cummings. 

THOMAS  ERVIN,  230  acs.,  beg. 
where  land  of  Jno.  Jennings  endeth  by 
or  nigh  Petetick  Cr.  &c,  running  to  land 
of  Jno.  Paine.  20  Feb.  1662,  p.  361, 
(389).  Part  of  600  acs.  granted  to  Mr. 
Thomas  Lucas  &  part  of  340  acs. 
granted  to  Mr.  Tho.  Hawkins,  &  due 
by  purchase  from  them. 

JOHN  PAINE,  200  acs.  upon  Pepe- 
tick  Cr.,  from  the  place  called  the 
deviding  to  land  of  Thomas  Ervin.  20 
Feb.  1662,  p.  361,  (389).  Part  of 
patent  of  340  acs.  of  Tho.  Hawkins, 
who  sold  to  sd.  Paine. 

RICHARD  PINNER,  500  acs.  Eliz. 
Citty  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  362,  (389). 
150  acs.  between  the  two  main  branches 
of  Chruch  Cr.,  from  Tymber  Neck  Sw. 
along  the  N.most  main  br.  of  sd.  Cr. 
N.E.  &c,  S.E.  parallel  to  the  great 
swamp  &c.  150  acs.  on  the  W.  br.  of 
sd.  River,  beg.  at  miles  end  of  Capt. 
John  Sipley,  running  W.S.W.  &c,  & 
200  acs.  lying  N.  upon  the  mouth  of 
Eliz.  Riv.  &c.  The  first  150  acs. 
granted  sd.  Pinner  the  20  Apr.  1653; 
150  acs.  granted  to  Xtop.  Rivers  11 
Mar.  1653  &  sold  to  sd.  Pinner,  &  200 
acs.  granted  to  Wm.  Ramshaw  1  July 
1635  &  after  severall  sales,  sold  to  sd. 
Pinner. 

MILES  HUGILL,  277  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,   on  N.   side  of  sd.   River,    3   Dec. 


512 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


1663,  p.  362,  (391).  Beg.  on  Nwd. 
side  of  a  main  br.  of  Richards  Cr.  to- 
wards the  head  thereof,  extending  the 
course  S.  &c.  to  his  own  land,  thence 
N.  &c.  to  land  of  James  Samford  & 
with  his  line  S.E.  &c.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
Eliz.  Hix,  Tho.  Evans,  Eliz.  Hobson, 
James  Atkinson,  Finolia  Williams,  Edw. 
Waid. 

NICHOLAS  COBB,  202  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co,  21  Feb.  1663,  p.  363,  (392). 
Beg.  on  Swd.  side  of  Floyds  Cr.  issuing 
out  of  Pagan  Cr.  &c.  to  Galcknie  Sw, 
thence  along  Jno.  Crews  Sw.  &c.  adj. 
Mr.  Nich.  Smith  &c.  &  from  Major  Jno. 
Bond  N.  W.  along  a  path  &c.  Trans, 
of  5  pers:  Susan  Cobb,  Sr,  Mary  Cobb, 
Susan  Cobb,  Jr.,  Jane  Cobb,  Jane 
Howard. 

RICHARD  AYLIFFE,  800  acs. 
N'umberland  Co,  4  Feb.  1662,  p.  363, 
(392).  S.  side  of  Wiccocomoco  Riv.  in 
the  branches  thereof,  running  Wly.  &c. 
to  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  to  the  Swd. 
of  Col.  Lees  horse  path,  thence  Ely.  &c. 
Trans,  of  16  pers:  Jno.  English  4  times, 
Francis,  Ellin  &  Ann,  his  3  wives,  Fra. 
and  Ann  his  2  daughters,  John  Melling- 
ham,  Tristram  Knoles,  Mary  Conway, 
Geo.  Allyson,  Richard  Redding,  Tho. 
Hosman,  Susan  Young. 

THOMAS  DIOS  (Dyos),  500  acs. 
W'moreland  Co,  24  Nov.  1664,  p.  363, 
(393).  S.  side  of  Patomeke  Riv,  butt- 
ing on  the  N.E.  side  &  towards  the  head 
of  Quanticoke  Cr,  beg.  at  the  upper- 
most marsh  of  sd.  Cr,  running  E.N.E. 
&c.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Blanch  Randall, 
Ann  Willis,  Eliz.  Willom,  Jno.  Brookes, 
Joyce  Trace,  Mathew  Heweat  (or 
Haveat),  Wm.  Askin  (or  Atkins), 
Joane  Linsey,  Rich.  Harman,  Eliz. 
Staple. 

ISAAC  WATSON,  &  SAMLL. 
MOTTERSHED,  300  acs.  on  S.  side  of 
Aquia  Riv,  beg.  at  the  head  of  a  seat 
of  land  that  was  formerly  Henry  Hutt- 
mans,  runningly  Nly,  thence  S.W.  upon 
a  run  dividing  this  &  land  of  Wm. 
Grimes.  7  Jan.  1662,  p.  364,  (393). 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Mary  Dorcestor  (?), 
Richard  Owin,  Dunkin  Conerke,  Margt. 
Peirson,   Patrick   Flood,   Sarah   Ocquell. 


THOMAS  DIOS,  1200  acs.  W'more- 
land Co,  15  Apr.  1664,  p.  364,  (394). 
S.  side  of  Patomeck  Riv.  behind  the 
Clifts  of  Curawoman,  beg.  on  the  Ewd. 
side  of  a  great  swamp  &  run  falling 
into  Rappa.  the  head  of  Gr.  Rappa.  Cr. 
opposite  600  acs.  surveyed  for  Mr.  Tho. 
Broughton.  Granted  to  Wm.  Overet 
(or  Everet),  by  him  deserted  &  granted 
sd.  Dios  by  order  of  court  &  due  for 
trans,  of  24  pers:  Wm.  Peirce,  Sarah 
Peirce,  Jno.  Ellyson,  Geo.  Walker,  Ann 
Leviton,  Fra.  Neson,  Wm.  Gilbert, 
Nich.  Short,  Jno.  Worton,  Rich.  Fawd- 
ing,  Mary  Core,  Edm.  Sturman,  Grace 
Hill,  Robt.  Farr,  Jone  East,  Gerrard 
Crosby,  Tho.  Carew,  Mary  Ward,  Jane 
Shaw,  Wm.  Porton,  Jacob  Mallew,  Ed. 
Wills,  Tho.  Turner,  Mary  Seward. 

CAPT.  GEORGE  LOYD,  350  acs. 
James  City  Co,  20  Apr.  1664,  p.  364, 
(395).  Neere  the  head  of  Morgans  Cr, 
bounded  from  his  old  devdt.  along  land 
of  Mr.  George  Lobb,  N.  E.  &c.  to  land 
of  Joseph  Knight  &c.  Granted  to  Wm. 
Morgan  8  June  1652,  by  him  deserted 
&  now  renewed  in  the  name  of  sd.  Loyd 
by  order  of  court  &  due  for  trans,  of  7 
pers:  Jno.  Johnson,  David  Thomas,  Tho. 
Ask,  Nath.  Sutton,  Jno.  Sheeres,  Tho. 
Fitcher,  Jno.  James. 

MICH.  GOODALL,  300  acs.  James 
City  Co,  30  June  1664,  p.  365,  (395). 
E.  side  of  Chickhomeny  Riv,  N.W.  on 
Taylors  Neck,  N.  &  N.E.  on  land  of  the 
relict  of  John  Merriman,  &  the  division 
line  S.E.  on  Phillip  Charles  land.  150 
acs.  purchased  by  sd.  Goodall  of  Henry 
Soanes,  Gent  &  150  acs.  for  trans,  of 
3  pers:  Math.  Munck,  Jane  Newdigate, 
Tho.  Webber. 

WALTER  GRAINGER,  2000  acs.  in 
the  freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv,  beg.  on  S. 
side  of  the  River  about  4  mi.  above 
Nanzimum  Towne  &c.  26  Sept.  1663, 
p.  365,  (396).  Granted  to  Mr.  Thomas 
Purefoy  13  Mar.  1655,  by  him  assigned 
to  Tho.  &  Robt.  Elliot,  sons  of  Anth. 
Ellyott  &  renewed  in  their  names  25 
Nov.  1658,  by  them  deserted  &  granted 
sd.  Grainger  by  order  of  court  dated 
herewith  &  due  for  trans,  of  40  pers: 
20  Negroes;  James  Trew,  Tno.  Jordan, 
Phil.    Wright,    Roger    Phillips,    Jervis 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


513 


Salmon,  Fra.  Plowman,  Fra.  Fisher,  Wm. 
Mead,  Emll.  Umpton,  Sarah  Waite, 
Tho.  Carier,  John  Card,  Step.  Rogers, 
Charles  Smart,  Jno.  Sims,  John  Mahew, 
Rich.  Hollis,  Eliz.  Tatlar,  Tho.  Jones, 
Jno.  Taylor. 

JOHN  LING,  370  acs.  James  City 
Co.,  7  Feb.  1662,  p.  365,  (396).  300 
acs.  on  N.  side  of  Chickhomeny  River, 
beg.  at  the  head  of  Tyascum  neere  the 
great  Indian  feild  nigh  land  of  Margt. 
Barret,  running  E.  by  N.  to  the  main 
Sw.  of  Tyascum  &c,  70  acs.  upon  sd. 
swamp,  N.W.  on  land  of  Tho.  Brookes 
alias  Joseph  Wade  &  S.E.  on  his  own 
land.  300  acs.  by  patent  dated  6  Oct. 
1658  &  70  acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers. 
Note:  The  following  names  appear: 
Wm.  Marmaduke,  Ann  Franks,  Abra. 
Battam,  Mary  Clue,  Wm.  Ward,  Sam. 
Flower,  Wm.  Jarvis.  Marginal  note:  5 
rights  due. 

JNO.  NAS WORTHY  (Naseworthy), 
985  acs.  Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  28  Mar. 
1663,  p.  366,  (397).  Beg.  at  the  mouth 
of  Ragged  Island  Cr.,  running  up  the 
head  of  the  same  thence  through  the 
Marsh  to  the  head  of  Parkers  Cr.,  down 
the  same  to  the  mouth  of  James  Riv., 
down  the  same  to  the  mouth  of  Ragged 
Is.  Cr.  150  acs.  granted  to  Wm.  Ayres 
1  Nov.  1637;  100  acs.  granted  to  Tris- 
triam  Nasworthy  10  Aug.  1642  &  now 
become  due  the  sd.  John;  735  acs.  for 
trans,  of  15  pers:  Wm.  Eaton,  Mary 
Lord,  Sam.  Eller,  Jno.  Card,  Geo.  John, 
Jno.  Calwell,  Sam.  Flower,  Wm.  Wood, 
Jane  Furnis,  Jno.  Marke,  Wm.  Simons, 
Jos.  Moore,  Ed.  Loyd,  Tho.  Cagg,  Wm. 
Simons. 

MR.  HUGH  YEO,  1044  acs.  N'amp- 
ton  Co.,  26  Mar.  1664,  p.  366,  (398). 
644  acs.  on  S.  side  of  Pungotegue  Riv., 
Nly.  upon  land  of  Charles  Scarburgh 
being  400  acs.  purchased  by  sd.  Hugh 
Yeo,  Merchant,  Ely.  on  land  of  Anth. 
Hoskins,  Wly.  part  on  land  of  Jno. 
Robinson  &  part  on  land  of  Nich.  Wad- 
dilow;  400  acs.  at  Pungotegue  Cr., 
bounded  on  W.  by  land  of  Tho.  John- 
son, N.  by  main  creek  of  Pungotegue 
&c.  644  acs.  granted  by  patent  20  Oct. 
1661  to  sd.  Yeo.  &  400  acs.  granted 
Charles  Scarburgh  12  Oct.  1652  &  as- 
signed to  sd.  Yeo  27  Sept.  1653. 


MR.  JOHN  BEACHAMP  &  MR. 
RICHARD  COCKE,  Sr.,  2994  A.  2  R. 
35  P.  2093  acs.  part  on  S.  side  of 
Chickahomeny  Sw.,  running  S.  &c.  to  a 
run  called  Col.  Owins  Quarter,  W.  by 
S.  to  a  run  above  the  Pamunkey  path 
&c.  over  the  run  called  Cow  taile  Quar- 
ter &c.  901  acs.  1  rod  in  Henrico  Co. 
on  N.  side  of  James  Riv.  knowne  by 
the  name  of  the  forke  of  the  Cattaile 
Run  &  bounded  N.  &  by  W.  to  the 
head  of  land  formerly  surveyed  for  Mr. 
Rich.  Cock,  Sr.,  along  his  line  over  the 
Western  br.  W.S.W.  &c.  to  line  of  Mr. 
Greene  &c.  21  June  1664,  p.  367, 
(399).  Trans,  of  60  pers:  Corn. 
Canida,  Neale  White,  Lucy  Davis, 
David  Gload,  Wm.  Shewmaker,  Robt. 
Browne,  Mary  Deth  Langford,  John 
Elkes,  Jno.  Gunter,  Jno.  Beachamp,  Wm. 
Andrews,  Henry  Bullocke,  Humph. 
Miles  (or  Mills),  Rich.  Hayward,  Jno. 
Parke,  Wm.  Partridge,  Eliz.  Bridges, 
Rabecca    Moore,     Robt.     Sherly,     Rich. 

Dennis,     Henry    ,     Jno.     Sanders, 

Timothy  Isar,  Robt.  Marsh,  Wm.  Ram- 
sey, Samll.  Knibb,  Geo.  Price,  Ester 
Barfeild,  Henry  Watkins,  Kath.  Smith, 
Wm.  Baldin,  James  Foster,  Jno.  Hine 
(or  Hind),  Robert  ,  Ann  Thomp- 
son, Simon  Owin,  Jno.  Myles,  Salsbury 
Land,  Geo.  Hinton,  Ed.  Lester,  Jno. 
Smith,  Henry  Flag,  Owin  Davis,  Wm. 
Lowder,  James  Hickman,  Wm.  Coxon, 
Mary  Crews,  Margery  Baker,  Edw. 
Crump,  Wm.  Walkner,  Margery  Spen- 
cer, Mary  Sotone,  Danll.  Jordan,  Ann 
Jordan,  Gilbert  Jones,  Clemt.  Bayly, 
Tho.  Gully,  Richard  Varling,  Phill. 
Sparkes,  Tho.  Read. 

BURTH  (or  Barth)  INGOBRICK- 
SON,  100  acs.  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  18  Oct. 
1664,  p.  367,  (400).  E.  side  of  Puzle 
Cr.  in  the  S.  branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.  Trans. 
of  2  pers:    Edw.  Martin,  Jno.  Edwards. 

BARTHOLOMEW  INGOBRICK, 
SON,  TOHN  PRESCOTT,  THOMAS 
BLANCH  (or  Branch),  NICHOLAS 
&  ROBERT  JORDAN,  1,000  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  29  Sept.  1664,  p.  368,  (400). 
Wly.  from  a  devdt.  of  land  called  the 
Mill  Land  at  the  head  of  Puzle  Cr.  in 
the  S.  Br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.  Trans,  of  20 
pers:  Jno.  North,  Wm.  Battery,  Edw. 
Feild,  Mary  Clarke,  Jno.  Turner,  Wm. 


514 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Rider,  Mathew  Allen,  Ann  Guy,  Nich. 
Gyles,  Jno.  Moone,  Win.  Morgan,  Wm. 
Linsey,  Wm.  Scott,  Mary  Ward,  Ellin 
Parker,  Wm.  Mincher,  Tho.  Ward,  Wm. 
Jones,  Amey  Tarton,  Jno.  Wood. 

ROBT.  DIGBY,  150  acs.  Low.  Norf. 
Co.,  18  Oct.  1664,  p.  368,  (401).  S. 
side  of  the  W.  br.  of  Eliz.  River.  Trans, 
of  3  pers:  Robt.  Digby,  Ann  Digby, 
Jno.  Digby. 

JOHN  JOLLY,  267  acs.  At  the  head 
of  Broad  Cr.  in  the  W.  Br.  of  Eliz.  Riv., 
18  Oct.  1664,  p.  368,  (401).  Trans, 
of  6  pers:  Fra.  Digby,  Mary  Robins, 
Alice  Fame,  Mathew  Smith,  Jno. 
Magdawell,  Jane  Rutte,  Math.  Rhods, 
Robin  a  Negro. 

THO.  SENIOR,  800  acs.  upon  the 
heads  of  the  main  branches  of  Upper 
Chepokes  Cr.;  350  acs.  at  the  heads  of 
the  br.  issuing  out  of  the  head  E.most 
of  the  two  main  branches  of  sd.  Cr., 
bounded  along  land  late  Mr.  Edw. 
Blands  &c;  50  acs.  a  little  remote  in 
the  pines,  &  400  acs.  beg.  at  sd.  E.most 
br.  running  along  sd.  Blands  land  &c. 
to  an  Indian  path  &c.  6  Apr.  1664,  p. 
368,  (402).  Granted  to  John  Senior  1 
Sept.  1652  &  given  by  will  to  sd. 
Thomas. 

ALEXANDER  FOREMAN,  400  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  18  Oct.  1664,  p.  369, 
(403).  About  2  mi.  Sly.  from  the  S. 
branch  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  beg.  in  a  necke 
formerly  called  the  Poplar  Necke  at  the 
Cypresse  Swamp  &c.  Trans,  of  8  pers: 
Stephen  Markes,  Henry  Meers,  Wm. 
Flake,  Martha  Druen,  Mary  Drana,  Jno. 
Reech,  Anne  James,  Mary  Relph. 

THOMAS  CARTWRIGHT,  260  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  18  Oct.  1664,  p.  369, 
(403).  N.  side  of  the  W.  br.  of  Eliz. 
Riv.,  beg.  nigh  Starlings  poynt  &c. 
Trans,  of  5  pers:  Tho.  Wright,  Fardi- 
nando  Straine,  Katharine  Devedon,  Mary 
Parish,  John  Home. 

JOHN  DEYOUNG,  450  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  3  Nov.  1664,  p.  369,  (404).  N. 
side  of  sd.  county  upon  Totoskey  Cr., 
running  W.  by  S.  &c.  to  trees  dividing 
this  &  land  of  John  Sherlocke,  bound- 


ing upon  land  of  Leonard  Jones  &c. 
Trans,  of  9  pers:  Jane  Burt,  Wm. 
Capell,  Fra.  Slaughter,  Wm.  Fawden, 
Tho.  Carew,  Jno.  Temple,  Sam.  Cortlet, 
Wm.  Hay,  Mary  Spell. 

JOHN  PRESCOTT,  400  acs.  in  the 
S.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  beg.  at  a  poynt  by 
a  creek  called  Ridge  his  Cr.,  running 
E.S.E.  &c.  5  Apr.  1664,  p.  370,  (405). 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  Barbara  Sidny,  Robt. 
Sidny,  Roraman  Browne,  Christian 
Wickam,  Jone  Griffin,  Danll.  Neach, 
Robt.  Briggs,  Walter  Turner. 

ELIAS  COBSON,  300  acs.  Gloster 
Co.,  6  July  1664,  p.  370,  (405).  On 
head  branches  of  Coxes  Swamp,  beg.  by 
Rappa.  path,  running  E.S.E.  &c.  Trans, 
of  6  pers:  Eliz.  Jenkins,  Jno.  Champ- 
ion, Lidda  Buttler,  Tho.  Cooke,  Jno. 
Godwin,  Gerard  Mart,  Marma.  Shawly, 
Samll.  Turner. 

CORNELIUS  DEBANY,  200  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  27  Sept.  1664,  p.  370, 
(406).  Beg.  at  the  mouth  of  Totopo- 
tomoys  Cr.  upon  the  S.  side  of  Yorke 
Riv.  a  little  below  the  fort  of  Manaskin, 
running  up  the  river,  bounding  on  same 
N.W.  &c.  Part  of  patent  of  312  acs. 
granted  to  Capt.  Gyles  Brent,  by  him 
deserted  &  now  granted  sd.  Debany  by 
order  of  court  dated  herewith  &  due 
for  trans,  of  4  pers:  Fra.  Marlow,  Wm. 
Luelin,  Tho.  Spann,  Mary  Forte. 

GEORGE  VEZEY,  NATHANIELL 
BROWNE    &    STEPHEN    TOMLING, 

480  acs.  N.  side  of  Lancaster  Co.,  1 
Nov.  1664,  p.  371,  (406).  Bounding 
upon  land  of  Wm.  Thomas,  Brian  Stott 
(or  Scott)  &  Tho.  Chetwood  and  land 
which  was  formerly  Parson  Grimes. 
Trans,  of  10  pers:  Xpher.  Young,  Robt. 
Stagg,  John  Penn,  Ann  (or  Wm.)  Price, 
Mary  West,  Jno.  Copping,  Rich.  Merri- 
man,  his  wife  twice,  Rabecca  Patent. 

WM.  IRONMONGER,  350  acs.  Glos- 
ter Co.,  3  June  1664,  p.  371,  (407). 
On  a  br.  on  the  head  of  Ware  Riv. 
called  Beech  Swamp,  adj.  land  of  Col. 
Jno.  Walker,  Esq.  Trans,  of  7  pers: 
Henry  Peasly  twice,  Jeremy  Persons, 
Jno.  Hall,  Martha  Robertson,  Thomas 
Knight,  Jno.  Lincolne. 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


515 


JOHN  COCKER,  100  acs.  New  Kent 
Co.,  14  June  1664,  p.  371,  (407).  S. 
on  Jno.  Adams  land,  E.  on  Jno.  Barsbie 
&  Nich.  Commings,  N.  on  Tho.  Gard- 
ner &  James  Wilson  &  W.  on  the  ready 
swamp,  of  Ware  Cr.  Trans,  of  2  pers: 
Mary  Hadly  &  Jno.  Hayle. 

CORNELIUS  REYNOLDS,  640  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  6  June  1664,  p.  372, 
(408).  N.  side  of  Mattapony  Riv.  & 
upon  a  br.  of  Peancketanck  main  sw. 
about  2  mi.  from  land  of  Mr.  Thomas 
Holmes,  beg.  in  a  dry  branch  which 
extends  Nly.,  thence  S.  by  E.  cutting 
Tymber  br.,  along  line  of  Jno.  Pigg  & 
Jno.  Maddison,  thence  W.  by  S.  &c.  Sd. 
land  was  taken  up  by  Jno.  Pigg,  as- 
signed to  David  Dale,  who  assigned  to 
sd.  Reynolds  &  further  due  for  trans, 
of  13  pers:  Cornelius  Reynolds,  Margtt. 
Reynolds,  Wm.  Reynolds,  Ann  Reynolds, 
Cornelius  Reynolds,  Susan  Reynolds, 
Tho.  Hall,  Mary  Tramwell,  Lodowick 
Higgins,  Jno.  Hayward,  Tho.  Booker, 
Robt.  Morris,  Eliz.  Wood. 

JNO.  MADDISON,  200  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  in  Stratton  Major  Parish,  13 
Sept.  1664,  p.  372,  (408).  Upon  N. 
side  of  Mattapony  Riv.  &  back  in  the 
woods  joyning  on  a  devdt.  called  Tower 
Hill  belonging  to  Mr.  Edward  Lockey; 
beg.  at  cor.  tree  of  Robt.  Bagbyes  that 
stands  in  sd.  Mr.  Lockeyes  lyne  bound- 
ing the  S.  side  of  his  devdt.,  from  thence 
S.  by  sd.  Bagbyes  land,  W.  by  same,  S. 
by  sd.  Maddisons  land  to  a  br.  of 
Whorecock  Cr.,  thence  E.  by  sd.  Maddi- 
sons land  &  N.  by  W.  to  beg.  by  land 
sd.  Maddison  now  lives  on.  Trans,  of 
4  pers:  Row.  Baltemore,  Kat.  Balte- 
more  (or  Battemore),  Martha  Holgate, 
Tho.  Sadler. 

JAMES  BONNER,  650  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  8  June  1664,  p.  372,  (409).  S. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  at  the  mouth 
of  a  br.  dividing  this  &  land  of  Tho. 
Dale,  the  son  of  Nich.  Dale,  dec'd., 
extending  along  the  Riv.  E.  by  S.  to 
trees  dividing  this  &  land  of  George 
Wading,  S.  by  W.  &c.  Renewal  of 
patent  dated  19  Oct.  1653. 

THOMAS  &  ROBT.  ELLIOT,  sons 
of  Col.  Anthony  Elliot,  2000  acs.  in  the 


freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  on  S.  side 
thereof  about  4  mi.  above  Nanzemun 
Towne  &c.  26  Apr.  1664,  p.  373, 
(410).  Renewal  of  patent  dated  25 
Nov.   1658. 

MARY  LEWIS,  400  acs.  Accomack 
Co.,  12  Sept.  1664,  p.  373,  (410). 
Near  the  seaboard  side,  being  a  neck 
between  two  branches  of  Nuswattocks 
Cr.  Due  for  rights  recorded  under 
patent  granted  sd.  Mary  7  Mar.  1656 
"which  land  being  not  to  bee  found  ac- 
cording to  the  bounds  by  reason  of  some 
older  grant  this  400  acs.  instead  thereof 
is  granted." 

JOHN  SAVADGE,  350  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  12  Sept.  1664,  p.  373,  (411). 
Nere  Machepungo,  Ewd.  on  land  of 
Tho.  Selby,  Wwd.  part  on  land  that 
was  Arthur  Upshotts  &  parted  by  a  line 
of  trees  running  from  sd.  Upshotts  cor. 
tree  &c.  to  land  of  Jno.  Smith,  Nly.  by 
sd.  Smiths  land  &  Sly.  part  on  land  of 
Jno.  Stirgies  &  parted  by  trees  from  cor. 
tree  of  Stirgies  unto  land  of  sd.  Up- 
shott.  250  acs.  by  patent  dated  23  Feb. 
1663  &  100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers: 
Ann  Willis,  Eliz.  Jones. 

LEWIS  DAY,  400  acs.  Gloster  Co, 
12  Sept.  1664,  p.  373,  (411).  S.E.  side 
of  Poropotancke  Cr,  upon  the  head  of 
Tottopottomoyes  Cr.  &  N.E.  side  of  a 
swamp  dividing  this  &  land  of  Isaak 
Richeson,  along  a  br.  of  same  dividing 
this  &  land  of  Wm.  Kinsey  N.E.  by  N. 
&c.  N.W.  by  W.  upon  land  of  Wm. 
Ginsey.  Granted  to  Jno.  Day,  dec'd, 
19  Oct.  1653  &  due  sd.  Lewis  as  his  son. 

WM.  SMITH,  50  acs.  James  City  Co, 
30  Aug.  1664,  p.  374,  (412).  S.W. 
side  of  Tyascum  Cr.  &  Sw,  beg.  at  the 
bridge  foot  (or  fort)  &  measuring  on 
travers  on  the  N.  side  the  Path  up  to 
Mr.  Mannings  cor.  tree,  thence  on  same 
to  a  meadow  which  is  Mr.  Wiggs 
bounds,  down  the  same  E.  by  S.  &  E  &c. 
Trans,  of  Jno.  Discon. 

WM.  SALE,  130  acs.  James  City  Co, 
30  Aug.  1664,  p.  374,  (412).  E.  side 
of  Chikahomany  Riv.,  beg.  on  a  br. 
parting  this  from  land  of  Wm.  Smith, 
along    ancient    marked    trees    of    Rich. 


516 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Jones  to  the  head  of  a  branch  &c.  to 
main  br.  of  Jones  Cr.  &c.  Trans,  of  3 
pers:  Edw.  Wilmot,  Eliz.  Dobson,  Mary 
Partin. 

RICHD.  HILL,  Jr.,  650  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  2  Sept.  1664,  p.  374,  (413). 
Near  head  of  Occahannock  Cr.,  bounded 
on  W.  by  land  of  Alphuso.  Ball  &  James 
Grey,  Ely.  by  part  of  a  Beaver  Dam  br. 
&  part  by  land  of  Wm.  Taylor  &  Bar- 
tholomew Meares.  200  acs.  granted  sd. 
Hill  23  Feb.  1663  &  450  acs.  for  trans, 
of  9  pers:  Charles  Bauldin,  Wm. 
Okely,  Richd.  Fowlor,  Richd.  Walker, 
Andrew  Clarke,  Ri.  Taylor,  Jno.  Baugh, 
Jane  Hawly,  Francis  Penestore  (?). 

BENJAMIN  STRANG  &  JNO. 
BROCKHURST,  450  acs.  New  Kent 
Co.,  28  June  1664,  p.  375,  (413).  E. 
side  of  the  head  of  Ware  Cr.,  N.W.  by 
W.  upon  Cowpen  Sw.,  S.  upon  a  br.  & 
trees  of  James  Wilson  &  Tho.  Gardner, 
E.  &  N.E.  on  trees  of  Mr.  Giggins  &  N. 
on  sd.  Brockhurst.  Trans,  of  9  pers: 
Tho.  Makins,  Rich.  Greedall,  Hen. 
Palmer,  Jno.  Bull,  Mary  Lovell,  Edw. 
Evans,  Wm.  Griffin,  Ellinor  Stephens, 
Joseph  Munns. 

WM.  MOSSE,  500  acs.  Rappa.  Co., 
22  June  1664,  p.  375,  (414).  In  the 
freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv.  beg.  at  N.W. 
end  of  1000  acs.  taken  up  by  Epaphro- 
ditus  Lawson,  N.  W.  upon  land  of  Wm. 
Hall  &  W.  upon  Mr.  Moselys  lyne,  in- 
cluding the  Marsh.  Granted  unto  Jno. 
Barrow  13  Oct.  1657  &  by  him  sold  to 
sd.  Mosse. 

ROBT.  FLACK  (Flake),  200  acs.  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  18  Oct.  1664,  p.  375, 
(414).  On  the  Wwd.  side  of  the  sec- 
ond swamp  of  the  black  Water  beg.  at  a 
marked  white  oake  "by  John  a  Pough 
his  Indian  Quarter"  &  running  up  S.W. 
&c.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Wm.  Agg,  Wm. 
Musgrove,  Jno.  Bush,  Eliz.  Morgan. 

MR.  THO.  PHILPOTT,  500  acs. 
Wmoreland  Co.,  1  Oct.  1664,  p.  375, 
(415).  Beg.  on  N.W.  side  of  land  of 
Jno.  Shepard,  extending  S.  by  E.  &c. 
Trans,  of  10  pers:  Jno.  Mills,  Geo. 
Brighton,  Fran.  Newnam,  Rich.  White, 
Wm.  Skip,  Ed.  Jennings,  Gwin  Canody, 


Jno.  Wilson,  Jenken  Thomas,  Hen. 
Maunder    (?). 

HENRY  PLUMTON  (Plumpton), 
500  acs.  in  Nancimond  Co.,  5  Apr. 
1664,  p.  376,  (415).  Beg.  at  miles  end 
of  Michaell  Brinkleys  land,  running 
S.S.E.  &c,  butting  on  land  of  Wm. 
Moore  &c.  to  myles  end  of  land  of  James 

Foster.    Trans,  of  10  pers:    Jno.  B. ■ 

(abbreviated),  Jno.  Kened  (?),  Tho. 
Gaule,  Jno.  Clerke,  Eliz.  Hide,  Dawson, 
Wm.  Hunt,  Samll.  Dyres  (?),  Emanuell 
Absalon. 

THO.  WILLIAMS,  500  acs.  N'umber- 
land  Co.,  17  June  1664,  p.  376,  (416). 
350  acs.  W.  upon  land  of  Mr.  George 
Fletcher,  N.E.  upon  a  br.  of  a  Cr. 
comonly  called  Derries  Cr.  which 
divides  this  &  land  surveyed  for  Tho. 
Prichett,  E.  against  the  mouth  of  Gr. 
Wiccocomico  Riv.  &  S.E.  &  S.W.  on  sd. 
Derises  (or  Devises)  Cr. ;  150  acs.  on 
N.  side  of  Dennis  his  Cr.  &c.  Ely.  upon 
the  bay  towards  the  mouth  of  sd.  Riv., 
N.Ely.  &  Nly.  upon  a  Cr.  dividing  this 
from  land  of  one  Prickett  &  land  of 
Abram  Byran.  Granted  to  Richd.  Budd 
&  now  due  sd.  Williams  as  marrying  the 
relict  of  sd.  Budd. 

THO.     LIGON     &     CAPT.     WM. 

FARRAR,  375  acs.  Henrico  Co.,  3  Oct. 
1664,  p.  376,  (416).  N.  side  of  James 
Riv.,  beg.  at  the  Round  aboute  slash, 
adj.  Morgan  Price  &  running  through 
another  br.  of  sd.  slash  W.N.W.  &c. 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  Walter  Felkes,  Sam. 
Rigot,  Ellinor  Wallis,  James  Hickton, 
Ann  Armestrong,  Jone  Davis,  Tho. 
Peldon,  Wm.  Dodson. 

CAPT.  WM.  FARRAR  &  THOMAS 
LIGON  (Liggon),  335  acs.  25  po.  Hen- 
rico Co.,  3  Oct.  1664,  p.  377,  (417). 
S.  side  of  James  Riv.,  beg.  at  a  white 
oake  upon  the  River  in  Mont  Malada 
(Mount  my  lady)  feild,  against  a  place 
where  an  old  Oven  had  stood,  running 
N.W.  by  W.  to  the  red  Water  Slash  &c. 
downe  the  falling  ground  of  Proctors 
&c.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  Phillis  (a  ?) 
Servant,  Robt.  Winter,  Danll.  Fishes, 
Tho.  Morsey,  Jane  Holmes,  Wm. 
Young,  Mary  Worts. 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


517 


GILBERT  HENDERSON,  500  acs.  in 
Accomack,  formerly  called  N'ampton 
Co.,  10  Oct.  1664,  p.  377,  (418).  Near 
Machepungo  Riv.,  Nly.  parted  by  a 
poplar  br.  from  the  land  of  Henry  Bis- 
hop, formerly  Jno.  Toulsons,  Sly.  by 
trees  separating  this  from  land  formerly 
granted  to  Mr.  Stephen  Charlton  &c. 
Granted  to  Wm.  Westerhouse  20  Oct. 
1661,  by  him  deserted  &  now  granted 
sd.  Henderson. 

MR.  PETER  PLOUVIER  (Plovier), 
196  acs.  16  ch.  in  Yorke  Co.,  15  Feb. 
1663,  p.  377,  (418).  Beg.  in  a  lyne  of 
trees  belonging  to  a  former  devdt.  pur- 
chased of  Mr.  Tho.  Kerby  &c.  along 
Mr.  Freemans  lyne  &c.  to  Anthony 
Francklins  lyne  &c.  to  white  oak  nere 
the  Church  path  &c.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
Peter  Plouveir,  Fran,  his  wife,  Ellis 
Plouvier,  Peter  Purrell. 

RICHD.  WHITE,  300  acs.  Rappa! 
Co.,  8  Apr.  1664,  p.  378,  (419).  N. 
side  of  Hoskins  Cr.,  towards  the  head 
thereof,  beg.  by  E.most  side  of  a 
marsh,  parallel  to  land  of  Jno.  Gillett, 
dec'd.  &c.  to  br.  of  sd.  Cr.  dividing 
this  from  land  of  Anthony  North. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Danll.  Tignor,  Marg. 
Collier,  Hen.  Howard,  Walter  Pine, 
Lewis  Wms.  (Williams),  Hester  Watson. 

THOMAS  COLLINS  (Collings)  & 
THO.  BAGNESS  (Bignes),  500  acs. 
upon  the  main  br.  of  Skimeno  on  the 
N.  side,  bounded  with  sd.  branch  &  a 
swamp  called  Crooked  Sw.,  running 
S.W.  to  drinking  Sw.  &c.  Granted  to 
Robt.  Wild  &  Phil.  Chesly  22  Nov. 
1652  &  by  them  sold  to  the  abovenamed. 
6  June  1664,  p.  378,  (420). 

JOHN  GOFFE,  400  acs.  New  Kent 
Co.,  5  Apr.  1664,  p.  378,  (420).  Beg. 
at  cor.  oak  of  his  old  devdt.,  running 
N.N.W.  nigh  Arracaico  Sw.  &c.  Trans, 
of  8  pers:  Aaron  Goffe,  Roger  Jones, 
Wm.  Bengoe,  Tho.  Smith,  Jane  Wene- 
frith,  Peter  Hunt,  Mary  Davis. 

WM.  HORTON,  600  acs.  Wmore- 
land  Co.,  9  Feb.  1663,  p.  379,  (421). 
N.Ely,  upon  Machoatick  Riv.,  S.Ely, 
upon  land  of  Mrs.  Barnett  (or  Barrett), 
N.Wly.  upon  land  of  Capt.  Tho.  Davies. 


Granted  to  Gervase  Dodson  29  Nov. 
1658  &  by  his  will  given  to  Isabella, 
his  relict.  Said  land  purchased  by  sd. 
Horton  of  Andrew  Petteygrew  &  sd. 
Isabella  his  wife. 

COL.  WM.  WATERS,  1350  acs. 
Accomack  Co.,  12  June  1664,  p.  379, 
(421).  Beg.  at  the  poynt  on  the  S.  side 
of  Gintotege  Cr.  &  running  up  the 
middle  br.  of  same  &c.  Trans,  of  27 
pers:  Dorothy  Marrott,  Rich.  Hack- 
worth,  Mary  Pryor,  Henry  Meld,  Samll. 
Michaell,  Jacob  Barber,  Rich.  Lewis, 
Jacob  Bond,  Morgan  Jones,  Bess  a 
Negro,  Eliz.  Pord,  Wm.  King,  Alice 
Michaell,  Stephen  Hues,  Peter  Richar- 
son,  Jacob  Childman,  Edw.  Jones,  Rich. 
Tull,  Miles  Stope,  Eliz.  Hickman,  Henry 
Wilkins,  Joane  Ore,  Alice  Rimmer,  Tho. 
Collier,  Anth.  Taylor,  James  Collier, 
Jno.  More. 

LT.    COL.    THOMAS    GOODRICH, 

2000  acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  on  S.  side  of 
Rappa.  Riv.,  28  Mar.  1664,  379,  (422). 
Beg.  at  a  white  oak  adj.  land  of  Jno. 
Mills,  bounded  on  the  N.  by  sd.  Mills 
&  Tho.  Rawson  &c.  to  land  of  Anthony 
North  on  the  S.  to  land  of  the  Orphant 
of  Clement  Thresh  &c.  Trans,  of  40 
pers:  Fra.  Bell,  Sam.  Graves,  Peter 
Grub,  Ja.  Piper,  Roger  Manley,  Susan 
Fletcher,  Jno.  Wms.  (Williams),  Alex. 
Wood,  Timothy  Jackson,  Robt.  Smith, 
Edw.  Shuffman,  Eliz.  Mackman,  Mary 
Tibols,  Jane  Spike,  Jane  Pratt,  Jno. 
Ding,  Johna.  Dew,  Robt.  Stapler,  Tho. 
Danieli,  James  Parker,  Rich.  Price,  Jno. 
Collings,  Richd.  Clarke,  Samll.  Thistle- 
wite,  Joseph  Webster,  Martin  Simons, 
Sam.  Dearing,  Judeth  Bruton,  Fra.  Bell, 
Sam.  Graves,  Peter  Grubb,  James  Piper, 
Roger  Manley,  Susan  Fletcher,  Jno. 
Williams,  Alex.  Wood,  Timothy  Jack- 
son, Robt.  Smith,  Edw.  Young,  Wm. 
Makerland. 

WM.  WESTWARY  (Westwray),  750 
acs.  of  Wight  Co.,  26  Sept.  1664,  p. 
380,  (422).  Upon  a  branch  of  the  Black 
Water,  beg.  on  the  brow  of  a  hill  by 
the  swamp  side,  E.  by  Mathew  Tomlins 
land,  then  S.S.E.  &c.  Trans,  of  15  pers: 
Jno.  Goales,  Jno.  Dewe,  George  Gren- 
way,  Mary  Jones,  Mary  Pitt,  Jno.  Par- 
fitt    (or    Panfitt)     &    his    wife,    Phillip 


518 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Chester,  An  Chester,  Robt.  King,  Ralph 
Taylor,  Robt.  Taylor,  3  Negroes. 

CAPT.     ALEXANDER     FLEMING, 

250  acs.  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  above 
the  plantation  of  Mr.  Wm.  Smart.  6 
Apr.   1664,  p.  380,    (423).    Granted  to 

Jno.  Aires  24  1655  &  by  him  & 

upon  petition  of  sd.  Fleming  granted  to 
him  by  order  of  the  Govr.  &  Councell 
30  Mar.  1664.  (Note: )  The  following 
names  appear  under  this  record:  Tho. 
Daniell,  Robt.  Goodlad,  Jno.  Sharman, 
Rich.  Stephens,  James  Goffe. 

JOHN  BRYAN,  168  acs.  on  a  branch 
of  Nancimond  Riv.  called  the  Indian  Cr., 
17  Aug.  1664,  p.  380),  (423).  Joyn- 
ing  to  patent  of  Mr.  Jno.  Garrett,  butt- 
ing on  land  of  Wm.  Story  &c.  Renewal 
of  patent  dated  15  Oct.  1652. 

RICH.  PAGE,  100  acs.  Yorke  Co.,  13 
Sept.  1664,  p.  381,  (424).  Beg.  at  S. 
most  end  of  Smith  line  nere  a  br.  of  the 
Mill  Swamp,  up  the  same  S.E.  by  E.  &c. 
to  Mr.  Fords  line,  thence  N.N.W.  &c. 
nere  the  falls  of  the  branches  of  Powe- 
tan  &c.  Granted  to  Danll.  Wild,  who 
sold  to  sd.  Page. 

THOMAS  CARTWRIGHT,  220  acs. 
in  Lynhaven  Parish  in  Low.  Norf.  Co., 
17  June  1664,  p.  381,  (425).  Beg.  at 
Thomasins  Cr.  &  running  by  E.  br.  of 
Eliz.  Riv.  W.  by  S.  &c.  joyning  to 
Goldsmiths  land,  thence  S.  by  E.  &c. 
along  Mr.  Sidnies  land  N.W.  to  beg. 
Granted  to  Humphry  Bell  8  June  1654 
&  by  him  sold  to  sd.  Cartwright. 

JOHN  CARTER  &  HENRY  HEARD, 
100  acs.  N'umberland  Co.,  10  June  1664, 
p.  381,  (425).  Ely.  upon  Potomack 
Riv.,  Sly.  upon  Yeocomico  Riv.,  Wly. 
upon  a  Cr.  dividing  this  from  land  of 
Tho.  Hayles  sould  to  Robt.  Lord,  Nly. 
upon  another  tract  belonging  to  Rich. 
Holder  (or  Holden).  Granted  sd. 
Holden  last  of  Nov.  1656  &  assigned 
to  the  abovenamed. 

HUMPHRY  HARWOOD,  1070  acs. 
Warwick  Co.,  on  N.  side  of  Skeale  (or 
Skeate)  Cr.,  15  Mar.  1663,  p.  381, 
(426).    Beg.   on   the  Cr.   side,   running 


N.E.  by  E.  &c.  to  markt  trees  dividing 
this  from  land  of  Capt.  Nathaniell 
Hurd  &c.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  26 
Nov.  1652. 

ANTHONY  BRANCH,  150  acs.  in 
the  N.W.  br.  of  Nancimond  Riv.,  butt- 
ing on  land  of  Symon  Symons  &c.  16 
Aug.  1664,  p.  382,  (426).  Granted  to 
Robt.  Sabin  11  June  1653,  by  him  sold 
to  Mr.  Thos.  Ballard,  who  sold  to  sd. 
Branch. 

CHARLES  EDGERTON,  200  acs.  in 
Linhaven  parish  in  Low.  Co.  of  New 
Norf.,  14  June  1664,  p.  382,  (427). 
150  acs.  at  a  small  cr.  on  Wwd.  side  of 
Jno.  Holmes'  house,  running  up  the  cr. 
S.S.W.  joyning  land  of  Giles  Collins, 
then  E.S.E.  &c.  50  acs.  being  3  small 
hammocks  joyned  together  by  small 
ostums  (?)  upon  Hog  Island  in  little 
cr.  in  Lynhaven.  Granted  to  Lemll. 
Mayson  18  Feb.  1653,  by  him  sold  to 
Tho.  Bridge,  who  sold  to  Edgerton. 

MR.  THO.  LUCAS,  1677  acs.  on  S. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  at  a  cr.  divid- 
ing this  from  land  of  Tho.  Page,  ex- 
tending by  &  through  the  same  S.S.W. 
&c.  to  a  cr.  dividing  this  from  land  of 
Valentine  Allen  &c.  Marginal  Nota- 
tion: "Nil.  This  pattent  recorded  al- 
ready in  folio  390." 

LT.  COLL.  ELLYOTT  (Elliot),  1400 
acs.,  beg.  at  N.E.  cor.  of  his  former 
devdt.,  running  N.W.  Sec.  to  Allins  Cr., 
up  the  same  Ely.  Sec.  6  June  1664,  p. 
383,  (428).  Renewal  of  patent  dated 
14  July   1655. 

CHARLES  ROANE,  200  acs.  Gloster 
Co.,  13  Sept.  1664,  p.  383,  (428).  Beg. 
at  Col.  Lees  land,  running  N.  by  W. 
&c.  by  the  marshy  branch  &c.  by 
Peancketanck  Sw.  &c.  by  Rappa.  Road 
path  Sec.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Edwd.  Fox, 
Jno.  Browne,  Tho.  Jordan,  Elizabeth 
Hayes. 

CAPT.      ANTHONY      FULGHAM, 

1000  acs.  Is.  of  Wight  Co.,  28  June 
1664,  p.  383,  (429).  On  a  br.  of  the 
Black  Water.,  beg.  at  S.W.  cor.  of 
Mathew  Tomlins  land,  running  Wly.  &c. 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


519 


by  a  meadow  &c.  Trans,  of  20  pers: 
Daniell  Wilson,  his  wife,  Edwd.  At- 
wood,  Robt.  Cole,  Katharine  Diamant, 
Martha  Greene,  Wm.  Lewis,  Robt.  Ed- 
wards, Jno.  Browne,  Jno.  Fulgham,  An- 
thony Fulgham,  Jno.  Boron,  Eliz.  Day, 
Joseph  Butler,  Hen.  Gough,  Jno.  Who- 
man,  Eliz.  Barnett  (or  Barrett),  Susan 
Smith,  Tho.  St.  Jno.,  Jno.  Wilson. 

THOMAS  UNDERWOOD,  200  acs., 
15  June  1664,  p.  384,  (430).  Beg.  by 
the  ready  swamp,  thence  S.  by  E.  &c. 
Granted  to  Thomas  Woodhouse  4  Sept. 
1651  (or  1654)  &  sold  to  John  Zaizes 
&  by  Col.  Swan,  Atty.  of  sd.  Zamis, 
sold  to  sd.  Underwood. 

MR.  PETER  STARKEY,  377  acs. 
Yorke  Co.,  20  Sept.  1664,  p.  384 
(430).  Upon  N.W.  end  of  a  ndg  of 
land  butting  upon  Smoak  homoak  &  ly- 
ing upon  Rayes  Cr.,  up  the  same  &c.  to 
E.  side  of  Lewis'  Neck,  down  the  same 
&c.  to  bottom  of  Mr.  Wm.  Travernors 
Ridg,  thence  over  the  marsh  &c.  to  beg. 
250  acs.  by  patent  6  Nov.  1637  &  127 
acs.  for  trans,  of  3  pers.* 

CAPT.  ALEXANDER  FLEMING, 
300  acs.  on  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  on 
the  upper  side  of  the  Cod  of  the  bay 
opposite  to  a  poynt  between  Nanzemond 
&  Nansatequond  towne,  adj.  upon  the 
N.W.   with   Cedars   Cr.,   which   divides 

this   &   land   of  John  Gillett  &c.  

Mar.  1664,  p.  384,  (431).  Granted  to 
Clemt.  Herbert  21  Apr.  1657,  by  him 
deserted  &  granted  sd.  Fleming  upon 
petition,  by  order  of  Govr.  &c.  28  Mar. 
1664. 

MR.  JOHN  GRESHAM,  520  acs.,  10 
June  1664,  p.  385,  (431).  320  acs.  beg. 
at  the  poynt  neere  Greshams  Cr.  mouth 
towards  Mr.  Knights  land,  running  S.  to 
Bakers  Cr.  mouth  &  W.  by  N.  along 
same;  200  acs.  in  N'umberland  Co.,  S. 
upon  Waddy  Cr.,  Nly.  upon  Peter 
Knight  &  Ely.  upon  his  own  land.  Re- 
newal of  patent  dated  5  May  1652. 

WM.  CAPPS,  250  acs.  Low.  Norf. 
Co.,  6  Apr.  1664,  p.  385,  (433).  150 
acs.  on  Ewd.  side  of  the  Swd.  bay  or 
head  of  Strattons  Cr.  issuing  into  Lyn- 


haven  river,  beg.  by  the  bay  side  &  run- 
ning E.S.E.  &c.  &  100  acs.  beg.  on 
poynt  on  the  second  bay  in  sd.  river, 
adj.  Hugh  Woods  land  &  running  W. 
&c.  Renewal  of  patent  dated  last  of 
Mar.   1656. 

MR.  RICHARD  FLINT,  480  acs. 
N'umberland  Co.,  28  June  1664,  p.  385, 
(434).  150  acs.  abutting  Nly.  upon 
Mattapony  Riv.  &  Wly.  upon  a  br.  of 
same.  330  acs.  adj.  150  acs.  pattented 
by  Jno.  Chambers  in  1652,  beg.  at  a  cor. 
of  same  by  sd.  Riv.,  running  Sly.  up  the 
river,  thence  by  Jno.  Kents  land,  thence 
E.  by  N.  &c.  to  Henry  Tappins  lyne  & 
thence  N.  by  E.  &c.  Granted  to  Phillip 
Carpenter  29  Aug.  1657  &  by  James 
Clayton,  his  Atty.,  sold  to  sd.  Flint. 

HENRY  &  WM.  SMITH,  1600  acs. 
Lancaster  Co.,  24  Sept.  1664,  p.  386, 
(435).  On  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  ex- 
tending E.S.E.  &c.  to  a  small  marsh  op- 
posite Colemans  Marsh,  thence  N.E.  &c, 
N.W.  along  Walter  Dickensons  &  Wm. 
Yarratts  lands  &  N.E.  upon  the  hills  or 
high  land.  Granted  to  Mr.  Tobv  Smith 
6  Sept.  1654  &  given  by  his  will  to  the 
abovenamed. 

THOMAS  DALE,  350  acs.  Gloster 
Co.,  24  May  1664,  p.  386,  (435).  On 
N.  side  of  Mattapony  Riv.,  running 
down  the  same  E.  by  S.  to  Col.  Taylors 
markt  gum  tree,  thence  N.E.  by  N.  &c. 
Renewal   of  patent  dated   4  Jan.    1653. 

MR.  HUGH  NEWETT  (or  Nevett), 
1800  acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  on  N.  side  of  sd. 
Riv.  at  the  head  of  Fornham  Cr.,  6  Sept. 
1664,  p.  386,  (436).  Running  for 
breadth  according  to  the  course  &c, 
parallel  with  the  head  lyne  of  land  of 
Mr.  Tho.  Griffeth,  adj.  land  of  Jno. 
Williams  &c.  Granted  to  Tho.  &  An- 
thony Stephens,  by  them  deserted,  then 
granted  to  Mr.  Francis  Kirkman  &  by 
him  sould  to  sd.  Nevett. 

THO.  ROBBINSON  &  QUINTAINE 
SHERMAN,  800  acs.  in  Rappa.  Co.  on 
N.  side  of  sd.  Riv.,  3  Nov.  1664,  p. 
387,  (436).  On  Ewd.  side  of  Totoskey 
Cr.,  beg.  on  a  poynt  on  the  Cr.  side, 
adj.   his   own   land  &c,   to  nere  mouth 


520 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


of  the  Cross  Cr.  being  an  E.  br.  of 
Totoskey  Cr.  &c.  Trans,  of  16  pers: 
Jno.  Goodman,  Thomas  Sitfore,  Robt. 
Foster,  Richd.  Phelps,  Martin  Smart, 
Jona.  Potter,  Samll.  Flariott,  Alex.  Jor- 
dan, Danll.  Hopkins,  Barnabe  Kemp, 
Marmaduke  Hatton,  Jud.  Palmer,  Fran. 
Wood,  Fran.  Morris,  Abigail  Parsons, 
John  Darby. 

JOSEPH  SMITH,  134  acs.  Gloster 
Co.,  9  June  1664,  p.  387,  (437).  Come- 
ing  up  from  a  small  Cr.  of  Poropo- 
tancke,  W.S.W.  by  Jno.  Kings  land  & 
N.  &  E.  by  E.  by  land  of  Jno.  Bennett 
&  Tho.  Leechman  where  it  began. 
Granted  to  Tho.  Bell  10  Oct.  1656,  by 
him  sould  to  Robt.  Jones,  who  sould  to 
sd.  Smith. 

JOHN  TAYLOR,  50  acs.  beg.  at  an 
ash  in  the  Mill  Swamp,  running  W.  by 
S.  for  length  upon  the  land  of  Thomas 
Smith  &  for  breadth  upon  S.  side  of  sd. 
Sw.,  running  down  into  land  of  sd. 
Taylor  as  farr  as  50  acs.  17  Aug.  1664, 
p.  387,  (438).  Granted  to  Robt.  Tay- 
lor, who  sould  to  Andrew  Leather  &  by 
him  assigned  to  sd.  Taylor. 

RICHARD  HARRISON,  400  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  6  July  1664,  p.  388, 
(438).  On  N.  side  of  Mattapony  Riv. 
about  5  mi  into  the  woods  &  upon  a 
br.  of  the  Dragon  Sw.,  beg.  neare  the 
mouth  of  Coles  Br.,  running  S.  inclining 
Ely.  towards  land  of  Thomas  Holmes, 
thence  parallel  with  Jno.  Exolls  Sw.  &c. 
Trans,  of  8  pers:  Ann  Tappin,  John 
Tappin,  John  White,  Wm.  Exoll,  Mary 
Jones,  Susan  Tops,  Andrew  Harris, 
Stephen  Person. 

ELI  AS  HARTERY  (HARETREE), 
600  acs.  N'ampton  Co.,  29  Mar.  1665, 
p.  388,  (439).  400  acs.  thereof  lying 
at  Nunswattox  Cr.  beg.  at  a  little  br. 
on  W.most  side  of  the  land  of  Jno. 
Waltham,  extending  150  po.  to  land  of 
Richd.  Jacob,  bounded  on  N.  by  a  br. 
of  sd.  Cr.  called  the  broad  cr.  or  branch 
&  Sly.  into  the  woods;  200  acs.  at  the 
head  of  Hungers  Cr.,  bounded  on  W. 
by  land  of  Jonathan  Gilles  (or  Giller), 
thence  E.N.E.  &c.  to  sd.  400  acs.  400 
acs.  granted  to  James  Pereen   14  Nov. 


1642  &  by  him  assigned  to  sd.  Hartery, 
&  200  acs.  granted  to  Thomas  Wyatt 
21  July  1640,  assigned  to  Richd.  Smith, 
who  assigned  to  Michaell  Richards  & 
by  him  assigned  to  sd.  Hartery. 

MAJOR  WM.  WYATT,  1940  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  20  May  1664,  p.  388, 
(429).  N.E.  side  of  Mattapony  Riv., 
bounded  W.N.W.  on  land  of  Richard 
Barnehouse,  N.N.E.  &c.  includeing  the 
whole  marsh,  being  850  acs.  of  land  & 
marsh,  thence  into  the  woods  adj.  sd. 
Barnehouse,  N.N.E.  along  his  head  line 
&c.  to  marked  beach  in  Aposcoke 
Swamp,  adj.  land  of  Jno.  Cosby  &c. 
400  acs.  granted  sd.  Wyatt  27  Apr. 
1653;  640  acs.  granted  to  Col.  Robt. 
Abrall  19  Mar.  1660  &  sold  to  sd. 
Wyatt;  450  acs.  granted  sd.  Wyatt  1 
Apr.  1661 ;  350  acs.  assigned  by  Ralph 
Masey  to  Tho.  Pluckett,  who  sold  to  sd. 
Wyatt,  &  100  acs.  the  residue  for  trans, 
of   2   pers:    Wm.  Jarvis,   Tho.   Parker. 

JOHN  BRUERTON,  1456  acs.  in 
Wmoreland  Co.,  1  Nov.  1664,  p.  389, 
(440).  Beg.  at  a  marked  pochikery  on 
S.E.  side  of  Potomack  path,  thence 
S.S.E.  &c.  to  a  vally  on  N.W.  side  of 
Attopin  Cr.  dam  &c.  crossing  the  first 
great  branch,  thence  W.  by  S.  &c. 
Trans,  of  29  pers:  Robt.  Turner,  Jno. 
Sparkes,  Symon  Drew,  David  Stevenson, 
Jno.  Walker,  Tho.  Dawson,  Tho.  Jor- 
dan, Robt.  Dier,  Jane  Steele,  Ann  Heard, 
Michaell  Owen,  Richard  Stanton,  Wm. 
Bond,  Jno.  Robbinson,  Rich.  Webb, 
Tho.  Swan,  Jno.  Travillian,  Jno.  Bruer- 
ton,  Xtop.  Withnell,  Jane  Bruton, 
Charles  Crestin,  Tho.  Tucker,  Samll. 
Flanard,  Tho.  Frith,  Tho.  Kason,  Wm. 
Lockram,  Hugh  Edmonds,  Arthur  Berry, 
Mary  Andrews. 

LT.   COL.   WM.    HARDICH    (Har- 

dick).  1000  acs.  Wmoreland  Co.,  25 
Nov.  1664,  p.  389,  (449).  On  Nomeny 
bay,  beg.  at  an  oyster  shell  poynt  at  the 
mouth  of  poore  Jack  Cr.,  extending  S.E. 
along  the  bay  to  another  Cr.  dividing 
this  &  land  of  Thomas  Speeke,  thence 
S.S.W.  &c.  along  head  lines  of  Robt. 
Henfeild  &  Jno.  Rosiers  &c.  to  E.  side 
of  a  vally  nere  a  poynt  by  the  S.E.  br. 
of  Corewoman  Cr.,  thence  along  line  of 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


521 


Mr.  Walter  Brodhurst  N.  E.  &c.  450 
acs.  granted  to  him  the  15  Sept.  1661; 
550  acs.  by  patent  dated  19  Oct.  1653 
&  6  acs.  due  for  trans,  of  1  pers.* 

RICHARD  VARDIE  (Vardy),  850 
acs.  in  James  &  Yorke  Counties,  28  Mar. 
1664,  p.  390,  (442).  On  Powetan 
branches  &  head  branches  of  Queens  Cr. 
branches,  beg.  at  cor.  tree  of  "my 
Ladies"  land  adj.  to  the  Hoppole  Sw., 
the  land  purchased  of  Jno.  Brumfeeild, 
along  the  branch  side  S.E.  50  chs., 
thence  E.  by  S.  20  chs.  to  the  br.  that 
makes  the  Little  Neck,  then  S.S.E.  &c. 
to  sd.  Vardies  400  acs.  purchased,  then 
S.S.E.  &c.  along  my  Ladies  line  to  the 
cart  path,  E.N.E.  along  same  &c.  to 
James  Wilkesons  bounds,  N.E.  to  Capt. 
Poplyes  cor.  tree  &c.  to  the  run  of  a 
sw.,  it  being  the  division  between  Mr. 
Efford  &  sd.  Vardie  &c.  to  Mr.  Lewis' 
survey  of  250  acs.  Sec,  includeing  the 
Indian  Cabbin  Neck  &  meadow  & 
swamp.  650  acs.  by  patent  dated  last  of 
Nov.  1653  &  200  acs.  for  trans,  of  4 
pers.* 

MR.  THO.  LUCAS,  Sr.,  1677  acs.  on 
S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  at  a  little 
cr.  dividing  this  from  land  of  Tho. 
Page,  extending  through  sd.  Cr.  &c.  to  a 
W.  br.  thereof  &c.  to  another  cr.  divid- 
ing this  from  land  of  Valintine  Allen 
&c.  including  all  poynts  of  land  adj.  to 
sd.  river  or  cr.  &c.  1405^2  acs.  granted 
sd.  Lucas  20  Feb.  1662  &  271^  acs.  due 
for  trans,  of  6  pers:  Jno.  Robbinson, 
Richard  Burton,  Nicholas  French,  Eliza- 
beth Smith,  Hellin  Whiteside,  Robt. 
Tidy.    16  Dec.  1663,  p.  390,  (444). 

ABYA.  BONYSON,  1300  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  16  Oct.  1664,  p.  391,  (445). 
Beg.  at  Haddaways  Cr.  at  a  branch  by 
trees  deviding  this  from  land  "formerly 
seated  by  Thomas  Salisbury  afterwards 
possessed  and  planted  upon  by  Capt. 
Fleets  people"  &  since  by  Humphry 
Tabbs  sons  &  servants  &  by  many  called 
the  said  Tabbs  Land,  running  up  the 
maine  Cr.  by  the  water  courses  being 
towards  the  head  of  Harpers  Cr.,  run- 
ning over  the  same  nere  the  house  where 
Henrry  Rye  lived  Sec.  550  acs.  granted 
to  Wm.  Harper  &  Henry  Rye  19  Oct. 


1653,  by  sd.  Harper  assigned  to  Rye, 
who  assigned  to  sd.  Bonyson;  400  acs. 
granted  sd.  Bonyson  1  Feb.  1653  &  350 
acs.  for  trans,  of  7  pers.* 

PAUL  WOODBRIDGE,  600  acs.  in 
Rappa.  Co.,  on  the  N.  side  of  sd.  River, 
18  Nov.  1664,  p.  391,  (446).  Between 
Moratico  Cr.  &  Farnham  Cr.,  beg.  in 
the  main  woods  &  adj.  land  of  Mr.  Jno. 
Newman,  thence  N.Wly.  Sec.  to  head  of 
Mr.  Thomas  Glascocks  land,  thence 
N.W.  along  same  &c.  to  a  poquoson, 
thence  N.Ely,  along  land  of  Mr.  Henry 
Wilson,  thence  N.E.  by  N.  along  land 
of  Thomas  Stephens  Orphant  to  the  head 
of  a  deep  valley  &c.  400  due  in  joynt 
tenure  with  Mr.  Jno.  Newman  by  patent 
the  19  Sept.  1664  &  by  consent  of  both 
parties  thus  equally  divided  &  upon  new 
survey  thereof  200  acs.  found  within 
the  bounds  &  due  for  trans,  of  4  pers: 
William  Juce  (or  Ince)  4  tymes. 

PETER  MILLS,  sonn  &  heire  of  Wm. 
Mills,  400  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  20  Feb. 
1662,  p.  392,  (447).  On  N  .side  & 
within  the  freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
bounded  on  N.W.  side  with  land  sur- 
veyed for  Toby  Smith  &  S.E.  upon  land 
of  Thomas  Hobkins.  Granted  to  sd. 
Wm.  Mills  6  Sept.  1654,  now  due  sd. 
Peter  as  above. 

JAMES  BROWNE,  of  the  Co.  of 
Rappa.,  346  acs.  &  125  perches  on  S. 
side  of  sd.  Riv.,  28  Sept.  1664,  p.  392, 
(447).  Beg.  at  lower  side  of  land  of 
Wm.  Grey  by  a  branch  side,  running 
W.  Sec.  S.S.E.  parallel  to  land  of  Jno. 
Ayres  &c.  200  due  by  former  grant  & 
the  residue  adjoining  due  for  trans,  of 
3  pers:  Tho.  Daniell,  Rob.  Godwin, 
Mary  Taylor,  Eliz.  Ward,  Amy  Stoakes, 
Roger  Reves,  Jno.  Sammon. 

RICHARD  WEST  &  WM.   FOGG, 

444  acs.  on  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  28 
July,  1663,  p.  392,  (448).  Beg.  a  little 
beyond  the  miles  end  of  Jno.  Watson, 
running  S.  by  E.  Sec.  Trans,  of  9  pers: 
Tho.  Strang,  Rebecca  Browne,  Wm. 
Landall,  James  Ballard,  Edw.  Parramore, 

James    Careless,    Francis    ,    Georg 

Fawne,  Richd.  Hasting  (or  Harting), 
Jno.  Shory. 


522 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


COL.  RICHARD  LEE,  Esqr.,  1  Dec. 
1664,  p.  393,  (448).  2600  acs.  Cum- 
berland Co.,  on  S.  side  Potomack  Riv. 
2200  acs.  beg.  at  the  mouth  of  a  Cr. 
issuing  out  of  Machotick  Riv.,  E.S.E. 
up  the  Cr.  &  crossing  the  beaver  dams 
to  W.  side  of  Peckatowns  feild,  thence 
S.S.W.  to  head  of  swamp  issuing  into 
the  head  of  Nomany  Riv.,  thence  W. 
N.W.  &c.  400  acs.  at  the  mouth  of  a 
small  creek  of  Machoatick  Riv.,  running 
up  sd.  Riv.  W.N.W.  &c.  2000  acs.  by 
patent  to  him  dated  5  June  1658  &  600 
acs.  for  trans,  of  12  pers.* 

FRANCIS  CLAY,  1000  acs.  N'um- 
berland  Co.,  last  of  June  1663,  p.  393, 
(449).  200  acs..  S.E.  on  the  heads  of 
Yeocomico  Riv.,  N.E.  upon  land  of 
Roger  Pullin,  dec'd.,  &  450  acs.  S.E.  on 
the  main  br.  of  the  head  of  sd.  Riv., 
N.E.  on  sd.  200  acs.,  &  350  acs.  S.E. 
upon  this  land,  N.E.  upon  land  of  Jno. 
Shakly.  Assigned  to  him  by  Mr.  George 
Colclough. 

HENRY  FREEMAN,  274  acs.  at  the 
New  Poquoson,  20  Sept.  1664,  p.  393, 
(450).  200  A.  Beg.  at  a  rownd  headed 
pine  on  a  poynt  between  two  creeks, 
running  S.W.  Wly.  &c.  to  a  pond  in 
Bryces  neck,  the  E.most  bounds  being 
the  main  Cr.  that  goeth  to  Giles  Taver- 
nors;  74  acs.  the  residue  bounded  Nly. 
with  a  Cr.  &  the  S.most  bounds  is  the 
land  patented  by  Tho.  Symmons,  now  in 
possession  of  sd.  Freeman.  200  acs.  by 
patent  dated  11  Feb.  1635  to  sd.  Sym- 
mons &  50  acs.  granted  Robt.  Freeman 
8  May  1638,  both  of  which  parcels  are 
now  due  by  purchase  of  sd.  Freeman 
from  Col.  Francis  Willis,  and  24  acs. 
for  trans,  of  1  per.* 

WM.  DOWNING,  700  acs.  N'um- 
berland  Co.,  24  June  1664,  p.  394, 
(451).  300  acs.  upon  N.  side  of  Gr. 
Wiccocomico  Riv.  about  5  mi.  up  the 
same,  beg.  upon  land  of  Martin  Cole, 
extending  along  the  river  W.N.W.  &c. 
400  acs.  Sly.  upon  Wiccocomico  Riv., 
Ely.  upon  land  of  George  Hayle  &c. 
300  acs.  granted  to  Thomas  Metstard  & 
Jno.  Edwards  26  Feb.  1653  &  sould  to 
sd.  Downing  &  400  acs.  granted  to 
Martin  Cole  5  Oct.  1653,  assigned  to 
sd.  Edwards,  who  sould  to  sd.  Downing. 


NICHOLAS  COBB,  900  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  17  June  1664,  p.  394, 
(452).  Upon  a  br.  issuing  from  Pagan 
bay  Cr.,  sd.  branch  running  through 
land  of  Mr.  Nathaniell  Floyd;  sd.  land 
beg.  in  a  swamp  &  running  S.  E.  &c. 
from  sd.  land  to  pattent  of  Mr.  Nicholas 
Smith  &c.  Granted  to  Mr.  James  Tuke 
11  Nov.  1640  &  assigned  by  Wm.  Tuke, 
his  son  &  heire,  to  sd.  Cobb  3  Jan.  1661. 

PETER  PRESTLEY,  300  acs.  Cum- 
berland Co.,  4  Oct.  1664,  p.  394,  (452). 
Sly.  upon  Wiccocomico  Cr.,  Ely.  upon 
land  pattented  by  Geo.  Colclough  at  a 
branch  called  Bridg  Cr.  Granted  sd. 
Colclough  4  June  1655,  by  him  deserted 
&  granted  to  Eliz.  Tompson  by  order  of 
the  Gen.  Ct.  &  due  sd.  Prestly  as  marry- 
ing sd.  Eliz. 

MAJOR  WM.  WYATT,  300  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  28  June  1664,  p.  395, 
(453).  On  N.E.  side  of  Mattapony 
Riv.  behind  his  own  land,  beg.  at  his 
own  uppermost  corner  tree,  running  Ely. 
&c.  adj.  land  of  Mr.  Henry  Soane,  &c. 
Trans,  of  6  pers.* 

MR.  DANIELL  HUTT  (or  Hull) 
Merchant,  250  acs.,  parte  upon  the 
River  of  Nomany  &  the  Cr.  called  by 
the  Indian  name  of  Cose  Coss  &  is  part 
of  500  acs.  which  was  formerly  George 
Reads  &  afterwards  sould  to  Jno. 
Michaells  as  by  the  marraidge  of  sd. 
Michaells  Widdow  unto  Wm.  Overett 
became  the  sd.  Overetts  land  &  bounded 
on  the  E.  with  his  other  250  acs.  The 
sd.  land  formerly  sould  by  sd.  Overett 
to  Jno.  Biddle,  who  sould  to  sd.  Hutt. 
Last  of  June  1664,  p.  395,  (453). 

BARRENDINE  MERCER,  2  parcels 
of  land;  the  one  parcell  given  unto  sd. 
Mercer  &  the  other  given  unto  Edward 
Harrisonn  by  Col.  Bridges  Freeman  in 
his  last  will  &  testament;  the  one  par- 
cell  Dead  mans  poynt  &  the  other  par- 
cell  Graces  poynt,  adj.  together,  the 
latter  parcell  purchased  by  Mercer  of 
sd.  Harrison  conteyning  245  acs.,  in  all 
420  acs.,  bounded  N.E.  on  Moses  Cr., 
S.E.  on  Bridges  Freemans  land,  S.W.  on 
Tomahun  Cr.  &  N.W.  on  Capt.  Bennett 
Freemans  land.  10  Aug.  1664,  p.  395, 
(454). 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


523 


WM.  HARDITCH  (Hardich),  450 
acs.  N'umberland  Co.,   7  May  1664,  p. 

395,  (455).  S.  side  of  Potomack  Riv., 
beg.  at  an  oyster  shell  poynt  on  Ewd. 
side  of  poore  Jack  Cr.  upon  Nomany 
bay,  running  S.E.  &c.  to  Wwd.  side  of 
a  small  Cr.  dividing  this  &  land  of  Mr. 
Thomas  Speake  &c.  to  br.  of  Poore  Jack 
Cr.  dividing  this  from  land  of  Mr. 
Walter  Broadhurst.  Renewal  of  patent 
dated  15  Sept.  1651. 

GILBERT  METCALFE  (Medcalfe), 
of  London,  Merchant,  810  acs.,  650  acs. 
taken  upon  Peancketancke  in  Gloster 
Co.,  beg.  at  the  water  side  at  a  marked 
tree  of  John  Chapmans,  running  E.  &c, 
the  survey  of  same  having  been  made 
Oct.  12  1663;  250  acs.  purchased  of 
Mr.  Edwd.  Wyatt,  adj.  land  of  Mr.  Wm. 
Armstead,  beg.  at  the  old  marked  trees 
of  Col.  Hugh  Gwin  in  the  Pinnace  (?) 
neck,  over  the  Cr.  &  woods,  including  a 
neck  of  land  being  most  of  it  Indian 
feilds,  as  will  appeare  by  bill  of  sale  in 
the  Gloster  records.    25   Sept.   1664,  p. 

396,  (455). 

JOHN  AYRES,  378  acs.  on  S.  side  of 
Rappa.  Riv.  in  the  freshes,  beg.  at  S.W. 
corner  of  land  belonging  to  Jno.  Meder, 
running  S.S.W.  &c.  to  trees  dividing 
this  &  land  of  Robt.  Davies,  thence  N. 
42  perches,  W.  80  perches  to  a  br.  of 
Potobaco  Cr.,  thence  N.N.E.  to  land  of 
Jno.  Medar  &c.  25  Sept.  1665,  p.  396, 
(455).  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Wm.  Brum- 
well,  Wm.  Bowlewar,  Jno.  Leatherland, 
Tho.  Strange,  Rebecca  Browne,  Wm. 
Langdale,  James  Bush,  Michaell  Parra- 
more. 

NICH.  COPELAND  &  WM.  WEST, 
1589  acs.  on  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Co. 
about  2  mi.  from  the  river  side,  25  Sept. 
1665,  p.  396,  (456).  Beg.  at  corner  of 
Capt.  Weires  land  &  land  of  Tho.  Hob- 
son  nere  a  branch  side,  extending  to 
land  of  Mr.  Wm.  Lane,  N.E.  &c,  cross- 
ing Rappa.  path,  thence  S.E.  &c.  Trans, 
of  32  pers:  Wm.  Sergiant,  Jno.  Price, 
Susan  Ward,  Jno.  Greenwood,  Jno. 
Warner,  Mary  Warner,  Rachiell  Simp- 
son, Wm.  Grimble,  Ann  Browne,  James 
Nicholls,    Tho.    Taylor,    Toby    Rogers, 


Wm.  Bright,  Sarah  Meade,  Jno.  Kemp, 
Judith  Olive,  Mary  Hopkins,  Sarah 
Milbridge,  Roger  Waterford,  James 
Cone,  Patrick  Love,  Symon  Grey,  Edith 
Tyler,  Morgan  Jones,  Jno.  Barron,  Jno. 
Staples,  Jno.  Rowley,  Law.  Hawlee, 
Luke  Ravew,  Jno.  Swift,  Susan  Riply, 
Jonathan  Dollatree. 

MR.  ROBT.  DAVIES  (Davis), 
2580  acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  25  Sept.  1665,  p. 
397,  (457).  In  the  freshes  of  the 
River;  2164  acs.  on  the  S.  side  thereof 
about  1^2  mi.  from  the  same  &  on  S.E. 
side  of  the  head  of  a  Cr.  of  Mr.  Thomas 
Lucas,  Sr.,  beg.  at  S.E.  end  of  Peter 
Cornwells  land  &c.  to  white  oake 
dividing  Cornwell  &  Mr.  Daniell  Gaines 
standing  nere  Cattaile  br.  made  by  Mr. 
Thomas  Lucas,  Sr.  Creek,  thence  N.N.E. 
by  sd.  Mr.  Games  lyne  &c.  crossing 
Cockle  Cr.,  thence  W.N.W.  &c.  to  a 
white  oake  nere  Chikahomani  path  &c. 
towards  land  of  Robt.  Tomlin  &c.  416 
acs.  beg.  nere  land  of  John  Ayres,  run- 
ning with  his  trees  S.S.W.  100  per.  to 
stake  at  his  miles  end,  thence  W.  &c.  to 
corner  of  Henrick  Lucas,  thence  N.W. 
&c.  to  land  of  James  Coghill,  thence 
S.W.  &c.  to  Potobacco  path,  thence  N. 
&c.  2164  acs.  being  taken  up  in  the  name 
of  sd.  Davies  &  Wm.  Hogdson  but  never 
pattented  &  by  sd.  Hogdson  with  the 
free  consent  of  Orah  (?)  his  wife,  as- 
signed to  sd.  Davies  &  4l6  acs.  taken 
up  in  his  own  name,  the  sd.  2580  acs. 
due  for  trans,  of  52  pers:  Samll. 
Parrott,  Joseph  Parrott,  Francis  Parrott, 
James  Culpepper,  Roger  Bainard,  Samll. 
Mason,  Tymothy  Jnoson,  Judith  Stan- 
ford, Robt.  West,  John  Fish,  Marma- 
duke  Pikman,  Geor(g)e  Parsons,  Fran- 
cis Partin,  6  Negroes,  Timothy  Jnoson, 
Mary  Bennett,  Ann  Jones,  Alice  Eston, 
Phillip  Flower,  Tho.  Watts,  Robt.  Mer- 
cer, Patience  Darkwell,  Obedia  Robins, 
Jno.  Elton,  Tho.  Newcock,  Richd. 
Wooton,  Bartholomew  Feild,  Ellen 
Wescott,  Eliz.  Cofeild,  Jno.  Brumly, 
Jno.  Baker,  Francis  Peterson,  Ralph 
Hopkins,  Samll.  Glower,  Jane  Stand- 
fast, Wm.  Porter,  Nathaniell  Garford, 
Joseph  Copton,  Tho.  Hoskins,  Tho. 
Story  (or  Skory),  Mary  Bonner,  Mar- 
tha Pallett,  Mary  Potts,  Samll.  Johnson, 
Walter  Price,  Edward  Munt,  Jno.  Tye. 


524 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Assignment  of  the  above  survey  in 
consideration  of  1200  Lbs.  of  tobacco 
&  caske.  Signed:  William  Hodgson  & 
Onah  (or  Oran)  Hodgson.  (Witnesses: 
Perilla  Callihan,  Lawrence  Hookes. 
Test:  Alex.  Fleming.  15  Sept.  1665, 
p.  397,  (458). 

MR.  EDWARD  SANDERSON,  3000 

acs.  James  City  Co.,  27  Sept.   1665,  p. 

398.  In  Chikahomany  Riv.  2300  acs. 
being  maine  land  &  700  acs.  including 
3  islands  of  Wood  &  Marsh,  bounding 
N.  on  Sandersons  Cr.  to  marked  tree  on 
Sir  William  Berkelyes  line,  S.  upon  gutt 
parting  the  land  of  Jno.  Felgate  &  Col. 
Robt.  Holt,  E.  upon  the  head  of  sd. 
gutt,  between  trees  of  sd.  Holt  &  San- 
derson to  main  br.  of  Chekerors  Cr., 
along  sd.  br.  Nwd.  until  it  comes  to 
trees  of  sd.  Berkely  which  crosseth  a 
ridge  between  their  lands,  thence  to  head 
of  Sandersons  Cr.  &  W.  upon  Piny 
Poynt  Cr.  2200  acs.  granted  sd.  San- 
derson 20  Jan.  1650;  400  acs.  granted 
to  Phillip  Chesly  7  June  1650  &  as- 
signed to  sd.  Sanderson  6  Aug.  1652; 
150  acs.  granted  to  Wm.  Morgan,  who 
assigned  to  Jno.  Browning  &  by  him  as- 
signed to  James  Cockett  (Cocquett),  & 
upon  petition  of  sd.  Sanderson,  hee  hav- 
ing an  order  of  the  County  Court 
granted  for  an  extent  against  the  land 
of  sd.  Cocquett  for  the  satisfaction  of 
a  certaine  summe  of  mony  due  from  sd. 
Cocquett;  the  residue  250  acs.  due  for 
trans,  of  5  pers:  Robt.  Colby,  Jno. 
Wms.  (Williams),  Evan  Waters,  Peter 
Williamson,  Margarett  Jones.  Marginal 
Note:  "This  pattern  received  false." 
(Note:  While  this  patent  is  not  re- 
corded in  New  Book  5,  it  is  here  in- 
serted because  of  description  of  land  & 
the  names  mentioned.) 

FRANCIS  OVERTON  &  WM. 
CHARLTON,  410  acs.  Rappa.  Co.  on 
S.  side  of  sd.  River,  21  Aug.   1663,  p. 

399,  (459).  Beg.  by  a  slash  or  pond 
side  aboute  a  mile  from  the  river  & 
backing  the  land  of  Mr.  David  Fox  &c, 
turning  in  an  oak  swamp  &c.  nigh  adj. 
Kylman  miles  end  &c.  over  branches  of 
a  Beavor  Dam  proceeding  from  a  small 
Cr.  behind  the  plantation  of  Sir  Henry 
Chickly  &c.    Trans,   of  9  pers.* 


WM.  MILES  &  WM.  COOKE,  Sr., 
1100  acs.  Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  29  Sept. 
1664,  p.  399,  (460).  On  the  second  br. 
of  the  Black  Water,  beg.  at  upper  cor. 
tree  of  Jno.  Olivers  land,  running  down 
the  swamp  S.W.  &c.  to  Mr.  Englands 
cor.  tree,  thence  S.  &c.  Trans,  of  22 
pers:  Henry  Wilson,  Job  Virgin,  Wm. 
Gobson,  Jno.  Jnoson,  Arthur  Jones, 
Samll.  Jenkins,  Edward  Miller,  Sampson 
Clarke,  Arthur  Jones,  Peter  Plumer, 
John  Harris,  Margtt.  Jones,  Hanay 
Boyce,  Jno.  Jackson,  Stephen  Pettus, 
Wm.  Stephens,  Wm.  Edwards,  Edward 
James,  Tho.  Petegrew,  Stephen  Wms., 
Edwd.  Williamson. 

RICHARD  BUNDICK  (Bunduck), 
1400  acs.  Accomack  Co.,  12  July  1664, 
p.  400,  (460).  At  the  seaboard  side, 
beg.  at  land  of  Col.  Edmond  Scarburgh, 
bounded  on  S.  by  Longtone  branch  &c. 
Trans,  of  28  pers:  Richard  Holmden, 
Edward  Thurland,  William  Thinn  (or 
Thrim),  William  Charlton,  John  Mal- 
lowes,  Edwin  Monfort,  Martha  Millford, 
Easter  Phillips,  Thomas  Mallowes, 
James  Trussell,  Jonas  Robinson,  Wm. 
Wright,  Jno.  James,  Jno.  Aspinall, 
James  Mathews,  Hen.  Horsington. 

CAPT.  JOHN  SAVADGE  (Savage), 
9000  acs.  N'ampton  Co.,  2  Oct.  1664,  p. 
401,  (461).  Bounded  on  W.  by  Ches- 
piack  Bay,  E.  by  the  seaboard  side,  S. 
by  Cherristones  Cr.,  formerly  called 
Accomacke  Cr.  the  maine  branch  thereof 
&c.  &  on  N.  by  Savadges  Cr.  formerly 
called  Wiscoponson  &c.  Granted  21 
Nov.  1637,  &  due  for  trans,  of  122  pers. 
&  trans,  of  58  pers.  &  granted  to  Col. 
Jno.  Stringer  13  Mar.  1661  &  by  sd. 
Stringer  &  Ann  his  wife  assigned  to  sd. 
Capt.  Jno.  Savage  11  Aug.  1663  &  by 
them  acknowledged  in  open  court  the 
28  Apr.  1664.  Tho.  Coffin,  Edward  Pike, 
Robt.  Chandler,  Peter  Kebble,  Jeffery 
Pennull,  Jno.  Sarum,  Tho.  Oriott,  Eliz. 
Berkin,  Joane  Greene,  Jno.  Busshell, 
Walter  Savage,  Tho.  Wild,  Wm.  Kite 
(or  Kibe),  Jno.  Nauson,  Anto.  Crump, 
Samll.  Sanders,  Jno.  Draper,  Robt. 
Sollers,  Edward  Tryar,  Francis  Hughes, 
Jno.  Kilving,  Jno.  Elliot,  Ri.  Greene, 
Paul  Methum  (?),  Rich.  White,  Xtopr. 
Gardner,  Stephen  Fox,  Tho.  Ray,  Joane 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


525 


Rader  (?),  Martha  Elmes,  James  Shel- 
don, Edward  Pennull,  Rich.  Dowd,  Tho. 
Watson,  Phill.  Person,  Wm.  Rauldin, 
Jno.  Hancock,  Wm.  Morton,  Jno.  Hig- 
gins,  James  Hall,  Henry  Francks,  Rich. 
Loftis,  Edward  Berry,  Rich.  Callway, 
Jno.  Ferres,  James  Croutch,  Jno.  Holt, 
Wm.  Joyce,  Joane  Greene,  Sarah  Nor- 
ton, Joseph  Wash,  Jno.  Bread,  Tho. 
Jolliff,  John  Beare,  James  Sheldon,  Ed- 
ward Vernon,  Jno.  Andrews,  James 
Charles,  Rich.  Carwar,  Jno.  Croft,  Jno. 
Harris,  Jno.  Beverly,  Wm.  Wade,  Ma- 
thew  Raye,  Robt.  Challes,  Charles  Yorke, 
Edward  Westby,  Rich.  Danry,  (or 
Daney),  Edward  More,  An.  Jnoson, 
Mary  White,  Edward  Carew,  Wm. 
Mux,  George  Sandes,  Tho.  Foley,  Jno. 
Abert,  Phill.  Bruce  (or  Brace),  Jno. 
Finch,  Tho.  Street,  Jno.  Hening,  Tho. 
Street,  Tho.  Vaultry  (or  Taultry), 
James  Norton,  Jane  Shaw,  Robt.  Jones, 
Wm.  Evans,  Jude  Morgan,  Henry 
White,  Wat  Bruer,  Judeth  Maze,  Hany 
Due,  Evan  Jones,  Peter  Gore,  Wm. 
Stevens,  Mu.  (?)  East,  Henry  Phillips, 
Hannard  Wms.,  Aug.  Skiner,  Peter 
Francklin,  Jno.  James,  Symon  Dudly. 
Wm.  Coates,  Edward  Coates,  Walter 
Heard,  Tho.  Morray,  Symon  Evans, 
Mary  Francklin,  Tho.  James,  Peter 
Plumner,  Edward  Ives,  Henry  Walker, 
Mary  Milles,  James  Milles  (or  Miller), 
12  Negroes,  Tho.  Edwards,  Jno.  Ed- 
wards, Wm.  Edwards,  Mary  Stone,  Susan 
Hart,  Martha  Due,  Wm.  White,  Ed- 
ward James,  Mary  Wms,  Tho.  Norton, 
Gabriell,  Jacob  Ashly,  Edward  Say,  Tho. 
Nappier  (or  Napper),  Robt.  Whittle, 
An  Whittle,  Tho.  Mun,  Tho.  Knotch- 
bull,  Wm.  Ayhurst,  Tho.  Twisden,  Wm. 
Meares,  7  Negroes,  Arthur  Pond,  Wm. 
Sweett,  Margtt.,  Rachaell  Coe,  Henry 
Phillmott,  Edward  Grace,  Susan  Peters, 
Martha  Goodland,  Edward  Ives,  Martha 
Black,  Walter  Black,  Edward  Preston, 
Tho.  Edmonds,  Jane  Edmonds,  Wm. 
Edmonds,  Henry  Biggs,  Tho.  Rason, 
Peter  Plovier  (?),  Jno.  James,  Tho. 
Holmes,  Wm.  West,  Jno.  Gore,  Edwd. 
Stamford,  6  Negroes,  Jno.  Edward, 
Mary  Cole,  Hanah  Driver,  Martha  Short. 

FRANCIS  ENGLAND,  2366  acs.  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  29  Sept.  1664,  p.  402, 
(462).    946  by  former  patent  &  120  acs. 


by  another  patent,  both  dated  13  Jan. 
1661.  400  acs.  of  the  residue  beg.  at 
his  own  land,  running  S.  &c.  &  adj. 
200  acs.  he  purchased  of  Jno.  White, 
both  of  these  beg.  in  the  mouth  of  Hills 
branch  &c.  700  acs.  beg.  at  his  120  ac. 
patent,  running  N.E.  by  N.  &c.  to  Robt. 
Elys  corner  tree,  then  N.N.W.  &c.  nere 
the  head  of  Tabers  branch,  down  the 
same  to  Xtopr.  Lewis'  land,  then  to 
beg.  Trans,  of  26  pers:  Francis  Eng- 
land, Joyce  his  wife,  Fran.  Masters, 
Bartho.  Devonshire,  Edward  Davis, 
George  Cripps,  Jno.  Godbere,  Eliz. 
Halfpenny,  Bath.  Man,  Jno.  Wigginton, 
Fran.  Jones,  Walter  Hoell,  2  Negroes, 
Barth  (a)  man,  Rich.  Powell,  Jno. 
Bruer,  Tho.  Huse,  Tho.  Griffin,  Jon. 
Birge,  Jno.  Ross,  Rich.  Barber,  Paul 
Snarsdell,  Joane  Heath,  Cornelius  Cully, 
Jno.  Morgan. 

Page  403  is  blank. 

CAPT.  WM.  BROADRIB,  595  acs. 
James  City  Co.,  6  Sept.  1665,  p.  404, 
(463).  S.  side  of  Chikahomini  Riv., 
beg.  in  Mr.  Brumfeilds  line  of  marked 
trees  standing  nere  a  br.  that  runs  into 
sd.  river  called  the  greate  run  where 
Francis  Story  now  lives  &c.  to  Shad- 
docks br.  &c.  to  former  devdt.  of  Mr. 
David  Newills,  then  S.E.  by  E.  &c.  Sd. 
land  taken  up  by  sd.  Newell  3  Sept. 
1664  &  assigned  to  sd.  Broadrib  22 
Aug.  1665,  sd.  Newell  having  never 
patterned  the  land,  being  due  for  trans, 
of  12  pers:  Jno.  Ackey  (or  Atkey), 
Robt.  Saxton,  Bryan  Bream  (?),  Richd. 
Morgan,  Tho.  Ashly,  An  Jacobus,  Jer. 
Wate  (or  Wale),  Geo.  Singleton, 
Susanah  Hide,  Joane  Rouse,  John  Ale, 
Will.  Griggs. 

MRS.  ANN  HACKE,  GEORGE 
NICH.    HACKE    &    PETER    HACKE, 

1000  acs.  N'ampton  Co.,  11  Sept.  1665, 
p.  404,  (464).  900  acs.  at  Pungotegue 
Cr.  beg.  at  a  little  branch  on  the  S.  side, 
extending  Wly.  down  same,  bounded  on 
E.  by  sd.  branch  &  land  of  Sampson 
Robins,  on  N.  by  the  main  Cr.,  W.  by 
the  bay  &  S.  towards  Nondui  Cr; 
100  acs.  contained  in  2  small  islands 
neere  the  N.  point  of  Pungotegue  Cr. 
Granted   to   Dr.   George  Hacke,   deed., 


526 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


late  husband  of  sd.  Ann  &  father  of  sd. 
Geo.  Nich.  &  Peter  Hacke,  which  sd. 
George  dieing  &  being  an  alien  sd.  land 
fell  to  his  Majestie  &  upon  petition  of 
sd.  Ann  to  the  Rt.  Honble.  Govr.  was 
granted  &  confirmed  to  the  abovenamed. 

WM.  NUSUM  &  WM.  RATTON, 
(Raton),  640  acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  18 
Sept.  1665,  p.  405,  (465).  On  N.  side 
of  sd.  Co.  upon  a  br.  of  Corratoman 
Riv.  which  divides  this  from  land  of 
Dominick  Ferriat  &  bounded  upon  land 
taken  up  by  sd.  Nusum,  &  Garrett  Rey- 
nolds. Trans,  of  13  pers:  Wm.  De- 
will,  Jno.  Bootes  (or  Booles),  Ann 
Pharoah,  Margtt.  Nusum,  Michaell 
Willington,  Richd.  Stephens,  Wm.  Parr, 
Susan  Farnell,  Edw.  Tisoe,  Roger  Sid- 
well,  Robt.  Sisson,  Wm.  Percivall,  Ann 
Akeford. 

WM.  TABOTT  (Tabolt)  &  JNO. 
CHENEY  (Cheyney— Chenny),  265  acs. 
S.  side  of  Rappa.  Co.,  18  Sept.  1665,  p. 
405,  (465).  Bounding  upon  land  of  Mr. 
Antho.  Stephens,  Major  Tho.  Gutrich 
(or  Gulrich)  &  Roger  Overton  &  Jno. 
Lacey.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Tho.  Robin- 
son, Edw.  Newman,  Ann  Mace,  Jno. 
Williams,  Margarett  Maurice. 

JOHN  LACY,  28  acs.  on  S.  side  of 
Rappa.  Co.,  18  Sept.  1665,  p.  405, 
(466).  Bounding  upon  his  former 
devdt.  &  Roger  Overton.  Trans,  of  Jno. 
Jnoson. 

JNO.  SYMMONDS  (Symons)  & 
GEORGE  GILHAM  (Gillam),  65  acs. 
on  N.  side  of  Lancaster  Co.,  18  Sept. 
1665,  p.  405,  (466).  Trans,  of  James 
Jnoson. 

RICHARD  KING,  32  acs.  on  S.  side 
of  Rappa.  Co.,  18  Sept.  1665,  p.  405, 
(466).  Upon  Puscaticon  Cr.,  bounding 
upon  his  own  devdt.  Trans,  of  Henry 
Woodnoale. 

GEORGE  VEZEY,  85  acs.  on  N.  side 
of  Lancaster  Co.,  18  Sept.  1665,  p.  406, 
(467).  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Mary  Jones, 
Susan  Godlad. 

WM.  WROUGHTON,  400  acs.  on 
N.  side  of  Lancaster  Co.,  18  Sept.  1665, 


p.  406,  (467).  Beg.  at  a  marked  pine 
standing  by  an  Eagle  Nest,  running 
W.S.W  .  bounding  upon  the  Court 
House  land  &  land  of  Wm.  White, 
then  N.N.W.  &c.  upon  Mr.  Jno.  Merri- 
man,  N.W.Nly.  upon  land  of  Mr. 
Nusum,  Michael  Arms,  Danll.  Harris  & 
Richd.  Merryman,  N.E.  upon  land  of 
Doctor  Edwards  &  Tho.  Marshall,  E.Ely, 
on  land  of  Jno.  Nicholls,  Wm.  Abby, 
Wm.  Lynhall,  Mr.  Balls  &  a  former 
devdt.  of  sd.  Wroughton.  Trans,  of  8 
pers:  Ann  Wilson,  Wm.  Kett,  Antho. 
Lancaster,  Jacob  Cooper,  Hen.  Clerke, 
Hen.  Davis,  George  Holland,  Xtian. 
Marland. 

JOHN  WILLIAMS,  600  acs.  N.  side 
of  Rappa.  Co.,  upon  Farnham  Cr.,  18 
Sept.  1665,  p.  406,  (468).  Beg.  by  the 
White  oake  swamp,  running  N.W.  &c. 
down  a  line  of  marked  trees  dividing 
this  &  his  former  devdt.  &c.  Due  by 
order  of  the  Genii.  Ct.  dated  23  Nov. 
1664  &  for  trans,  of  12  pers:  Tho. 
Colly,  George  Powell,  George  Glass, 
George  Jenkins,  Richard  Pantry,  George 
Smith,  Jno.  Williams,  Nicho.  Rawlins, 
George  Smee,  Jno.  Chamberline,  Francis 
Symmons,  William  Abram. 

JNO.  BARROW,  600  acs.  in  the 
freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv.  on  S.W.  side  of 
Powmansend  Cr.  next  the  land  of  Cle- 
ment Herbert  &  running  to  white  oake 
that  parts  this  from  land  of  Jno.  Prosier 
nere  sd.  Cr.  &c.  25  Sept.  1665,  p.  407, 
(468).  Trans,  of  12  pers:  James 
Wood,  Mary  Jones,  Arthur  Smith, 
Alexander  Jenkins,  Willim  Godale, 
Jonathan  Williams,  Ann  Barrow,  Ste- 
phen Watts,  Henry  Nicholls,  Mary 
Hues,  Anthony  Young,  Mary  Toms. 

HENRY  JARMAN,  JNO.  POWELL, 
WM.  COPPIN  &  CORNELIUS  NEALL, 
1097  acs.  &  27  per.  on  S.  side  of  Rappa. 
Riv.  in  the  freshes,  about  4  mi.  from 
the  river  side  &  on  main  br.  of  Occu- 
pare  Cr.,  25  Sept.  1665,  p.  407,  (469). 
Beg.  at  the  head  of  a  vally  on  the  N. 
side  of  the  branch,  running  cross  the 
same  &c.  over  Chikahomani  Path  &c. 
Trans,  of  22  pers:  7  Negroes;  Wm. 
Stephens,  Mary  Stephens,  Ann  Stephens, 
Thomas  Wright,  Hannah  Dew,  Andrew 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


527 


Morgan,  Judeth  Prin,  Anthony  Philmore, 
Susanna  Norcott,  Margtt.  Wmson  (Wil- 
liamson), Richard  Harris,  Mary  Jones, 
Alice  Paramont,  Stephen  Willis,  Henry 
Clerke. 

JAMES  COGHILL,  246  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.  on  S.  side  of  sd.  Riv.  in  the  freshes 
of  sd.  Co.,  24  Mar.  1664/5,  p.  407, 
(470).  Beg.  at  the  head  of  Mr.  Lucas' 
Cr.  &  the  branch  side,  running  with  a 
line  of  trees  formerly  Vallentine  Allins, 
N.W.  by  W.,  thence  N.  by  E,  butting 
on  land  of  Henrick  Lucas,  thence  S.W. 
butting  on  land  of  Daniell  Games  (?), 
along  same  thence  S.S.E.  &c.  to  Mr. 
Games  land  that  joynes  to  Peter  Corn- 
well  &c.  Trans,  of  5  pers:  Thomas 
Stetting  (or  Shetting),  John  Doncomb, 
Mary  Herbert,  Paul  Woodbridge,  Mary 
Woodbridge. 

GEORG  BRYAR  &  RICH.  LAW- 
RENCE, 3000  acs.  Rappa.  Co.  on  Ewd. 
side  of  Rappa.  Cr.,  16  Mar.  1663/4,  p. 
408,  (470).  Beg.  on  sd.  Cr.  side  adj. 
land  of  Col.  More  Fantleroy  &  opposite 
to  the  now  plantation  of  Col.  Walker, 
extending  along  the  Cr.  side  to  land  of 
Charles  Grimes,  dec'd.,  bounded  by 
same,  land  of  Mr.  Jno.  Hull  &  his  own 
to  white  oak  in  his  Cr.  &c.  Trans,  of 
60  pers:  Jno.  Cole,  Wm.  Williams, 
Mary  Jones,  Wm.  Wright,  7  Negroes, 
Ann  Jones,  Andrew  Jones,  Stephen 
Waters,  Richard  White,  Nathall.  Pine, 
Henry  Addison,  Jno.  Martin,  Mary  Cole, 
Mary  Wise,  Peter  Ware,  Jno.  Pigg,  Jno. 
Garratt,  Mary  Stone,  Ann  Stone,  Tho- 
mas Harris,  Ann  Harris,  Susan  Harris, 
Margtt.  Williamson,  Richard  Mines, 
Mary  Orchard,  thrice,  Wm.  Stephens, 
Mathews  Peters,  Stephen  Margetts, 
Timothy  Collins,  Robt.  Collingworth, 
Peter  Gage,  &  his  wife,  Wm.  Norton, 
Warwick  Pett,  James  Stone,  Francis 
Skinner,  Andrew  Foreman,  Norton 
Jones,  Henry  Etmore  (or  Elmore), 
Peter  Rix,  Susan  Lawnes,  Mathew  Tom- 
lin,  Richd.  Everdew,  Susan  Pike,  5 
Negroes;  Thomas  Atkins,  Andrew 
Joyner,  Thomas  Wms.  (Williams), 
Margtt.  Jones. 

RICH.  LAWRENCE,  EVAN  DAVIS 
&  THOMAS  WILLIAMSON,  900  acs. 


Rappa.  Co.,  16  June  1663,  p.  408, 
(471).  Beg.  at  Ewd.  side  of  a  white 
marsh  at  the  head  of  a  br.  issuing  out 
of  the  Dragon  Sw.,  crossing  Mattapony 
upper  path,  running  Sly.  along  sd. 
branch  to  sd.  Swamp,  Ely.  along  same 
to  another  br.  thereof,  along  the  same 
to  Mattapony  path,  along  sd.  path  24 
degrees  N.Wly.  85  po.,  N.N.W.  298 
po.,  W.N.W.  51  po.,  W.  by  N.  204  po. 
to  beg.  Trans,  of  18  pers:  Ann  Stevens, 
Mary  Tye,  Nathaniell  Atkins,  Susanna 
Stone,  Richard  Lawne,  Peter  Stoner, 
Margtt.  Andrewes,  Wm.  Peterson,  Daccy 
(?)  Anderson,  Wm.  Norton,  Peter 
Pope,  Peter  Andrewes,  Henry  Hart, 
Rich.  Wiseman,  Stephen  Pine,  Hannah 
Dew,  Margtt.  Tollon,  Mathew  Stevens. 

MR.  EDWARD  SANDERSON,  Mer- 
chant, 3000  acs.  James  City  Co.  27  Sept. 
1665,  p.  409,  (472).  (Note:  No  ab- 
stract is  made  because  it  is  the  same  as 
abstract  noted  on  page  398,  with  the 
exception  of  marginal  note  therein 
mentioned.) 

THOMAS  TODD,  700  acs.  Gloster 
Co.,  9  Oct.  1665,  p.  410,  (473).  400 
acs.  in  Mockjack  bay  in  the  No.  River, 
beg.  at  &  running  along  a  small  creek 
N.W.  &c.  300  acs.  lying  a  mile  from 
the  river,  beg.  at  the  head  of  Edward 
Rawlins  land  at  an  ash  standing  in  the 
glead  below  Joseph  Gregories  planta- 
tion, running  W.S.W.  &c.  400  acs.  part 
of  a  patent  of  2400  acs.  granted  to  Mr. 
Wm.  Davies  (?)  &  by  him  assigned  to 
sd.  Todd  &  300  acs.  likewise  assigned. 

RICHARD  TODD,  600  acs.  Eliz. 
City  Co.,  9  Oct.  1665,  p.  410,  (474). 
350  acs.  beg.  by  the  water  side,  extend- 
ing from  land  of  Edward  Paices  (?), 
up  the  Cr.  Wwd.  &c.  &  Nly.  upon  land 
formerly  John  Graves  &c.  350  acs. 
granted  to  John  Graves  9  Aug.  1637, 
who  sould  to  Richd.  Grigson,  who  gave 
the  same  by  will  to  sd.  Todd;  250  acs. 
purchased  of  Thomas  &  Henry  Preston 
by  Mr.  Tho.  Todd  &  given  to  sd.  Rich- 
ard, his  son. 

PLOMER  BRAY,  570  acs.  Low.  Norf. 
Co.,  in  Lynhaven  Parish,  9  Oct.  1665, 
p.  410,  (475).    Beg.  at  the  head  of  land 


528 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


of  Wm.  Dyer,  running  S.S.E.  to  the 
swamp,  thence  W.S.W.  to  the  side  of 
Van-hicks  branch,  soe  N.N.W.  along 
same  to  the  Wolfe  Snare,  thence  E.  N.E. 
to  the  beg.  Trans,  of  12  pers:  Jno. 
Atkey,  Robt.  Sixton,  Bryan  Breeme, 
Richd.  Morgan,  Tho.  Ashly,  Jeremiah 
Wale,  Susan  Hide,  Jno.  Ale,  Angelo 
Jacobus,  George  Singleton,  Jone  Rouse, 
Wm.  Griggs. 

JOHN    MARTIN,     578     acs.     Low. 

Norf.  Co.,  Lynhaven  Parish,  9  Oct. , 

p.  411,  (476).  Beg.  at  Indian  Cabbin 
Br.  of  Lynhaven  Riv.,  E.  &c.  to  side 
of  the  Beaver  dams  parting  this  from 
land  of  Jno.  Woodhouse  &c.  150  acs. 
part  of  a  greater  devdt.  granted  to  Tho- 
mas Allen,  by  him  assigned  to  Isaack 
Morgan,  who  sold  to  Richd.  Dudly,  who 
sold  to  James  Shuile  (?),  who  sold  to 
Jno.  Brumfeild  &  by  him  sold  to  sd. 
Martin;  350  acs.  granted  sd.  Martin  6 
Nov.  1663  &  78  acs.  for  trans,  of  2 
pers:    James  Madsly,  Robert  Scott. 

JNO.  KEETING  (or  Keeling),  150 
acs.  Low.  Norf.  Co.  in  Lyn  haven  Parish, 
9  Oct.  1665,  p.  411,  (476).  Granted 
to  Adam  Keeting  (or  Keeling)  20  Sept. 
1661  &  given  to  sd.  Jno.,  his  son. 

JNO.  CATLETT  (Cattlett),  Gent., 
500  acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  on  N.  side  of  sd. 
Riv.,  &  parish  of  Sittngborne,  3  Aug. 
1663,  p.  411,  (477).  Beg.  by  the  river 
side,  a  line  of  trees  dividing  this  from 
land  of  Peter  Mills,  the  heire  of  Wm. 
Mills,  dec'd.,  N.E.  &c.  butting  upon 
land  of  Mr.  Toby  Smith,  S.W.  &c, 
Trans,  of  10  pers:  Mary  Jones,  Wm. 
Wittington,  Susan  Steward,  3  Negroes; 
Anthony  Due,  Wm.  Peters,  Suan  Tye, 
Richard  Joyce. 

DANIEL  GAINES,  400  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  on  S.  side  of  sd.  Riv.,  28  July, 
1663,  p.  412,  (478).  On  both  of  the 
main  br.  of  Aliens  Cr.,  under  and  above 
a  body  of  hills  in  which  is  included  350 
acs.  by  patent  dated  21  of  June  1661, 
&  beg.  nigh  unto  the  path  leading  be- 
tween Potobacco  &  Chikahomani  &c, 
butting  upon  Cattaile  Sw.  &c.  350  acs. 
by  patent  dated  20  Sept.  1661  &  50  acs. 
for  trans,  of  Mary  Tatton. 


MR.  RICHARD  DUDLY,  455  acs. 
Gloster  Co.,  4  Sept.  1665,  p.  412, 
(479).  On  E.most  side  of  the  E.  river, 
beg.  on  N.W.  side  of  Pudding  Cr., 
N.W.  along  sd.  E.most  river  &c.  to 
mouth  of  a  Cr.  dividing  this  from  land 
of  Robt.  Landall  &c,  along  land  of 
Phillip  Hinly  &c.  350  acs.  granted  to 
George  Collins  25  Nov.  1653  &  105 
acs.  upon  survey  newly  taken  up  but 
never  pattented  &  due  for  trans,  of  3 
pers:  Wm.  Story,  Peter  Oliver,  Andrew 
Jones. 

JOHN  PROSSER,  4892  acs.  in  the 
freshes  of  Rappa.  above  Nanzaticon  next 
the  land  of  Mr.  Jno.  Paine  on  the  S. 
side  of  the  Riv.,  8  Oct.  1665,  p.  413, 
(479).  Beg.  at  an  oake  parting  his  & 
land  of  Mr.  Jno.  Paine,  running  down 
the  river,  over  the  Goulden  Vale  Cr.  to 
cor.  of  Jno.  Gilletts  land,  dec'd.,  &c. 
S.E.  on  back  line  formerly  Clement  Her- 
berts to  a  pochikery  nere  Pwomansend 
Cr.  &c.  to  head  of  Muzazin  Sw.  &c. 
Trans,  of  90  pers:  Harman  Ford,  Henry 
Kelderkin,  Richd.  Bartlett,  Abraham 
Packford,  Richd.  Downer,  Francis  Clif- 
ton, Robt.  Clifton,  Francis  Coniers, 
Tymothy  Holt,  Rich.  Hudson,  Robt. 
Chambers,  Richd.  Eay,  James  Clayson, 
Tho.  Portman,  Jno.  Bawdon,  Giles  Burd, 
Tho.  Moone,  Jesper  Arnold,  Jonathan 
Dew,  Joseph  Axon,  Thomas  Carvile, 
Wm.  Lampert,  Wm.  Roberts,  Wm. 
Courte,  Jno.  Foreman,  Tho.  Corken,  Jno. 
Ashford,  George  Farrar,  Jno.  Sherman, 
Ann  Tawkerd,  Ann  Collins,  Mary  Cart- 
wright,  Mary  Harper,  Judith  Teakby, 
Tho.  Tart,  Jno.  Cole,  Em.  Porte  (or 
Porter),  Hannah  Spike,  Fred.  Clowder- 
son,  Jeremiah  Frett,  Jno.  West,  James 
Stone,  Richd.  Wells,  Tho.  Wms.  (Wil- 
liams), Mary  Samper,  Jane  Hofer,  Ste- 
phen Howard,  Jno.  Reeve,  Tho.  Adam, 
Brigett  Drothers,  13  Negroes;  Georg 
Gwilliford,  Tho.  Davis,  Gilbert  Geny 
(or  Gery),  Eliz.  Edwards,  Jno.  Evans, 
Jno.  Hosnell  (or  Hosnett),  Wm.  Trea- 
son, Edwd.  Rich,  Jno.  Chart,  Abigail 
Tee  (?),  Tho.  Right,  Tho.  Merreday, 
Joane  Cotton,  Mary  Jones,  Wm.  Tye, 
Henry  Lee,  Peter  Stevens,  Andrew  Good- 
lad,  Peter  White,  Susan  Hide,  Tho. 
Yong,  Jno.  Mayson,  Andrew  Jones,  Wm. 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


529 


Wright,  Stephen  Goodlad,  Mary  Jones, 
Susan  King. 

ROBERT  HEGES  (Heggs),  200  acs. 
on  the  head  of  Hollowes  Cr.,  bounding 
on  land  of  Jno.  Vaughan.  18  Mar.  1662, 
p.  413,  (480).    Granted  to  Wm.  Freeke 

11  Sept.  1653,  assigned  to  Jno.  Beard, 
who  assigned  to  Thomas  Moulton  &  sd. 
Moulton  &  Jane  his  wife  assigned  to 
Thomas  Carvell,  who  assigned  to  sd. 
Heggs. 

WM.  PEIRCE  (Pierce),  1200  acs. 
N'umberland  Co.,  31  Dec.  1662,  p.  414, 
(481).  250  acs.  on  E.most  side  of 
Nomani  Riv.,  opposite  land  of  Mr. 
Lewis  Parrell  (or  Parrett),  beg.  at  a 
sw.  dividing  this  &  land  of  Gabriell 
Odier,  nigh  sd.  river,  W.  upon  a  branch 
of  same  upon  S.  side  of  Vasaticon  path 
&c.  600  acs.  beg.  where  the  former  land 
ends  upon  a  br.  of  sd.  river  opposite 
land  of  Mr.  Rosier  &c.  &  350  acs.  be- 
twext  land  of  sd.  Odier  &  this  land, 
running  S.  &c.    Granted  to  Jno.  Wood 

12  Oct.  1653  &  by  him  assigned  to  sd. 
Peirce. 

MR.  JNO.  MOTTROM,  1550  acs. 
N'umberland  Co.,  13  Oct.  1665,  p.  414, 
(482).  1150  acs.  on  S.E.  side  of 
Chikacone  Riv.  nigh  the  mouth,  along 
the  bay  side  S.E.  by  E.  to  mouth  of  a 
little  Cr.,  S.W.  up  the  same  &c.  400  acs. 
on  S.E.  side  of  sd.  Riv.  adj.  his  own 
land  &c.  800  acs.  granted  Jno.  Mottrom, 
Gent.,  16  Sept.  1651  &  400  acs.  by 
patent  16  Sept.  1651  &  now  due  sd. 
Jno.  as  sonn  &  heire,  &  350  acs.  for 
trans,  of  7  pers:  Roger,  Maria,  Erra, 
Nan,  Will,  Jone,  Negroes;  Jno.  Yates. 

RICHARD  WHITE,  Cooper,  1500 
acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  in  the  freshes  of  the 
Riv.,  13  Oct.  1665,  p.  415,  (483). 
1000  acs.  beg.  nigh  a  run  proceeding 
out  of  a  Cr.  on  the  upper  side  of  the 
land  of  Abraham  Moone,  N.  by  E.  &c. 
nigh  land  of  Jno.  Gillett,  E.  by  S.  Sec. 
to  his  patent  land,  S.  by  W.  &c.  500 
acs.  opposite  to  Nanzemond  towne, 
N.E.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Charles  Grimes, 
S.W.  upon  land  of  sd.  Moone  &  S.E.  on 
the  River.  1000  acs.  granted  sd.  White, 
Evan  Davis  &  Samll.  Mann  6  Oct.  1658, 


who  assigned  to  White  &  500  acs.  by 
patent  to  him  dated  2  Dec.  1657. 

MR.  WILKES  MAUNDERS,  1000 
acs.  W'moreland  Co.,  13  Oct.  1665,  p. 
415,  (484).  Beg.  on  S.W.  side  of  a 
great  swamp  that  falleth  into  Roatank 
Cr.,  extending  up  the  Sw.  S.W.  &c.  to 
head  of  a  branch  which  falleth  into 
Yeocomico  Riv.,  N.E.  to  an  oake  in  a 
great  swamp  between  this  &  land  of 
Jno.  Ward  &c.  400  acs.  granted  Robt. 
Coleman  30  June  1661  &  by  him  de- 
serted; 300  acs.  granted  to  Wm.  Clemms 
(or  Clemmis),  who  sould  to  Wm. 
Jollings  &  deserted;  300  acs.  part  of  a 
patent  of  600  acs.  granted  to  Tho.  Mar- 
tin, who  sold  to  Martin  Cole  &  by  him 
deserted;  &  granted  sd.  Maunders  upon 
petition  by  order  of  the  Gov'r.  &c. 
dated  with  these  presents  &  further  due 
for  trans,  of  20  pers:  15  Negroes;  Jno. 
Cole,  Mary  Stannop,  Judeth  White,  An- 
drew Peters,  Wm.  Wright. 

MR.  MOYSES  DAVIES  (Davis)  & 
THOMAS  BIGGINS,  1620  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  13  Oct.  1665,  p.  416,  (485). 
S.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.  nere  adj.  to  land 
called  Mohixen,  Beg.  on  the  head  of 
Mathews  br.,  which  divides  this  &  land 
taken  up  in  the  narrowes  by  Mr.  Tho- 
mas Brereton  &  Charles  Edmonds, 
thence  S.S.E.  Ely.  to  the  main  run  of  a 
swamp  called  Tottopottomoyes  Cr., 
bounding  on  sd.  run  upwards  to  an 
oake  by  Powhite  path  &c.  Trans,  of  33 
pers:  Moyses  Davies,  Henry  Drakes, 
Mary  Mosly,  Wm.  Mosly,  Tho.  Brokes, 
Wm.  Lewis,  Tho.  Wood,  Eliz.  Wood 
(or  Woad),  Lidia  How,  Wm.  Badger, 
Jno.  Gaffer,  Daniell  Merwick,  Jno. 
Jones,  Edw.  Seare,  Margtt.  Wms.  (Wil- 
liams), Rich.  Webb,  Abell  Jason,  Wm. 
Richards,  Ann  Roberts,  Susan  Aleak, 
Samll.  Hooks  (or  Hooes),  Francis 
Grover,  Dorotha  Glover,  Ri.  Bullock, 
Thomas  Man,  Edwd.  Evans,  Robt.  Evans, 
Jno.  Cawsey,  Kath.  Aires,  Jno.  Gage, 
Eliz.  Mallard,  Richard  Harvy,  Jno. 
Bradly. 

MR.  STEPHEN  CHARLTON,  1700 
acs.  at  Machepungo,  N'ampton  Co.,  14 
Oct.  1665,  p.  417,  (486).  Ely.  in  part 
of  a  creek  issuing  out  of  Machepungo 


530 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Riv.  &  upon  another  tract  of  land  of  sd. 
Charlton  &c.  Renewal  of  patent  dated 
16  Mar.  1653. 

MARTIN  JOHNSON,  of  Rappa.  Co. 
&  Parish  of  Sittingborne,  326  acs.  & 
40  po.  on  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  12 
Oct.  1665,  p.  417,  (487).  Beg.  at 
devdt.  of  land  of  Jno.  Ayer,  S.S.W.  to 
W.  side  of  a  creek  dividing  this  from 
land  of  Valentine  Allen  &c.  Granted  to 
Jno.  Ayres  13  Nov.  1662  &  by  him 
sould  to  Henry  Lucas  of  the  same  Co. 
&  by  him  sould  to  sd.  Johnson. 

MILES  REILY,  1100  acs.  Rappa.  Co. 
on  N.  side  of  the  Riv.,  12  Oct.  1665,  p. 
417,  (487).  200  acs.  beg.  at  marked 
red  oak  of  Tho.  Robinsons,  running  S. 
&c.  900  acs.  N.  from  a  red  oake,  E.  to 
land  of  Mr.  Jno.  Hull  &c.  Trans,  of 
22  pers:  Jno.  Hull,  Eliz.  Hull,  Mary 
Hull,  An  Baker,  Jno.  Beard,  Wm.  Hos- 
kins,  Richd.  Tinston  (?),  Jno.  Davis, 
Peter  Waterford,  Tho.  Wilkes,  Mary 
French,  Andrew  Hooper,  Cornelius 
Glover,  Samll.  Tompson,  6  Negroes, 
Mary  Jones,  Ann  Jones. 

MILES  REILY,  1000  acs.  on  N.  side 
of  Rappa.  Riv.,  12  Oct.  1665,  p.  418, 
(488).  Trans,  of  20  pers:  An  White, 
Susan  Sted  (or  Steal),  Wm.  Griffin, 
Jno.  Jones,  Peter  Fore,  Mary  Knott,  Jno. 
Tye,  Wm.  Norcott,  Ant.  Jones,  Margtt. 
Stephens,  Wm.  Titton,  Margtt.  Jones, 
Tho.  Morris,  Wm.  Stone,  Wm.  Peters, 
An  Keling,  Wm.  Jones  Margtt.  Pope, 
An  Pope,  Mary  Best. 

RALPH  MAZEY,  600  acs.  New  Kent 
Co.,  12  Sept.  1665,  p.  418,  (488).  100 
acs.  on  N.  side  of  Mattapony  Riv.  beg. 
at  Mr.  Frederick  Fartsons  cor.  at  the 
extent  of  his  EN.E.  line,  running  along 
same  &c.  500  acs.  upon  N.  side  of  sd. 
Riv.,  beg.  at  Mr.  Fosons  cor.  tree  stand- 
ing nere  a  br.  of  Hartquack  Cr.  &  adj. 
land  of  Tho.  Hickman  &c,  parallel  with 
back  line  of  Foson  &  Wm.  Henderson, 
E.N.E.  &c.  to  land  of  Peter  Ford  & 
along  back  line  of  Ford,  Haines,  Hen- 
derson &  Foson  to  beg.  100  acs.  by 
patent  dated  1  Oct.  1661  &  500  acs.  for 
trans,  of  10  psons:  An  Melling,  Mary 
Melling,    Susan    Milling,    Mary    Jones, 


Andrew  Peters,  Wm.  Story,  Peter  White, 
Phillip  Jones,  An  Hart,  Wm.  Hart. 

MR.  JNO.  EDWARDS,  530  acs.  on 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  in  Corratoman 
Riv.  upon  S.  side  of  the  E.most  branch 
thereof,  22  Mar.  1663/4,  p.  419,  (489). 
Bounded  along  land  of  Henry  Lee  E.  by 
N.,  thence  N.E.  by  N.,  thence  to  a  creek 
running  to  sd.  Riv.,  thence  W.N.W.  & 
along  river  side  to  beg.  Granted  to 
George  Taylor  5  Sept.  1650,  by  him  de- 
serted &  upon  petition  of  sd..  Edwards 
granted  to  him  by  order  of  Govr.  &c. 
dated  herewith,  &  further  due  for  trans, 
of  11  pers:  Jno.  Gibson,  Tho.  Staple- 
ton,  Jno.  Crady,  Mary  Dempton,  Jno. 
Bradford,  Jane  Bandon,  Susan  Bell,  Tho. 
Clifton,  Blanch  Randall,  Samll.  New- 
man, Tho.  Dickenson. 

JNO  MEREDETH  (Merrideth— 
Meredith),  600  acs.  on  N.  side  of 
Rappa.  Riv.  in  Corrotoman  Riv.,  in  the 
E.most  br.  on  S.  side  thereof,  14  Oct. 
1665,  p.  419,  (490).  Beg.  on  E.  side 
of  the  mouth  of  a  small  Cr.  on  sd.  River 
side,  E.S.E.  along  land  of  George  Tay- 
lor &c.  to  head  of  Wm.  Hutchins  land, 
thence  N.W.  along  same  &c.  Part  of 
760  acs.  granted  to  Major  Jno.  Bond  29 
July  1650  &  by  him  assigned  to  sd. 
Meredith. 

JNO.  BERRY,  350  acs.  Lancaster  Co., 
14  Oct.  1665,  p.  419,  (491).  On  W. 
side  of  Corrotoman  Riv.,  being  part  of 
a  tract  commonly  known  by  the  name  of 
Powells  neck;  beg.  on  the  river  side  & 
adj.  Dogwood  Spring,  then  extending 
W.  &c.  Part  of  700  acs.  granted  to 
Wm.  Clapham  11  Dec.  1663  &  assigned 
to  sd.  Berry. 

JNO.  SHARPE,  800  acs.  Rappa.  Co., 
on  S.  side  of  sd.  Riv.,  14  Oct.  1665,  p. 
420,  (492).  About  2  mi.  Sly.  from 
plantation  of  Mr.  James  Bagnall,  beg. 
nere  a  branch  issuing  into  the  great 
swamp,  running  E.N.E.  &c.  Granted  to 
sd.  Snarpe  28  Nov.  1664,  "the  course 
and  distances  not  agreeing  with  the 
naturall  situation  (?)  of  the  place,  are 
now  newly  rectified." 

MR.  RICHARD  LAWRENCE,  450 
acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  11  Oct.  1665,  p.  420, 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


531 


(493).  On  E.most  br.  of  Corrotoman 
Riv.,  bounding  upon  land  of  Thomas 
Chetwood,  running  E.  &c.  Granted  to 
Col.  Jno.  Carter,  Esq.,  25  Sept.  1661  & 
upon  petition  of  sd.  Lawrence  it  was 
granted  to  him  by  order  of  the  Govr. 
&c,  dated  with  these  presents  &  further 
due  for  trans,  of  9  pers:  Mathew  Bow- 
man, Jno.  Chambers,  Eliz.  Mills,  Wm. 
Jackson,  Jno.  Pike,  Jno.  Read,  Thomas 
Baker,   Eliz.  Hobbart,  Mathew  Harrett. 

MR.  JNO.  PINE,  600  acs.,  being  a 
neck  of  land  called  the  Island  Neck,  on 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  nere  Corroto- 
man Riv.  mouth,  N'umberland  (now 
Lancaster)  Co.,  14  Oct.  1665,  p.  421, 
(493).  S.E.  upon  Rappa.  Riv.  from 
Island  Neck  Cr.  mouth  to  the  utmost 
Island  poynt,  bounding  on  S.W.  with 
Rappa.  Riv.  from  the  Is.  poynt  to  the 
Is.  Neck  back  Cr.  mouth  &c.  Granted 
to  Wm.  Nesum,  Thomas  Sax,  Miles 
Batersby  &  sd.  Pine  in  joynt  tenure  the 
29  Jan.  1649  containing  800  acs.,  "the 
said  pattent  being  Casually  burnt  and 
the  said  Land  thereupon  strictly  sur- 
veyed it  is  found  to  containe  but  600 
acres  as  abovesaid.  The  said  land  like- 
wise by  the  naturall  deaths  of  Tho.  Sax 
and  Miles  Batersby  and  the  assignment 
of  Wm.  Nesum  now  belongs  wholy  to 
Jno.  Paine"  etc.  (Note:  This  last  ref- 
erence gives  this  name  as  Paine.) 

COL.  PETER  ASHTON,  500  acs. 
W'moreland  Co.,  12  Oct.  1665,  p.  421, 
(494).  S.  side  of  Potomack  Riv.  & 
N.E.  side  of  the  head  of  Chappawansick 
Cr.  &c.  S.E.  upon  land  of  Nathaniell 
Pope.  Granted  to  Walter  Brodhurt  4 
Sept.  1655  &  by  him  deserted  &  upon 
petition  of  sd.  Col.  Austin  it  was 
granted  to  him  by  order  &c.  &  further 
due  for  trans,  of  10  pers:  Peter  Laper 
(?),  Wm.  Barker,  Eliz.  Bundy,  Mary 
Wills,  Jno.  Whitcroft,  John  Simson, 
John  Leaves,  Robt.  Atkins,  Wm.  Aldrige, 
Eliz.  Peirce. 

EDWARD  ROGERS,  600  acs.  W'- 
moreland Co.,  14  Oct.  1665,  p.  421, 
(495).  S.  side  of  Potomack  Riv.,  on 
N.  side  of  Potomack  Cr.  towards  the 
head  thereof,  beg.  against  land  of  Mr. 
Robt.  Yeo,  extending  E.  &c.    Being  part 


of  a  patent  for  700  acs.  granted  to  Wm. 
Beach  10  June  1654  &  sould  to  Coll. 
Gerrard  Fowke,  who  sold  to  Nich. 
Russell,  by  him  assigned  to  sd.  Fowke, 
who  assigned  the  above  to  sd.  Rogers. 

WM.  WILDY  (Weldy),  1450  acs. 
N'umberland  Co.,  14  Oct.  1665,  p.  422, 
(495 ) .  On  N.  side  of  Gr.  Wiccocomico 
Riv.,  Sly.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Jno.  Bar- 
don,  Mr.  Radford  (or  Rapford)  dec'd. 
&  Wm.  Downing  bought  of  Martin 
Cole,  John  Edwards  &  others  &  Ely. 
upon  land  of  Roger  Walters  &  Jno. 
Motly.  Granted  unto  Jane  the  daughter 
of  Col.  Wm.  Clayborne  10  Feb.  1657  & 
assigned  to  Capt.  Jno.  Whitty  by  Col. 
Wm.  Clayborne,  Capt.  Wm.  Clayborne 
&  Tho.  Brereton  who  marryed  the  sd. 
Jane  &  then  likewise  confirmed  by  order 
of  the  Govr.  &c.  dated  with  these  pre- 
sents to  sd.  Whitty  &  due  for  trans,  of 
29  pers.,  the  sd.  land  being  granted  to 
sd.  Whitty  15  May  1661  &  assigned  by 
him  to  sd.  Weldy. 

STEPHEN  ROBINSON,  500  acs. 
bounding  N.Ely,  upon  a  br.  of  Potomack 
freshes  nere  the  head  of  a  great  Cr. 
beyond  Col.  Speakes  land  above  the 
Doege  Island,  S.Ely,  upon  land  called 
Peter  Smiths  &  running  N.Wly.  &c. 
Granted  to  Tho.  Moulton  15  July  1657, 
by  him  assigned  to  Jno.  Wood,  who  as- 
signed to  Wm.  Thomas  &  by  him  as- 
signed to  Wm.  Betts,  who  gave  &  as- 
signed to  sd.  Robinson,  Orphant.  14 
Oct.  1665,  p.  422,  (496). 

RICHD.  BRAMHAM,  240  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  on  N.  side  of  sd.  Riv.  &  W.  side 
of  Totoskey  Cr.,  14  Oct.  1665,  p.  423, 
(497).  Beg.  at  head  of  land  belonging 
to  George  Haslock  (Haslelock),  dec'd., 
on  the  side  of  a  small  swamp  dividing 
sd.  land  &  land  of  Jno.  Sherlock,  run- 
ning N.W.  &c.  to  land  of  Samll.  Cockin, 
170  po.  to  land  of  James  Williamson 
&c.  Trans,  of  5  pers:  Symon  Corneck, 
Wm.  Cisell,  John  Brookes,  Sarah  Davies, 
Marke  Hill. 

JAMES  BROWNE,  346  acs.  125  per. 
in  Rappa.  Co.,  on  S.  side  of  sd.  Riv., 
28  Sept.  1664,  p.  423,  (498).  Beg.  at 
lower  side  of  land  of  Wm.  Gray  by  a 


532 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


branch  side,  running  W.  &c.  to  land  of 
Jno.  Ayres,  thence  to  a  Cr.  &c.  200  acs. 
due  by  former  grant  &  the  residue  ad- 
joining due  for  trans,  of  4  pers:  Ma- 
thew  Bowman,  Jno.  Chambers,  Eliz. 
Miller,  Wm.  Jackson. 

MR.  NICHOLAS  JARNEW,  178  acs. 
W'moreland  Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Poto- 
mack  Riv.,  14  Oct.  1665,  p.  423,  (498). 
Adj.  land  of  Wm.  Clements,  extending 
N.N.W.  &c.  to  a  gum  dividing  this  & 
land  of  Mr.  Tho.  Philpott,  thence  S.S.E. 
&c.  200  acs.  by  patent  dated  29  Nov. 
1662  to  sd.  Jarnew  but  upon  strict  sur- 
vey found  to  contain  178  acs. 

SAMUELL  BONAM,  99  acs.  W'more- 
land Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Potomack  Riv., 
13  Oct.  1665,  p.  424,  (499).  Adj.  land 
of  Richard  Holding,  extending  W.  &c. 
nigh  the  little  creek,  thence  S.E.Ely, 
nigh  Yeocomico  Riv.  &c.  Granted  to 
sd.  Holding,  by  him  deserted,  then  sup- 
posed to  contain  112  acs.  but  upon  strict 
survey  found  to  contain  99  acs.,  &  now 
granted  by  order  &c.  &  further  due  for 
trans,  of  2  pers:  Henry  Lacashire,  Jane 
Castle. 

FRANCIS  PETTETT,  300  acs.  N'- 
ampton  Co.,  14  Oct.  1665,  p.  424, 
(500).  Near  the  head  of  Cheristones 
Cr.  on  S.  side  of  Hogpen  Cr.  &  main 
br.  thereof,  bounding  on  the  N.  part 
therewith  dividing  this  from  land  of 
Capt.  Jno.  Savidge,  on  S.  parte  by  Snag 
pine  br.  &  trees  running  from  the  head 
thereof  E.N.E.  to  marked  tree  parting 
this  from  land  of  Lt.  Col.  Wm.  Kendall 
&c.  200  acs.  formerly  belonging  to 
Capt.  Jno.  How,  since  escheated  to  his 
Majestie  &  granted  to  Maj.  Wm.  An- 
drews, who  sold  to  sd.  Pettett  4  Sept. 
1664  &  100  acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers: 
Migo  &  Charles,  Negroes. 

THOMAS  GERRARD,  1000  acs. 
N'umberland  Co.,  16  Oct.  1665,  p.  425, 
(500).  S.  side  of  Potomack  Riv., 
E.N.E.  upon  Natchosiq  Cr.  opposite 
land  of  George  Ludlow,  Esqr.,  E.S.E. 
upon  land  of  Nicholas  Jornew  &c.  16 
Oct.  1665,  p.  425,  500.  Granted  to 
Wm.  Hoccady  3  Apr.  1651  &  by  him 
assigned  to  sd.  Gerrard. 


GEORGE  PARKER,  350  acs.  N'amp- 
ton  Co.,  at  Pungoteage  Cr.,  20  Oct.  1661, 
p.  425,  (501).  Beg.  at  a  small  branch 
issuing  out  of  Pocomeck  Br.  &c. 
Granted  to  Mr.  Thomas  Teagle  12  Oct. 
1652  &  by  him  assigned  to  sd.  Parker 
&  Jno.  Elzey,  who  assigned  his  right  to 
sd.  Parker. 

FRANCIS  &  MARY  VINCENT,  100 

acs.  N'ampton  Co.,  20  Mar.  1660,  p. 
425,  (501).  S.  side  of  Pungotege  Riv., 
Ely.  upon  a  br.  of  same  called  Pocomock, 
Nly.  upon  land  of  Jno.  Jnoson,  Negro, 
Wly.  upon  land  of  Anthony  Jnoson, 
Negro,  &  Sly.  upon  land  of  Nicholas 
Waddilow.  Granted  to  Richard  Jnoson, 
Negro,  21  Nov.  1654  for  trans,  of  2 
pers.*  &  due  the  abovenamed  by  assign- 
ment from  Mathew  Pepin  26  Dec.  1660, 
to  whom  it  had  been  assigned  by  sd. 
Richard  Johnson,  Negro,  2  Mar.  1657. 

MR.  WM.  THOMAS,  608  Acs. 
N'umberland  Co.,  19  Oct.  1665,  p.  426, 
(502).  560  acs.  in  Little  Wiccocomico 
Cr.  &  commonly  known  by  the  name  of 
Kings  Neck,  beg.  S.S.E.  on  sd.  Creek 
from  the  mouth  of  a  cr.  or  br.  commonly 
called  old  Mans  Cr.  to  mouth  of  Kings 
Cr.  &c.  to  a  cr.  dividing  this  from  land 
of  Michaell  Brooke,  S.W.  on  land  of 
George  Colclough  &c.  Granted  to 
Richd.  Tompson  by  patents  dated  4  Apr. 
1649  for  560  acs.  &  48  acs.  dated  15 
Dec.  1651  &  after  sd.  Tompson's  de- 
cease became  due  unto  Sarah  &  Eliz. 
Tompson,  his  heires,  &  by  Mr.  Tho. 
Willoughbie  &  Mr.  Peter  Presly,  who 
marryed  sd.  Sarah  &  Eliz.,  with  their 
free  consents  assigned  over  to  sd. 
Thomas. 

RICHARD  RENSHAW,  300  acs. 
Gloster  Co.,  23  Mar.  1664,  p.  426, 
(503).  On  the  Bryre  br.  which  issueth 
into  the  head  of  Ware  Riv.  in  Mock- 
jack  bay,  beg.  by  the  branch  side  run- 
ning N.W.  by  same  &c.  to  Mrs.  Cooks 
land  &c.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Jno.  Picker- 
ing, Wm.  Jones,  Jno.  Isbell,  Jno.  Darly 
(or  Darby),  Alice  Wellmay,  Richd. 
Dirbishire. 

MRS.  MARY  FANTLEROY,  Wid- 
dow,  2600  acs.  in  Rappa.  Co.,  according 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


533 


to  the  antient  bounds  thereof,  20  Oct. 
1665,  p.  427,  (504).  Granted  to  Miles 
Dixon  &  lately  found  to  escheate  to  his 
Majestie  as  by  an  Inquisition  recorded 
in  the  Secretaryes  Office  under  the  hands 
&  seals  of  Mr.  Cuthbert  Potter  by  virtue 
of  a  deputation  from  Col.  Miles  Cary, 
Esqr.,  his  Majestie's  Escheator  Genl.  for 
this  county  &  the  Jury  sworne  to  him 
for  that  purpose  dated  25  Oct.  1665  may 
appear,  &  now  due  sd.  Mrs.  Mary  who 
hath  made  her  composition  to  bee  paid 
according  to  act. 

COL.  WM.  KENDALL,  600  acs.  ac- 
cording to  the  antient  lawfull  bounds 
thereof  in  N'ampton  Co.,  18  Oct.  1665, 
p.  427,  (504).  Formerly  belonging  to 
Capt.  Jno.  How,  dec'd.  &  lately  found 
to  escheate  &c,  the  Jury  sworne  before 
Col.  Jno.  Stringer,  Dep.  Escheator  for 
that  Co.,  dated  30  Sept.  1662  &c.  & 
now  granted  sd.  Kendall  who  hath  made 
his  composition  &c.  Also  300  acs.  more 
joyning  upon  the  sd.  land,  bounded  Wly. 
on  his  own  &  land  of  Francis  Pettit, 
Nly.  on  Jno.  Savidge,  Ely.  on  Capt. 
Phill.  Telyo,  (?)  deed.,  Sly.  on  land  of 
Maj.  Wm.  Andrewes  and  a  former  pat- 
tent  of  Col.  Obedience  Robbins  dated  20 
Mar.  1643.  Granted  to  Major  Wm.  An- 
drewes 15  Oct.  1660,  by  him  deserted 
&  upon  petition  of  sd.  Kendall  granted 
him  by  order  &c.  &  due  for  trans,  of  6 
pers:  Mary  Barnes,  Walter  Banington, 
John  Hawkins,  Tho.  Hemence,  Eliz. 
Merrick,  Hester  Ridly. 

COL.  GARRARD  FOWKE,  1050 
acs.  N'umberland  Co.,  20  Oct.  1665,  p. 
427,  (505).  Nly.  upon  Potomack  Riv., 
S.Ely,  upon  Chotanck  Cr.  &  S.W.  upon 
land  of  Jno.  Waltham.  Granted  to 
Samll.  Taylor  9  Sept.  1653,  by  him 
sould  to  Richard  Turney  &  by  him  as- 
signed to  sd.  Fowke. 

SAME.  925  acs.  in  Potomack  Riv. 
adj.  land  of  Capt.  Giles  Brent,  20  Oct. 
1665,  p.  428,  (505).  Being  the  moyety 
of  a  pattent  granted  to  Peter  Knight  & 
said  Capt.  Cutt  13  Oct.  1653.  Granted 
to  Mrs.  Eliz.  Cutts  26  Feb.  1656  &  by 
Capt.  Jackson,  who  marryed  sd.  Eliza- 
beth, sould  to  Capt.  Tho.  Fowke  &  now 


become  due  to  sd.  Col.  Gerrard  as  heire 
to  sd.  Thomas,  dec'd. 

COL.  MILES  CARY,  Esqr.,  Counci- 
lor of  State,  a  neck  of  land  conteyning 
92  acres,  79  chs.  &  71  dec.  pts.,  in 
Warwick  Co.,  on  W.S.W.  side  of  War- 
wick Riv.,  20  Oct.  1665,  p.  428,  (506). 
Beg.  at  the  mouth  of  sd.  neck  S.  by  W. 
&c.  to  S.E.  end  of  Hawkes  Nest  ridge, 
thence  E.  by  N.  &c.  to  Canny  poynt, 
thence  N.  by  W.  &c.  to  the  Marsh  be- 
tween sd.  river  &  sd.  neck  &c.  Granted 
unto  Zachery  Cripps  14  Mar.  1628  & 
by  him  assigned  to  sd.  Col.  Cary,  the 
pattent  being  then  for  100  acres  but 
upon  strict  survey  found  to  containe  the 
quantity  aforesaid. 

SAME.  103  acs.  57  chs.  58  dec.  pts. 
of  land,  being  high  land  &  marsh  on 
N.  side  of  James  Riv.  &  to  Wwd.  of 
the  mouth  of  Worwick  Riv.  in  War- 
wick Co.,  knowne  by  the  name  of  Joyle 
Neck,  20  Oct.  1665,  p.  429,  (507). 
Beg.  on  E.most  end  of  a  ridge  nere  a 
small  creeke,  thence  N.  by  E.  &c.  to 
corner  locust  nere  Pooles  Island  Cr.  by 
the  same  S.E.  &c.  to  Colsons  Island, 
thence  S.E.  &c.  17  acs.  granted  unto 
Zachery  Cripps  10  Jan.  1643  &  assigned 
to  sd.  Col.  Cary  &  the  remainder  due 
for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Mary  Williams, 
John  Short. 

THOMAS  MORRIS,  50  acs.  upon 
Ware  neck  in  Gloster  Co.,  adj.  a  parcel 
of  land  called  Bassetts  Creeke  devdt., 
11  Oct.  1665,  p.  429,  (508).  Beg.  at 
the  head  of  his  own  land,  running 
through  Turtons  feild  N.N.E.  &c.  to 
corner  tree  of  Mr.  Boswell  by  Turtons 
fence  &c.    Trans,  of  Richard  Spragg. 

MR.  WM.  WOODWARD,  2100  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  23  Feb.  1664,  p.  430, 
(509).  N.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.,  beg.  at 
the  mouth  of  Mr.  Johns  Cr.,  running  up 
the  river,  including  a  neck  of  sunken 
ground  &c.  to  a  creeke  nere  against 
Capt.  Bassetts  now  dwelling  house, 
which  Cr.  is  the  lower  bounds  of  land 
of  Mr.  Samuell  Snead,  Sr.  whereon  he 
now  lives,  thence  E.S.E.  &c.  Said  land 
was  purchased  by  sd.  Woodward  of 
Cocka  Coeske,  Queene  of  Pomunke,  27 


534 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Sept.  1664  &  "upon  desire  of  the  said 
Queene  that  the  said  Mr.  Woodward 
might  seate  upon  the  said  Land  by  her 
assigned  and  sett  over  to  him  the  said 
Woodward,  it  was  accordingly  granted 
by  order  of  the  Govr.  and  Councell 
dated  the  24th  of  November  1664." 

EDWARD  RAWLINGS,  164  acs. 
upon  the  N.  River  in  Mockjack  bay,  beg. 
at  a  small  Cr.  parting  this  from  land  of 
George  Levitt,  running  from  the  mouth 
of  same  W.N.W.  &c.  to  land  of  Mr. 
Tho.  Todd,  E.S.E.  &c.  20  Oct.  1665,  p. 
430,  (510).  Being  part  of  a  devdt.  of 
2400  acs.  granted  to  Mr.  Wm.  Daines, 
who  assigned  to  sd.  Rawlings. 

ANTHONY  WYATT,  282  acs.  Chas. 
City  Co.,  13  Oct.  1665,  p.  430,  (511). 
Beg.  at  a  poynt  between  the  dry  bottome 
&  the  deep  bottome,  running  N.N.W. 
&c.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  "Edmond  Vickory 
(or  Vikory),  James  King,  Wm.  Cooper, 
Rich.  Newman  (or  Newain),  Tho. 
Morris,  James  Drischell. 

JNO.  COGAN  (Coggan),  650  acs. 
Chas.  City  Co.,  12  Oct.  1665,  p.  431, 
(511).  S.  side  of  James  Riv.,  beg.  on 
the  N.  of  the  ponds  as  by  agreement  of 
sd.  Cogan  &  Patriak  Jackson,  bounding 
W.  on  the  poplar  br.  by  the  side  of 
Jones  his  Levell  &c.  Granted  to  Mr. 
Rich.  Craven,  dec'd.  &  by  lineall  decent 
from  him  to  his  grandchild  Emelia,  now 
the  wife  of  Thomas  Boyce,  who  with 
his  wife's  consent  transferred  to  sd. 
Coggan  &  his  heirs. 

MORGAN  JONES,  100  acs.  Chas. 
City  Co.,  13  Oct.  1665,  p.  431,  (511). 
S.  side  of  James  Riv.,  S.  along  line  of 
Thomas  Crooke,  E.  50  po.,  N.  320  po. 
crossing  the  greate  swamp  at  the  mouth 
of  the  Cross  Sw.  &c.  Part  of  devdt. 
granted  to  Richd.  Baker  &  Patriak 
Jackson. 

MR.  ISAAK  ALLERTON,  1600  acs. 
Northumberland  County,  20  October 
1665,  page  431,  (512)'.  South  side  of 
Potomack  River  &  Ewd.  side  of  Macho- 
tigue  River  alias  Trent,  beginning  on 
the  South  side  of  a  vallie  or  m^rs!"1  de- 
viding  this  &  land  of  Wm.  Gooch,  up  the 


river  S.S.W.  to  a  Cr.  issuing  out  of  sd. 
Riv.  Trent  deviding  this  from  land  of 
Mr.  Richd.  Lee  &c.  Granted  to  Lewis 
Burwell  17  Oct.  1650  &  assigned  to 
Richd.  Turny  4  Sept.  1651,  who  as- 
signed to  the  above. 

MR.  HENRY  MEESE,  1000  acs. 
Stafford  Co.,  20  Oct.  1665,  p.  432, 
(513).  S.  side  of  Potomack  Cr.,  beg. 
on  E.  side  of  a  swamp  &  small  gutt  de- 
viding this  &  another  tract  in  possession 
of  sd.  Meese,  extending  S.  &c.  to  greate 
Eastern  br.  of  Wipsewasin  Cr.  includ- 
ing a  poynt  of  land  on  the  W.  side  of 
sd.  Cr.  abutting  upon  Potomack  Cr.  &c. 
Granted  to  Col.  Thomas  Pettus,  Esqr., 
15  Mar.  1658  &  by  him  &  Eliz.  his 
wife  assigned  to  sd.  Meese  &  ack'd.  in 
court  by  Major  Edward  Griffeth,  Atty. 
of  sd.  Pettus  &  wife,  as  by  records  of 
W'moreland  Co.  will  more  fully  appear. 

ROBERT  FOSTER,  son  &  heire  of 
Jno.  Foster,  dec'd.,  750  acs.  N'ampton 
Co.,  at  the  seaboard  side,  20  Oct.  1665, 
p.  432,  (513).  Bounding  on  S.  by 
Mountaines'  Cr.,  extending  N.N.E.  along 
the  seaboard  &c.  Granted  to  sd.  Jno. 
Foster,  viz:  300  acs.  dated  23  Oct. 
1643  &  450  acs.  23  Nov.  1647  &  now 
due  as  abovementioned. 

MAJOR  WILLIAM  ANDREWS,  500 

acs.  N'ampton  Co.,  20  Oct.  1665,  p. 
433,  (514).  N.  side  of  the  old  planta- 
tion Cr.,  bounding  Sly.  &  Ely.  on  same, 
Wly.  parte  by  the  maine  bay  &  a  line  of 
trees  running  Nly.  from  the  Cowpen 
Br.  deviding  it  from  land  of  Wm. 
Starling  &  others  &c.  to  land  of  George 
Travilor,  dec'd.  200  acs.  granted  to  Mr. 
Peter  Walker  28  Sept.  1645,  who  sould 
to  Thomas  Letherbury  7  May  1652  & 
by  him  sould  to  sd.  Andrews  26  Nov. 
1662;  100  acs.  granted  to  Henry  Fleet 
&  by  him  sould  to  Jonathan  Gylls  20 
Sept.  1634  &  lately  become  the  inheri- 
tance of  Francis  Gylls,  the  only  daugh- 
ter &  heire  of  sd.  Jonathan,  &  by  her 
sould  to  sd.  Andrews  20  Sept.  1665; 
100  acs.  granted  to  Capt.  Thomas 
Graves  &  since  found  escheated  to  his 
Majestie  &  granted  to  Mr.  Wm.  Melling 
1  Sept.  1663,  who  sould  to  Mr.  Robt. 
Hutchenson    20   Jan.    1663    &   by   him 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


535 


sould  to  sd.  Andrews  5  Apr.  1665;  100 
acs.  granted  to  Francis  Stockey  &  Henry 
Wilson  by  patterns  the  one  dated  22 
Dec.  1636  &  the  other  29  Oct.  1637  & 
at  length  became  the  inheritance  of 
Obedience  Johnson,  son  &  heire  of  Lt. 
Col.  Thomas  Johnson,  deed.,  who  sould 
to  Mr.  Robt.  Hutchenson  &  by  him  as- 
signed to  sd.  Andrews. 

DAVID   JONES,    479    acs.    2    R.    & 

19  P.,  with  marsh  adj.,  at  the  upper  end 
of  Weynock  in  Chas.  City  Co.,  20  Oct. 
1665,  p.  434,  (516).  N.  side  of  James 
Riv.,  beg.  at  a  stake  that  parts  Joseph 
Harwood  &  David  Jones,  S.  by  E.  along 
the  marsh  &c.  to  a  br.  that  runs  in 
Kittawan  Cr.,  W.  to  sd.  Riv.,  S.S.W. 
along  same  &c.  279  A.  2  R.  &  19  P- 
due  &  confirmed  unto  sd.  Jones  by  order 
of  the  Gen'l.  Ct.  dated  16  Sept.  1663 
&  200  acs.  for  trans,  of  4  pers:  "Brine 
of  Channell,"  Mary  Gosling,  George 
Houghton,  James  Graunt. 

JAMES  AKIN,  250  acs.  Henrico  Co., 

20  Oct.  1665,  p.  434,  (517).  N.  side  of 
Appamattock  Riv.,  beg.  at  corner  tree 
at  the  head  of  land  of  Tho.  Wells,  into 
the  woods  N.  160  po.  to  Flintons  run, 
then  W.  &c.  Trans,  of  5  pers:  John 
Jones,  Thomas  Moore,  Rebecca  Warrin, 
Robt.  Fuller,  Charles  Webb. 

THOMAS  WEBSTER,  251  acs.  &  28 
pole,  Henrico  Co.,  20  Oct.  1665,  p. 
435,  (517).  N.  side  of  Appamattox 
Riv.  &  at  the  head  of  the  old  Towne 
land,  extending  into  the  woods  W.N.W. 
&c.  to  the  Stony  run.  Trans,  of  5  pers: 
Bredgett  Treverton,  Presilla  Colto  (or 
Cotto),  Capt.  Upton,  Wm.  Prowling, 
Jno.  Plinton. 

JOSEPH  HARWOOD,  42  A.  2  R.  & 
25  P.,  Chas.  City  Co.,  20  Oct.  1665,  p. 
435,  (518).  N.  side  of  James  Riv.  in 
Weynock,  beg.  at  a  stake  that  parts 
Hammon  Woodhouse  &  sd.  Harwood, 
N.  by  W.  294  po.  to  Kittawan  Br.  &c; 
also  another  parcell  of  land  in  sd.  Co.  & 
belonging  to  the  bounds  of  Weynock 
conteyning  120  acs.,  beg.  at  the  river, 
extending  into  the  woods  E.  */£  Nly. 
240  po.,  abutting  upon  Fardinando 
Fustins  land  &c.    Said  land  due  &  con- 


firmed unto  sd.  Harwood  by  order  of  the 
Genl.  Ct.  dated  16  Sept.  1663. 

JOHN  TATE,  80  acs.  Chas.  City  Co., 
20  Oct.  1665,  p.  435,  (518).  N.  side 
of  James  Riv.  &  along  line  that  parts 
this  &  land  of  Peter  Plummer,  N.  &c. 
Due  &  confirmed  &c.  as  above. 

ROBERT  COLEMAN,  Junr.,  450  acs. 
Chas.  City  Co.,  20  Oct.  1665,  p.  435, 
(519).  S.  side  of  Appomattox  Riv., 
beg.  at  head  line  of  land  of  Robt.  Cole- 
man, Sr.,  extending  N.E.  by  N.  &c.  over 
the  branch  of  Baylies  Wly.  run,  S.W. 
along  same  &c.  Due  for  trans,  of  9 
pers:  Tho.  Williams,  Giles  Dement, 
Wm.  Cooper,  Tho.  Cooper,  Tho. 
Palmer,  Martha  Jeffurd  (or  Jessurd), 
Mary  Homes,  Motshooto  Turke,  Phaugh 
Turke.  (Note:  These  last  two  may  be 
Turks.) 

RICHARD  &  HENRY  BLANKES, 
150  acs.  at  the  mouth  of  Queens  Cr.  in 
Chas.  City  Co.,  20  Oct.  1665,  p.  436, 
(519).  N.  side  of  James  Riv.,  along 
same  N.  by  W.  &c.  to  the  cleare  ground, 
N.W.  20  po.,  N.  to  the  house  of  sd. 
Richard  &  Henry  Banks  9  po.  then  up 
the  Cr.  E.  &c.  Due  &  confirmed  by 
order  &c.  dated  16  Sept.  1663. 

THOMAS  CHAPPLE  (Chaple),  80 
acs.   Chas.   City  Co.,    20   Oct.    1665,   p. 

436,  (520).  N.  side  of  James  Riv.  & 
N.  side  of  Kittawan  Cr.,  beg.  at  a  line 
parting  this  &  land  of  Jno.  Tate,  into 
the  woods  N.  &c.  Due  &  confirmed  as 
above. 

HAMMON  WOODHOUSE,  42  A.  2 
R.  &  25  P.  in  Chas.  City  Co.,  20  Oct. 
1665,  p.  436,  (521).  N.  side  of  James 
Riv.  in  Weynock,  beg.  at  a  stake  part- 
ing this,  land  of  Tho.  Cable  &  Margtt. 
Hoes  (Hues-Hives  ?),  N.  by  W.  to  sd. 
br.  &c.    Due  &  confirmed  as  above. 

MR.  RALEIGH  TRAVERSE,  3650 
acs.  Wmoreland  Co.,  24  Oct.   1665,  p. 

437,  (521).  3350  acs.  on  S.  side  of 
Potomack  Riv.,  S.S.W.  on  Potomack  Cr. 
&c.  N.E.  upon  a  maine  Sw.  upon  the 
head  of  a  br.  at  sd.  Cr.  which  divides 
this  &  land  commonly  knowne  by  the 
name  of  the  fort  land,  E.S.E.  &c;   300 


536 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


acs.  upon  the  head  of  a  br.  of  Potomack 
Cr.  &c.  N.E.  against  land  of  Capt.  Brent, 
S.E.  upon  land  of  Jno.  Withers. 
Granted  unto  Col.  Gerrard  Fowke  18 
Nov.  1662  &  assigned  to  sd.  Travers  11 
Nov.  1663. 

COL.  EDMOND  SCARBURGH,  1000 
acs.,  parte  of  a  greater  devdt.  formerly 
elected  by  sd.  Scarburgh,  situate  at  Little 
Matomkin  Cr.,  bounded  on  S.  therewith, 
E.  by  the  seaboard  side,  W.  by  the  maine 
woods  &  Nly.  towards  greate  Matomkin. 
12  Nov.  1664,  p.  437,  (522).  Trans, 
of  20  pers:  Mary  Williams,  Ann  Ste- 
phens, Thomas  Atkins,  James  Williams, 
Gabriell  Norton,  Phillip  Towne,  An- 
drew Jones,  Peter  Stephens,  Ann  Jones, 
Wm.  Trotter,  Martha  Godale,  Jonathan 
Drew,  Wm.  Anderson,  Tymothy  Elton, 
Anthony  Stone,  Doratha  Stead,  Wm. 
White,  Matha  Nott,  Jno.  James,  Wm. 
Peterson. 

LITTLETON  SCARBURGH,  1000 
acs.  Accomack  Co.,  formerly  N'ampton 
Co.,  12  Nov.  1664,  p.  437,  (522). 
Bounded  on  W.  by  the  maine  bay,  S. 
by  a  right  line  running  between  Occa- 
hannock  &  Curratuck  Cr.,  N.  by  sd. 
Currotuck  Cr.  &  E.  by  a  line  drawn  from 
the  middle  line  to  a  br.  of  sd.  Cr. 
Granted  to  sd.  Scarburgh  by  pattent  de- 
rived from  the  first  entry  (of)  his  sur- 
vey &  rights  in  the  office  being  the  4 
Sept.  1651  &  now  renewed. 

MR.  ROBT.  BRISTOW,  398  acs. 
Gloster  Co.,  25  Oct.  1665,  p.  438, 
(523).  On  the  N.  River  in  Mockjack 
bay,  beg.  at  a  tree  parting  this  &  land 
of  Thomas  Morris,  W.  along  land  of 
Major  Curtis  &  land  of  Harris  &c.  to 
the  mouth  of  the  Back  Cr.  being  parallel 
with  land  of  Mr.  Rich.  Young,  thence 
crossing  the  back  Cr.  mouth  to  beg.  288 
acs.  granted  unto  Mrs.  Averilla  Curtis 
4  Apr.  1661,  being  parte  of  a  devdt.  of 
410  acs.  &  by  her  assigned  to  sd.  Bristow 
her  husband,  &  110  acs.  for  trans,  of 
3  pers:  "3  rights  due  for  a  former 
pattent  granted  to  Mrs.  Averilla  Curtis 
in  folio  15." 

JAMES  HARRIS,  60  acs.  W'more- 
land  Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  438,  (523). 
Being  a  poynt  of  land  bounded  Ely.  with 


his  own  land,  Nly.,  N.Wly.,  Wly.  & 
Sly.  with  Hallowes  Cr.  &  with  a  br.  of 
same  called  Morotsny.  Granted  to  Tho- 
mas Butler  26  May  1660  &  sould  to  sd. 
Harris. 

COL.  JNO.  CARTER,  Esqr,  Coun- 
cilor of  State,  4000  acs.  being  a  neck  of 
land  on  the  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
bounded  on  Wwd.  side  with  Cassatta- 
woman  Cr.  which  runneth  N.  &  E.N.E. 
towards  the  head  of  Wiccocomico  Riv. 
&c.  Granted  to  Capt.  Samll.  Mathews 
1  Aug.  1643,  by  him  deserted  &  upon 
petition  of  sd.  Carter  granted  to  him 
by  order  of  the  Genrll.  Ct.  bearing  date 
with  these  presents,  12  Oct.  1665,  & 
further  due  for  trans,  of  80  pers:  John 
Carter,  John  Carter,  Eliz.  Carter,  Symon 
Kerby,  Martha  Jane,  Mathew  Mason, 
Jno.  Morgan,  Ned  (a)  Welchman,  Jno. 
Cooper,  Thomas  &  Peter — Frenchmen, 
Henry  Harmond,  Edward  Carter,  Rich. 
Townsin,  Jno.  Malby,  Batt.  Willmouth, 
Robin,  Jno.,   Candee,   Chubb — Negroes, 

Jno.  Vincle  (?),  Jno.  Bum,  Lakins 

Jno.  Shore,  Jno.  Persie,  Wm.  Harmond, 
1  died  on  board,  Wm.  Farecloth,  Jno. 
Mann,  Thomas  Holmes,  4  Cast  away  in 
the  Virga.  Merchant,  Francis  Dolman, 
Edw.    Coock,    Wm.    &    Ralph    Scotts, 

Lawrence     ,     Henry     Bell,     Jno. 

Daniell,  Pitcher  ,  Jno.  Wms  (Wil- 
liams), Robt.  Busbury,  Kingsmell,  Ste- 
phen Thomas,  Tho.  Jackson,  Tho.  Or- 
ford,  Tho.  Marly,  Ed.  Purnell,  Ri.  San- 
derson, Jno.  Bumwell,  Sarah  Edes,  Edw. 
Westly,  Peter  Mosher,  Jno.  Bennett,  Jno. 
England,  Tho.  Sherwood,  Geo.  Maples, 
Wm.  Colon,  Jno.  Freeman,  Isaak  Aller- 
ton,  Peter  Shanack,  Dole,  Ned,  Mingo, 
Raw,  Bosse,  Joane,  Nan,  Kate,  Margtt., 
Betty,  Susan,  Phillip,  Jane,  Anthony, 
Jude,  Besse,  Symon,  Negroes.  P.  439, 
(524). 

STEPHEN  WARMAN,  750  acs.  W- 
moreland  Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Potomack 
Riv.,  27  Mar.  1663,  p.  439,  (525),  Nigh 
to  Nomany  upon  branches  of  Herring 
Cr.,  beg.  on  S.  side  of  the  E.  br.  of  said 
Cr.  dividing  this  from  land  of  Mr.  Haw- 
ley,  extending  up  the  br.  E.  &c.  Trans, 
of  15  pers:  Dorathy  Warman,  Wm. 
Watson,  Henry  Nicholls,  Mary  Stevent, 
Peter    Andrews,    Jno.    Argoll,    Andrew 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


537 


Jones,  Tho.  Norcott,  Wm.  Norcott, 
Margtt.  Tye,  Richd.  King,  Richd.  Wil 
Hams,  Andrew  Morris,  Thomas  Norton, 
Thomas  Skinner. 

DANIELL  CLARKE,  Gent.,  2029  A. 
2  R.  &  20  P.,  Chas.  City  Co.,  25  July 
1665,  p.  440,  (525).  1000  acs.  being  a 
neck,  lying  in  between  Old  Mans  Cr.  on 
the  Nly.  side  &  Queens  Cr.  on  the  Sly. 
side,  crossing  the  head  thereof,  running 
N.Wly.  &c;  698  acs.  at  the  head  of  sd. 
Cr.  between  Sellar  run  &  Fishing  run; 
&  331  A.  2  R.  &  20  P.  on  N.  side  of 
James  Riv.  at  the  head  of  his  own  land, 
beg.  on  Sellar  run,  running  W.  along 
the  head  to  nere  the  ponds  of  the  Old 
mans  Cr.  run,  then  N.  &c.  1698  A.cs. 
granted  to  Capt.  Thomas  Stegg,  Esqr., 
24  Nov.  1653,  assigned  to  sd.  Clarke  & 
granted  to  him  28  Jan.  1662  &  the  resi- 
due for  trans,  of  7  pers:  Peter  Harding, 
Wm.  Stevens,  Mary  Stone,  Anthony 
Knott,  Jno.  Goffe,  Tho.  White,  Maria 
a  Negro. 

JNO.  WARD,  150  acs.  N'umberland 
Co.,  according  to  ancient  bounds  thereof, 
18  June  1663,  p.  441,  (527).  Granted 
to  Lewis  Gilman  &  lately  found  to 
escheate  as  by  an  inquisition  dated  23 
Oct.  1662  &  now  granted  sd.  Ward  who 
hath  made  his  composition  &c. 

GEORGE  ARCHER,  250  acs.  Henrico 
Co.,  according  to  the  ancient  bounds 
thereof,  30  Dec.  1663,  p.  441,  (527). 
Formerly  granted  to  Edward  Tunstall  & 
lately  found  to  escheate  to  his  Majestie 
as  by  inquisition  etc. 

CAPT.  THOMAS  STEGG,  1850  acs. 
Henrico  Co.,  according  to  ancient 
bounds  thereof,  29  Dec.  1663,  p.  441, 
(528).  Granted  to  Capt.  Mathew  Goffe 
&  lately  found  to  escheate  as  by  in- 
quisition &c. 

MR.  JNO.  KNOWLES,  100  acs. 
Henrico  Co.,  according  to  ancient 
bounds  thereof,  30  Dec.  1663,  p.  441, 
(528).  Granted  to  Capt.  Mathew  Goffe, 
dec'd.  &  lately  found  to  escheate  etc. 
(as  above). 

WM.  LENNULL  (Lenawell),  500 
acs.  Lancaster  Co.,  according  to  the  an- 


cient bounds  thereof,  2  Sept.  1663,  p. 
441,  (528).  Granted  to  Jno.  Frish  (or 
Fish)  &  lately  found  to  escheate  &  by 
inquisition  dated  14  Oct.  1662  etc. 

EDWARD  WYATT,  850  acs.  Yorke 
Co.,  3  Sept.  1663,  p.  442,  (529). 
Granted  to  Jno.  Clarke  &  lately  found 
to  escheate  &c.  &  by  inquisition  dated 
15  Oct.  1662  &c. 

JNO.  COX,  737  acs.  Rappa.  Co., 
according  to  the  ancient  bounds  thereof, 
3  Apr.  1664,  p.  442,  (529).  Granted 
to  Jno.  Johnson  etc.,  by  inquisition  dated 
11  Mar.  1663  &c. 

AUGUSTINE  HULL  &  JNO.  WIL- 
SON, 750  acs.  W'moreland  Co.,  21  Oct. 
1665,  p.  442,  (529).  S.  side  of  Poto- 
mack  Riv.  nigh  to  Nomany,  upon 
branches  of  Herring  Cr.,  beg.  on  the  S. 
side  of  the  E.  br.  thereof  dividing  this 
from  land  of  Mr.  Hawly  extending  E. 
&c.  to  branch  dividing  this  &  land  of 
Mr.  Jno.  Whiston  &c.  Granted  to 
Stephen  Warman  27  Mar.  1663,  assigned 
to  Augustine  Hull,  who  had  assigned 
halfe  of  same  to  sd.  Wilson. 

MR.  JNO.  LORD,  1200  acs.  W'more- 
land Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  443,  (530). 
At  the  head  of  Mr.  Popes  Cr.,  600  acs. 
parte  N.  upon  same,  Ely.  upon  land  of 
Mr.  Tyrrill  &c.  and  600  acs.  bounding 
N.  with  the  aforesd.  land,  Ely.  with  land 
of  sd.  Tyrrill,  Swly.  with  branches  of 
the  Bevor  Dams  that  cometh  up  behind 
sd.  Tyrrills  land,  W.S.W.  with  land  of 
Abraham  Feild  &  Christopher  Butler  & 
N.W.  with  land  of  Richard  Griffin.  600 
acs.  granted  to  Richard  Walker  16  July 
1654,  assigned  to  Samll.  Bonam,  who 
assigned  halfe  of  same  to  Jno.  Boocock, 
who  assigned  to  sd.  Lord  &  the  other 
halfe  of  sd.  600  acs.  was  assigned  by 
Bonam  to  sd.  Lord.  600  acs.  the  re- 
mainder due  for  trans,  of  12  pers:  9 
Negroes;  Mary  Jones,  Susan  Totnam, 
Walter  Peters. 

XTOP.  (Christopher)  BUTLER, 
123^4  acs->  being  the  Northwestermost 
moyte  or  halfe  of  247^2  acs.  in  W'more- 
land Co.,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  443,  (531). 
Beg.  on  S.  side  of  a  run  that  falls  into 


538 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


the  head  of  Popes  Cr.,  S.  by  W.  up  a 
vally  to  branches  of  Rappahannock, 
thence  W.  by  N.  &c.  247^4  acs.  granted 
to  sd.  Xtop.  &  Jno.  Butler  30  July  1660, 
the  sd.  moyety  assigned  by  sd.  Jno.  &  is 
devided  from  the  other  moyety  now  in 
possession  of  Abraham  Feild  by  a  line 
of  marked  trees  which  run  E.  &  W. 
upon  the  head  of  a  branch  on  the  N. 
side  of  the  house  of  sd.  Feild. 

WM.  HORTON,  100  acs.  W'more- 
land  Co.,  formerly  N'umberland  Co.,  23 
Oct.  1665,  p.  444,  (532).  At  the  head 
of  Attopin  Cr.,  N.E.  upon  the  lower 
part  of  the  Dams  next  sd.  Cr.  &c. 
Granted  to  Jno.  Hiliar  19  Oct.  1653  & 
by  him  not  seated  according  to  law  now 
granted  by  order  of  the  Genii.  Ct.  & 
due  for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Jno.  Hallowes, 
Mary  Wiseman. 

MR.  WM.  CRUMP,  MR.  CHARLES 
EDMONDS  &  MR.  ROBT.  WHITE- 
HAIRE,  2700  acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  9 
Nov.  1665,  p.  444,  (532).  On  S.  side 
&  in  the  freshes  of  Yorke  Riv.  above 
Mohixenn,  beg.  at  upper  bounds  of  land 
taken  up  by  Mr.  George  Smith,  up  the 
river  &c,  being  bounded  by  the  river  & 
marked  trees  on  all  sides.  Trans,  of  54 
pers:  Wm.  Dyer,  Richd.  Greme  (or 
Grome),  Wm.  Langaster,  Wm.  Harvey, 
Wm.  Henning,  Fran.  Cory,  Phillip 
Watson,  Tho.  Leads,  Tho.  Cox,  Job 
Doegood,  Charles  Price,  Edm.  Bell, 
Eliz.  Fry,  Jos.  Norman,  Jno.  Bowden, 
Edm.  Tapper,  Robt.  Pedly,  Hump. 
Beale,  Jno.  Heritick,  Abiah  Coll,  Joane 
Andrewes,  Wm.  Dawson,  Jno.  Boswell, 
Margtt.  Watson,  Tho.  Taylor,  Tho. 
Saunders,  Edward  Beale,  Wm.  Chester, 
Thomas  Motley,  Hen.  Beardsby  (or 
Beardsly),  Jno.  Gunting,  Susan  Gentell, 
Mary  Peake,  Jos.  Benthall,  Rich.  God- 
fry,  Robt.  Walker,  Jno.  Watts,  Danll. 
Rolph,  Wm.  Parker,  Jno.  Worthington, 
Wm.  Phillips,  Thomas  Skinner,  Jno. 
Sayle,  Tobias  Goulding,  Sarah  Bridges, 
Jane  (or  Jones)  Fearne,  Simon  Chap- 
man, Zachary  Sharpe,  Tho.  Shelton,  Jno. 
Trilly,  Rich.  Godard,  Jno.  Grout,  Mary 
Underwood,  Dorothy  Vickars. 

MR.  ROBERT  FLACK,  300  acs.  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,    18   Oct.    1664,   p.   445, 


(533).  At  the  mouth  of  a  Br.  on  the 
W.  side  of  the  third  swamp  at  Black- 
water,  running  up  the  same  W.  by  N. 
&c.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Jno.  Sweet, 
Robt.  Tatton,  Andrew  Steward,  Stephen 
Norman,  An.  Charnock,  Henry  Preston. 

SAME.  600  acs.  Is.  of  Wight  Co., 
same  date  &  pages.  On  the  second  sw. 
of  Black  water,  whereof  200  acs.  lyeth 
on  the  E.  side  between  land  of  Jno. 
Olliver  &  Mr.  Thomas  Wombrell  op- 
posite to  the  lower  parte  whereof  be- 
ginneth  the  other  400  acs.  on  W.  side  of 
sd.  swamp,  beg.  at  the  mouth  of  a  reedy 
Br.  Trans,  of  12  pers:  Jno.  Tomlin, 
Mathew  Tomlin,  Jno.  Rutter,  Isaak  Ed- 
wards, Jno.  Tappin,  Wm.  Coock,  Wm. 
Aghurt,  Jno.  Goddin,  Samll.  Bickford, 
Wm.  Twysden,  Henry  Tylor,  Wm. 
Wilcox. 

OWEN  MORRIS,  130  acs.  Yorke  Co., 
12  Oct.  1664,  p.  445,  (534).  S.  side  of 
the  greate  swamp  opposite  to  another 
tract  of  land  of  Jno.  Fleet,  &  extending 
W.S.W.  by  S.  &c.  Granted  to  Mr.  Jno. 
Fleet  22  Nov.  1652;  sould  to  Thomas 
Rascall,  10  Jany.  1652,  who  assigned  to 
sd.  Morris,  11  Nov.  1654,  who  assigned 
to  Lewis  Atkins  9  Jan.  1655,  who  as- 
signed to  Jno.  Berriman  5  Mar.  1656  & 
by  him  assigned  to  sd.  Morris  5  Oct. 
1663. 

JOHN  BROWNE  &  EDWARD 
HATCHER,  500  acs.  Henrico  Co.,  ac- 
cording to  the  ancient  bounds  thereof, 
30  Dec.  1663,  p.  446,  (534).  Granted 
unto  James  Place  &  lately  found  to 
escheate  to  his  Majestie  as  by  inquisi- 
tion dated  5  Sept.  1663  &  now  granted 
the  abovenamed  who  hath  made  their 
composition  to  bee  paid  according  to  act. 

NICHOLAS  OWEN,  318  acs.  N'um- 
berland Co.,  according  to  the  ancient 
bounds,  23  Sept.  1663,  p.  446,  (535). 
Sd.  land  granted  unto  Richard  Clare  & 
lately  found  to  escheate  &c,  by  inquisi- 
tion dated  23  Oct.  1662  &  now  granted 
to  sd.  Owen  who  hath  made  &c. 

ADAM  MILES,  300  acs.  Yorke  Co., 
according  to  the  ancient  bounds  thereof, 
18  June  1663,  p.  446,   (535).    Granted 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


539 


to  Mr.  Wm.  Caynhoo,  lately  found  to  1663,  p.  448,  (539).  Granted  unto 
escheate  &c,  by  inquisition  dated  23  Sergt.  Wm.  Williams  &  found  &c,  as 
Dec.  1662  &  now  granted  &c.  by  inquisition   dated   8   May    1663    &c. 


HENRY  WHITE,  100  acs.  Yorke 
Co.,    according   &c,    18   June    1663,   p. 

446,  (536).  Granted  unto  Jno.  Utton 
(?),  found  to  escheate  &c,  as  by  in- 
quisition dated  15  Oct.  1662  &  now 
granted  &c. 

GEORGE  FOWLER,  180  "or  ninty ' 
acres,  Low.  Norf.  Co.  according  &c,  26 
Nov.  1663,  p.  447,  (536).  Granted 
unto  George  Hyam,  found  to  escheate 
&c.  as  by  inquisition  dated  12  Aug. 
1663  &  now  granted  &c. 

USTUS  SANDERS,  150  acs.  N' amp- 
ton  Co.  according  to  the  ancient  bounds, 
1  Sept.  1663,  p.  447,  (536).  Granted 
unto  Jno.  Nanry  &c,  as  by  inquisition 
dated  17  Apr.  1663  &c. 

GEORGE  VEZEY,  200  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co.  according  &c,  2  Sept.  1663,  p. 

447,  (537).  Granted  unto  Tho.  Cooper 
&c,    as    by    inquisition    dated    14    Oct. 

1662  &c. 

NATHANIELL  EDWARDS,  100  acs. 
Warwick  Co.  according  &c,  26  Nov. 
1663,  p.  447,  (537).  Granted  unto  Jno. 
White  &c,  as  by  inquisition  dated  30 
July  1663  &c. 

MAJOR  WM.  ANDREWS,  400  acs. 
N'ampton  Co.,  according  &c,  10  Sept. 
1663,  p.  447,  (538).  Granted  unto 
Capt.  Jno.  How  &c,  as  by  inquisition 
dated  6  Nov.  1662  &c. 

WILLIAM  MELLING,  200  acs.  N'- 
ampton Co.,  according  &c,  1  Sept.  1663, 
p.  448,  (538).  Granted  unto  Frances 
Trevitt  &c,  as  by  inquisition  dated  17 
Apr.  1663  &c. 

AMEY  BUTLER,  400  acs.  Henrico 
Co.,    according   &c,    30   Dec.    1663,    p. 

448,  (538).  Granted  unto  John  Cock- 
ney &c,  as  by  inquisition  dated  5  Sept. 

1663  &c. 


SAME.  Same  county,  acreage,  date  & 
pages.  Formerly  granted  unto  Capt. 
Clemt.  Delke  &c,  as  by  inquisition  dated 
as  above. 

JOSIAS  TOWNSEND  (Tounesend), 
200  acs.  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  according  &c, 
26  Nov.  1663,  p.  449,  (540).  Granted 
unto  Thomas  Chely  &c,  as  by  inquisi- 
tion dated  9  Apr.  1663  &c. 

JOHN  MARTIN,  350  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  according  &c,  26  Nov.  1663, 
p.  449,  (540).  Granted  unto  John 
Dyer  &c,  as  by  inquisition  dated  9  Apr. 
1663. 

WM.  CAPPS,  150  acs.  Low.  Norf. 
Co.,  according  &c,  26  Nov.  1663,  p. 
449,  (540).  Granted  unto  Hugh  Wood 
&c,  as  by  inquisition  dated  9  Apr.  1663. 

WM.  GRIMES,  100  acs.  Yorke  Co., 
according  &c,  18  June  1663,  p.  449, 
(541).  Granted  unto  Wm.  Caynhoo 
&c,    as    by   inquisition    dated    23    Sept. 

1662,  &c. 

JOHN  LYMAN,  50  acs.  Yorke  Co., 
according  &c,  2  Sept.  1663,  p.  449, 
(541).  Granted  unto  John  Orchard  &c, 
as   by  inquisition   dated    15    Oct.    1662. 

MRS.  ANN  WILCOX,  400  acs. 
N'ampton    Co.    according    &c,    3    Sept. 

1663,  p.  450,  (542).  Granted  unto  Jno. 
Corneliuson  &c,  as  by  inquisition  dated 
8  May  1663  &c. 

MRS.  MARY  BROUGHTON,  240 
acs.  N'umberland  Co.,  according  &c,  21 
Sept.  1663,  p.  450,  (542).  Granted  un- 
to Henry  Raynor  &c,  as  by  inquisition 
dated  23  Oct.  1662  &c. 

SAME.  300  acs.  in  same  county, 
date,  pages.  Granted  unto  Thomas 
Broughton  &c,  as  by  inquisition  dated 
as  above. 


MRS.    GRACE    ROBBINS,    100    acs.  CHARLES  DRURY,   100  acs.  Nanci- 

N'ampton   Co.,    according   &c,    3    Sept.       mond  Co.,  according  &c,  23  Sept.  1663, 


540 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


p.  450,  (543).  Granted  unto  Benors 
Brasheire  &c,  as  by  inquisition  dated 
23  Feb.  1662  &c. 

MAJOR  THEOPHILUS  HONE,  1000 
acs.  Eliz.  City  Co.,  according  &c,  21 
Sept.  1663,  p.  451,  (543).  Granted 
unto  James  Vanerick  &c,  as  by  inquisi- 
tion dated  13  Feb.  1662,  &c. 


RICHARD  BACHELOR  (Batchelor), 
300  acs.  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  27  Sept.  1665, 
p.  452,  (546).  In  the  S.  br.  of  Eliz. 
Riv.  on  S.  side  of  deep  Cr.,  running 
along  the  Cr.  S.W.  to  a  marked  pine  on 
E.  side  of  Mannings  Cr.,  S.E.  into  the 
woods  &c.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Arthur 
Long,  An  Pine,  Wm.  Joyner,  Susan 
Norton,   Stephen   Hardich,   Henry  Skin- 


SAME.  50  acs.,  same  county,  date  & 
page,  (544).  Granted  unto  Henry 
Withers  &c,  as  by  inquisition  dated  as 
above. 

THOMAS  ADAMS,  103  acs.  N'um- 
berland  Co.,  according  &c,  21  Sept. 
1663,  p.  451,  (544).  Granted  unto 
Henry  Toppin  &c,  as  by  inquisition 
dated  23  Oct.  1662  &c. 

JOHN  PANNULL,  260  acs.  N'amp- 
ton  Co.,  according  &c,  24  Dec.  1663, 
p.  451,  (544).  Granted  unto  Kathar- 
ine Pannull  &c,  as  by  inquisition  dated 
4  Aug.  1663  &c. 

MR.  JNO.  LORD,  100  acs.  W'more- 
land  Co.,  according  &c,  30  Apr.  1664, 
p.  451,  (545).  Granted  unto  Wm. 
Loveden  (or  Loneden)  &c,  as  by  in- 
quisition dated  14  Oct.  1663  &c. 

WM.  KNIGHT,  809  acs.  16  chs.  5 
dec.  pt.,  James  City  Co.,  14  Sept.  1665, 
p.  452,  (545).  Beg.  on  N.  side  of  the 
old  Rockahoc  path  to  James  Citty, 
thence  by  a  line  of  marked  trees  running 
W.  &c.  to  corner  stake  nere  Mr.  Bush 
his  fence,  being  the  end  of  a  deviding 
line  between  sd.  Knight  &  his  brother 
Joseph  Knight,  along  same  &c.  to  line 
deviding  this  from  Ellen  Bush,  thence 
E.  &c.  to  W.  side  of  the  greate  marked 
road,  downe  the  same  severall  courses 
92  chs.  to  the  sd.  path,  down  same 
S.S.E.  to  the  old  path  tending  toward 
James  Citty,  down  same  several  courses 
70  ch.  on  a  forke  of  Arrow  reade  Sw., 
along  sd.  path  S.  by  W.  to  the  greate 
cart  Road  to  Yorke,  over  the  same  & 
along  sd.  path  S.  1/3  Wly.  21  ch.  to 
beg.  Part  of  2000  acs.  granted  unto 
Mr.  Joseph  Knight,  deed.,  1  July  1653, 
who  gave  by  will  to  his  son  Will. 


JOSEPH  KNIGHT,  809  acs.  16  ch. 
5  dec.  pt.,  James  Citty  Co.,  14  Sept. 
1665,  p.  453,  (547).  Beg.  nere  Mr. 
Bush  his  fence,  running  W.  &c.  to  W. 
side  of  a  branch  of  Morgans  Cr.,  N. 
&c.  to  hickory  on  S.  side  of  the  South- 
ermost  br.  of  Warrany  Cr.,  thence  E. 
&c.  to  red  oake  at  the  Northermost  end 
of  line  dividing  this  &  land  of  his 
brother  Wm.  Knight,  along  same  So. 
&c.  Part  of  2000  acs.  granted  to  Joseph 
Knight,  dee'd.,  1  July  1653  &  given  by 
will  to  his  son,  the  sd.  Joseph. 

THOMAS  HORNE,  300  acs.  nere  the 
head  of  the  W.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  adj. 
land  of  Jane  Rigglesworth ;  27  Sept. 
1665,  p.  453,  (548).  Granted  unto 
Robt.  Capps  &  Robt.  Spring  30  May 
1653,   &  by  them  sould  to  sd.   Home. 

JOHN  CARTWRIGHT,  100  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  27  Sept.  1665,  p.  453, 
(548).  S.  side  of  the  E.  br.  of  Eliz. 
River,  nigh  unto  the  E.  side  of  Henry 
Nicholls  marked  trees  &c.  Trans,  of  2 
pers:    Mary  Williams,  Anthony  Coates. 

THOMAS  ALEXANDER,  400  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  27  Sept.  1665,  p.  454, 
(549).  250  acs.  parte  lying  on  Nwd. 
side  of  a  br.  of  the  Southern  br.  of  Eliz. 
Riv.  called  Gathers  Cr.  &c.  150  acs.  in 
the  S.  br.  of  sd.  Riv.  on  Gathors  Cr., 
bounding  on  his  former  grant,  running 
E.S.E.  &c.  250  acs.  granted  unto  Richd. 
Whitehurst  20  Oct.  1648  &  assigned  to 
sd.  Alexander,  &  150  acs.  for  trans,  of 
3  pers:  Andrew  Jones,  Thomas  Goodale, 
Mary  Wiseman. 

WALTER  CUSSENS  (Cozens),  400 
acs.  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  27  Sept.  1665.  p. 
454,  (550).  On  E.  side  of  the  S.  br. 
of   Eliz.   Riv.,   running   S.   by  W.   &c, 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


541 


N.W.  on  Robt.  Butts  line,  E.N.E.  &c. 
through  a  swamp,  thence  W.,  bounding 
on  Thomas  Everidge,  thence  S.  by  E. 
&c.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Thomas  Griffin, 
Jno.  Edwards,  Dennis  Murrah,  Ed. 
Power,  Tho.  Kely,  Ed.  Follett,  Tho. 
Norcott,  Wm.  Peters. 

DANCIE  ATTLO,  150  acs.  being 
marsh  called  by  the  name  of  the  Lower 
Gulf,  in  Chikahomani  Riv.,  James  City 
Co.,  9  Nov.  1665,  p.  455,  (550). 
Bounding  W.  &  N.  on  Gregory  Wells 
land,  E.  on  Nunckles  neck  &  S.  on 
Phillips  Island.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Ma- 
thew  Phillips,  Wm.  Whiting,  Andrew 
Stevens. 

MR.  DAVID  FOX,  200  acs.  on  N. 
side  of  Lancaster  Co.,  29  Dec.  1665,  p. 
455,  (551).  Beg.  by  the  side  of  a  main 
br.  of  the  N.W.  branch  of  Corrotoman, 
running  down  same  S.S.W.  240  po. 
from  a  red  oake,  N.  &  by  W.  bounding 
upon  land  of  Robert  Pollard  &c,  bound- 
ing upon  land  of  Capt.  Jennings  &  Mr. 
Mathew  Kemp  &c.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
James  Johnson,  Mary  Stevens,  Abram 
Vines,  Wm.  Phillips. 

MR.  THOMAS  CLAYBORNE,  500 
acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  20  Oct.  1665,  p. 
455,  (551).  Upon  N.E.  side  of  Exolls 
Swamp  which  falleth  into  Peancketanck 
Riv.,  beg.  on  the  side  of  same  &c.  Trans, 
of  10  pers:  Stephen  Norman,  Thomas 
Stills,  Thomas  Tatton,  Mary  Willis,  An 
Whithorne,  Peter  Goodlad,  Susan  Swart 
(or  Smart),  Rebecca  Yates,  Wm.  Yates, 
Henry  Gibson. 

GEORGE  DILLARD,  250  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  29  Nov.  1665,  p.  456,  (552). 
Upon  branches  of  Tassitiomp  Sw., 
bounded  on  N.  by  land  of  Ralph  Green 
&  E.  br.  of  sd.  Sw.,  E.  by  land  known 
as  Persons  land,  S.  by  land  of  Thomas 
Sanders,  W.  by  land  of  sd.  Green  &  W. 
br.  of  sd.  Sw.  &  N.W.  adj.  land  sd. 
Dillard  lives  upon.  Trans,  of  5  pers: 
Jno.  Richardson,  Peter  Stone,  Margtt. 
Williams,  Martha  Wms.  (Williams), 
Wm.  Worts. 


661  acs.  parte  lying  upon  a  br.  of  the 
Dragon  Sw.,  beg.  by  the  br.  side,  run- 
ning S.  by  W.  into  the  woods,  W.  by 
N.  by  a  dry  branch  &c.  66  acs.  beg.  at 
a  marked  ash  standing  in  a  br.  that 
cometh  up  by  sd.  Hills  house,  thence  E. 
Nly.  &c.  bounding  on  a  devdt.  he  pur- 
chased of  James  Cole  &  now  liveth  up- 
on. 661  acs.  granted  to  James  Cole  15 
Mar.  1660  &  sould  to  sd.  Hill  &  66 
acs.  for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Mary  Jones, 
Peter  Evans. 

SAME.  134  acs.  in  same  county, 
same  date.  Page  457,  (553).  Beg.  in 
the  forke  of  a  br.  that  runneth  into 
Exolls  br.  &c.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Susan 
Cotton,  Wm.  Wright,  Andrew  Murrey. 

EDWARD  DENNIS  &  SAMLL. 
MOTTERSHOTT,  500  acs.  New  Kent 
Co.,  20  Oct.  1665,  p.  457,  (553).  Beg. 
at  a  pine  standing  in  a  Meadow,  being 
the  S.most  cor.  tree  of  a  devdt.  of  land 
of  Capt.  Martin  Palmer,  thence  N.E. 
&c.  to  land  of  Mr.  Edward  Diggs, 
thence  N.  by  E.  &c.  across  a  branch  &c. 
Trans,  of  10  pers:  Margtt.  Spire,  Eliz. 
Morgan,  Alice  White,  Hannah  Rump, 
David  Spire,  Eliz.  Miles,  George  Barker, 
Mary  Goodwin,  Georg  Demount,  Jno. 
Barker. 

SHIRLY  MANDITT,  100  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  20  Oct.  1665,  p.  457,  (554). 
On  N.E.  side  of  Exalls  Sw.,  beg.  at  the 
forke  of  a  small  br.  running  into  same 
about  one-half  mile  above  land  of 
Gabriell  Hill,  running  N.W.  &c.  Trans 
of  2  pers:  Wm.  Travers,  Arthur  Powell 

WM.  BIRCH,  345  acs.  New  Kent  Co. 
20  Oct.  1665,  p.  458,  (555).  On  N 
side  of  Mattapony  Riv.,  about  2  mi.  in 
the  woods  upon  the  W.  br.  of  Hark 
quack  Sw.  back  from  Peter  Ford,  beg 
nere  the  head  of  a  vally  that  runneth 
W.S.W.  into  the  W.  br.  of  sd.  Sw. 
thence  W.S.W.  Sly.,  crossing  sd.  br.  &c 
to  path  that  goes  to  sd.  Fords  house 
unto  Jno.  James  house  &c.  Trans,  of  7 
pers:  George  Heath,  George  Slaughter, 
Mary  Holding,  Isaack  Newton,  Rice 
Williams,  Thomas  Wms.,  Jno.  Martin. 


GABRIELL    HILL,     727    acs.    New  GEORGE   MORRIS,    1350   acs.   New 

Kent  Co.,  29  Nov.  1665,  p.  456,  (552).      Kent  Co.,  19  July  1663,  p.  459,  (555). 


542 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


N.  side  of  Mattapony  Riv.,  part  thereof 
upon  branches  of  Horecock  &  parte  up- 
on Aquintenocoe  Sw.,  beg.  by  an  Indian 
path  called  Cheskaack  path,  running  E. 
by  &  nere  sd.  path  &c.  thence  N.  devid- 
ing  this  from  land  of  Anthony  Arnold 
to  corner  by  a  branch,  thence  cutting 
certaine  branches  of  a  sw.  &c.  cutting  a 
path,  S.S.E.  &c.  to  Jno.  Exolls  path, 
along  same  S.  by  W.  &c.  down  Ches- 
caack  path  to  &  over  Aquintenockcoe 
Sw.  &c.  to  Mr.  Rich.  Tunstalls  line,  over 
Mr.  Thomas  Holmes  Cart  path  &c,  adj. 
land  of  Coll.  Robt.  Abrahall  formerly 
Mr.  Haines  land  &c.  to  Tattapaixsack 
spring  &c.  to  trees  belonging  to  land 
formerly  Jonathan  Parsons,  along  that 
line  to  land  of  Jno.  Maddison,  &  along 
his  line  of  marked  trees  to  beg.  600 
acs.  granted  to  Col.  Robt.  Abrahall,  be- 
ing the  moyety  of  a  joynt  pattern  to  sd. 
Abrahall  &  Jno.  Pigg,  dated  10  July 
165-,  &  750  acs.  for  trans,  of  15  pers: 
George  Bryar,  Wm.  Stevens,  Andrew 
Strong,  Peter  Short,  Wm.  Anthrop, 
Susan  Island,  Mary  Winter,  Hannah 
Clarke,  Thomas  Finch.  Gabriell  Norton, 
Tymothy  Swart,  Jane  Swan,  Francis  Mil- 
burn,  Thomas  Clinker,  Jno.  Evans. 
Note:  There  appeareing  but  860  acs. 
upon  a  resurvey  the  last  ten  rights  are 
withdrawn  &  transferred  to  other  patt. 
this  29th  Aprill  1670.  Test:  Rich. 
Awborne,  Clk. 

SAME.  933  acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  19 
July  1663,  p.  460,  (557).  S.  side  the 
narrowes  of  Yorke  Riv.,  upon  branches 
of  black  Cr.,  beg.  at  cor.  tree  by  West- 
over  path  belonging  to  land  of  Mr. 
Jones  &  Jonathan  Higly  (or  Higby), 
formerly  Wm.  Pullams,  along  land  of 
Mr.  Brereton  &  Anthony  Arnold,  N.W. 
&c.  downe  a  br.  of  Stones  Sw.  to  Jno. 
Mores  &  Wm.  Peaslyes  land  &c.  to  Mr. 
Nappers  (Nappires)  corner  by  the  br. 
&c.  to  Capt.  George  Lyddalls  cor.  tree 
&c.  over  the  Ridge  path  to  land  of  Mr. 
Jones  &  Jonathan  Highlies,  thence  to 
beg.    Trans,  of  19  Negroes. 


of    Trotter.    Trans,    of    2    pers:    Mary 
Hansford,  Will.  Neale  (or  Neate). 

RICHARD  DIXON,  300  acs.  War- 
wick Co.,  17  Jan.  1665,  p.  461,  (558). 
Beg.  on  N.  side  of  a  br.  of  Deep  Cr=, 
E.  into  the  woods  to  an  oak  parting 
this  from  land  of  Mr.  Richard  Hale, 
Sly.  to  land  of  Evan  Waters,  joyning  to 
Newmans  dun  (dam  ?),  Wly.  to  mouth 
of  Little  Cr.,  thence  to  an  oak  parting 
this  from  land  of  Mr.  Thomas  Owens, 
Nly.  on  the  banck  of  Warwick  river  150 
po.  to  beg.  50  acs.  granted  to  Richard 
Ramshaw  27  July  1635  &  assigned  to 
sd.  Dixon  &  250  acs.  for  trans,  of  5 
pers:  John  Mahaw,  Katharine  Carragon, 
Giles  Underwood,  Jone  Evans,  Wm. 
Cashley. 

ROBT.  EVANS,  80  acs.  in  Weynock 
in  Chas.  City  Co.,  20  Oct.  1665,  p.  461, 
(559).  N.  side  of  James  Riv.  &  N. 
side  of  Kittawan  Cr.,  beg.  at  a  line 
parting  Thomas  Chappie  &  Robt.  Evans, 
running  into  the  woods  N.  &c.  Said 
land  due  &  confirmed  by  order  of  the 
Genii.  Court  16  Sept.  1663. 

ROBERT  EVANS,  41  acs.  &  23  po., 
in  Weynock  in  Chas.  City  Co.,  20  Oct. 
1665,  p.  461,  (559).  N.  side  of  James 
Riv.,  beg.  at  a  stake  parting  Francis 
Radford  &  Robt.  Evans,  running  N.  by 
W.  &c.    Due  &  confirmed  as  above. 

SAME.  60  acs.,  3  R.  &  9  P.,  same 
location,  date  &  page,  (560).  Beg.  at  a 
stake  parting  Thomas  Cable  &  Robert 
Evans,  running  N.  by  W.  to  Kittawan, 
then  W.  &c.    Due  as  above. 

WM.  &  JAMES  LAWRENCE  (Laur- 
ence), 95  A.  16  P.,  Chas.  City  Co.,  at 
the  lower  end  of  Weynock,  next  to  land 
formerly  known  to  bee  Wm.  Clayes  on 
N.  side  of  James  Riv.,  20  Oct.  1665,  p. 
462,  (560).  Beg.  at  a  stake  by  the 
Persimon  Island  Sw.  &  running  N.  by 
W.  to  Kittawan  Cr.,  thence  W.N.W. 
&c.    Due  &c.   as  above. 


THOMAS  HICKES,  100  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co.,  2  Feb.  1664,  p.  460,  (558).  N. 
side  of  Peancketanck  Riv.,  beg.  at  land 
of  Mr.  Jno.  Appleton  &  S.E.  upon  land 


SAME.  240  acs.  Chas.  City  Co.,  same 
date  &  page,  (561).  Joyning  to  David 
Jones  upon  an  Ash  Sw.,  beg.  at  the 
river,    running    E.    &c.    abutting    upon 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


543 


Fardinando  Astins  land,  thence  N.  Sec. 
Due  &c.  as  above. 

PETER  PLUMMER  (Plumer),  80 
acs.   Chas.  City  Co.,    20   Oct.    1665,   p. 

462,  (561).  N.  side  of  James  Riv.  Se  on 
N.  of  Kittawan  Cr.,  beg.  at  a  line  that 
parts  Rice  Hoe  &  sd.  Plummer,  running 
into  the  woods  N.  Sec.  Due  &c.  as  above. 

ANTHONY  BRANCH,  300  acs.  in 
upper  parish  of  Nancimond,  20  Oct. 
1665,  p.  463,  (562).  Beg.  at  miles  end 
of  Israeli  Johnsons  land,  adj.  his  own 
&  land  of  Symon  Symmons.  Trans,  of 
6  pers:  George  Durant,  thrice,  An 
Durant,  Thomas  Keile,  George  Richards. 

FRANCIS  WELLS,  600  acs.  nere  the 
head  of  the  S.  br.  of  Nancimond  Riv., 
20  Oct.  1665,  p.  463,  (562).  Beg.  by 
the  br.  side,  running  for  length  N.  &c. 
Trans,  of  12  pers:  Tho.  Harris,  Samll. 
Slotum,  Silas  Hayward,  George  Blake, 
his  wife,  Jno.  Fisher,  Eliz.  Moore,  Tho. 
Brookes,  An  Morris,  Jno.  Bullard,  Eliz. 
Tyler,  Jno.  Boyce. 

DAVID  FLOYD,  200  acs.  in  upper 
parish  of  Nancimond,  20  Oct.  1665,  p. 

463,  (562).  Beg.  at  a  pine  &  soe  N.W. 
Sec.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  David  Floyd,  his 
wife  &  child,  Richard  Teddy. 

WM.  EASON,  700  acs.  in  upper 
parish  of  Nancimond  Co.,  20  Oct.  1665, 
p.  463,  (563).  Beg.  on  a  poynt  by 
Mathews  Cr.,  running  W.  Sec.  Trans,  of 
14  pers:  Hester  Bennett,  Blanch  Clarill, 
Jno.  Smith,  Thomas  Light,  Roger  Perry, 
Wm.  Eason,  his  wife,  Henry  Dutton, 
James  Dutton,  Mary  Dotton,  Jno.  Surly, 
Jno.  Irisman,  Teage  Irishman  (Irish- 
men), Richard  Bishop. 

ELIZABETH,  ANN  &  SUSANNA 
FRANCIS,  Orphants  of  Mr.  Tho.  Fran- 
cis, dee'd.,  900  acs.  Nancimond  Co.,  20 
Oct.  1665,  p.  464,  (563).  Beg.  at 
miles  end  of  William  Sanders  land,  run- 
ning N.  &  joyning  same,  butting  on  land 
of  Gressum  Cofeild,  E.  80  po.  to  sd. 
Cofeilds  land,  butting  on  land  of  the 
Widdow  Elwood  &c.  through  a  greate 
Arrow  Reed  Sw.  &c.  to  land  of  Thomas 
Tomlinson  &c.    Granted  to  Samuel  Ste- 


phens 20  July  1639,  the  pattern  being 
then  for  2000  acs.  but  upon  strict  sur- 
vey found  to  contain  the  quantity  afore- 
said; by  Stephens  sould  unto  Nathanll. 
Batts,  who  sould  to  sd.  Francis. 

WM.  WRIGHT,  100  acs.  Nancimond 
Co.,  11  Oct.  1665,  p.  464,  (564). 
Joyning  to  his  fathers  land,  crossing  a 
marsh  to  the  S.  br.  side  Sec.  to  poynt  of 
marsh  opposite  Wm.  Harrisons  Landing 
place  Sec,  butting  on  the  Indian  feild  of 
Titus  Carly  (Carty  or  Carby)  Sec.  Trans. 
of  2  pers:   George  Banton,  Doll  Dugrace. 

THOMAS  CALLAWAY,  766  acs. 
Chas.  City  Co.,  27  Feb.  1665,  p.  465, 
(565).  N.  side  of  James  Riv.  between 
the  heads  of  Florida  hundred  &  Powells 
Cr.,  bounded  upon  Capt.  Frame  N.  & 
N.E.,  upon  Capt.  Rothwell  W.  &  N.W., 
upon  land  of  Mr.  Sparrow  S.W.  &  upon 
Harris  his  run  S.E.  Granted  unto  Jno. 
Dibdall,  Cleeke  (Clerke  ?),  24  Nov. 
1653,  by  him  deserted  &  upon  petition 
of  sd.  Callaway  granted  to  him  by  order 
of  the  Genii.  Ct.  28  Sept.  1664  Se  fur- 
ther due  for  trans,  of  16  pers:  Mary 
Hart,  Wm.  Jones,  Stephen  Peters,  An 
Jones,  James  Story,  Peter  Godlad,  An- 
thony Horns,  Wm.  West,  Eliz.  Toms, 
Susan  Armes,  Thomas  Gore,  George 
Harris,  George  Seward,  Peter  Mason, 
Henry  Wise,  Wm.  Wise. 

JOHN  COLCLOUGH,  500  acs.  Staf- 
ford Co.,  22  Oct.  1665,  p.  465,  (565). 
N.E.  side  of  Quanticutt  Cr.,  N.W.  upon 
a  greate  br.  deviding  this  &  land  of 
Henry  Walker  &c.  Trans,  of  10  pers: 
Robt.  Jones,  George  Grissell,  Henry 
Lane,  Nich.  Racholins,  Wm.  Jackson, 
Teage  O  Comly  (or  Conily),  Eliz. 
Quome,  Joane  Somerdon,  Ann  Bayly, 
Hugh  Richards. 

CHRISTOPHER  LUM  (or  Lunn), 
800  acs.  Stafford  Co.,  22  Oct.  1665,  p. 
465,  (565).  S.W.  side  of  Quonticutt 
Cr.,  S.E.  upon  land  surveyed  for  Henry 
Walker,  S.W.  upon  back  line  of  Mr. 
Richard  Haiberd,  &  N.E.  by  the  Cr.  & 
maine  run.  Trans,  of  16  pers:  Anthony 
Bridges,  Henry  Haughto  (Haughton  ?), 
Tho.  Houghton,  Mary  Webb,  Jone 
Traverse,  Andrew  Langly,  James  Langly, 


544 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Rachell  Jones,  Hen.  &  Eliz.  Pate,  Wm. 
Plumpton,  Joseph  Tucker,  Mary  Jones, 
Wm.  Jones,  Susan  Hatsell,  Mary  Wms. 
(Williams.) 

JOHN  BATES,  50  acs.  at  the  middle 
plantation,  5  Mar.  1665,  p.  465,  (566). 
Butting  Ely.  upon  the  old  paile,  Wly. 
into  the  woods,  Nly.  upon  Mr.  Tyler 
&  Sly.  on  Francis  Peale.  Renewal  of 
pattern  dated  15  Sept.  1655. 

HENRY  WALKER,  500  acs.  Stafford 
Co,  22  Oct.  1665,  p.  466,  (566).  N.E. 
side  of  Quanticutt  Cr,  beg.  upon  a 
poynt  on  N.W.  side  of  a  greate  br.  nere 
a  sunken  marsh,  NfW.  by  land  of 
Thomas  Dios  &  S.W.  by  sd.  Cr.  Trans, 
of  10  pers:  Mathew  Fearson,  Ant. 
Royly,  Alice  Rigg,  Jno.  Wells,  Jane 
Fish,  Jno.  Hibit,  Ann  Sheppard,  Danll. 
Stephens,  Jno.  Cawson,  Jno.  Frevitt  (?). 

PETER  SMITH,  200  acs.  Low.  Norf. 
Co,  9  Dec.  1665,  p.  466,  (567).  In  a 
br.  of  the  W.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv,  beg.  on 
E.  side  of  the  head  of  Loyds  Cr.  at  a 
marked  hickory  standing  by  Edmond 
Bowmans  marked  trees  &c.  to  poynt  at 
the  mouth  of  the  Reedy  Br.  &c.  Trans, 
of  4  pers.* 

ROBT.  ABERNATHE,  100  acs.  Chas. 
City  Co,  7  Mar.  1665,  p.  466,  (567). 
S.  side  of  James  Riv.  on  the  head  of 
the  poplar  runn  where  it  boundeth  on 
land  of  James  Wallis,  S.  on  land  of 
Thomas  Duglas  &  the  quarter  land  &c. 
Part  of  a  greater  devdt.  granted  to 
Patriack  Jackson  &  Richard  Barker  & 
by  sd.  Jackson  out  of  his  parte  sould  to 
sd.  Abernathe. 

WILLIAM  CLAW,  220  acs.  Gloster 
Co,  4  Jan.  1665,  p.  467,  (568).  Upon 
branches  of  Peancketanck  Riv,  beg.  at  a 
white  oake  parting  this  &  land  of  Major 
Cant,  running  along  same  &c.  to  land 
of  Stephen  Gill,  dec'd.  Trans,  of  5  pers: 
Jone  Jenkins,  Anthony  Prior,  Mary 
Rason,  Wm.  Smett,  (or  Sinett). 

JOHN  COLDCLOUGH,  200  acs. 
Stafford  Co,  10  Nov.  1665,  p.  467, 
(568).  S.W.  side  of  Quanticutt  Cr, 
beg.  on  N.W.  side  of  a  run  of  water 


adj.  to  a  marsh  with  marked  trees,  S.W. 
with  back  line  of  Richard  Hayberd, 
N.W.  with  land  of  Xtophr.  Lun  &c. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  Thomas  Crouch,  Ann 
Seate,  Mary  Baker,  Eliz.  Watkins. 

THOMAS  WATKINS,  300  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co,  (no  date),  p.  467,  (569). 
150  acs.  beg.  on  Swd.  side  of  the  E. 
br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.  &c.  joyning  land  of 
Jno.  Godfry,  W.N.W.  &c;  150  acs.  adj. 
the  same,  beg.  on  S.  end  of  his  land, 
running  S.  &c.  150  acs.  granted  to 
Henry  Nicholls  10  Aug.  1646  &  sould 
to  Humphry  Belt  (or  Bett),  who  sould 
to  Thomas  Cartwright,  who  sould  to 
Abram  Thomas,  who  sould  to  sd.  Wat- 
kins  &  by  him  sould  to  Thomas  Steere. 

DENNIS  EYES  &  DENNIS  CON- 
WAY, 400  acs.  N'umberland  Co,  11 
Mar.  1662,  p.  468,  (570).  Upon  Nwd. 
side  of  the  maine  br.  of  Greate  Wicco- 
comico  Riv.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Mary 
Stevens,  Susan  Parriott,  Wm.  Susan, 
Anthony  Godlad,  Mathan  (Nathan  ?) 
Bats,  Mary  Stores,  Wm.  Wilson,  An- 
drew Jones. 

SAME.  270  acs.  Same  location,  date 
&  page.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Peter  An- 
drewes,  Wm.  Archer,  Jno.  Cole,  Mary 
Cole,    Wm.    Stevens,    Mary   Carisbrook. 

ROBERT  BURRELL  (Burwell), 
Gent,  250  acs.  N'umberland  Co,  18 
Mar.  1662,  p.  469,  (571).  132  acs. 
N.E.  upon  a  cr.  deviding  this  from  land 
of  Nicholas  Morris,  S.E.  upon  land  of 
John  Essex,  S.W.  &  Wly.  upon  land  of 
George  Fletcher,  Gent,  &  75  acs.  bound- 
ing upon  land  of  sd.  Burwell  &  by  line 
of  trees  of  Jno.  Huletts  running  N.E. 
&c.  182  acs.  the  first  part  granted  to 
Nich.  Morris  17  Nov.  1652  &  assigned 
to  sd.  Burwell  &  Jno.  Fawsett  &  interest 
of  Fawsett  sould  to  sd.  Burwell;  75  acs. 
for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Wm.  Sanders, 
Peter  Stuarson. 

RICHARD  AYLIFE  (Ayliffe),  248 
acs.  N'umberland  Co,  4  Feb.  1662,  p. 
469,  (572).  Upon  Wwd.  side  of  the 
Swd.  br.  of  greate  Wiccocomico  Riv, 
Sly.  &  Swly.  upon  a  small  br.  of  sd. 
river  &c.   bounded  by  land   claimed  by 


David  Williamson  Patent.    An  example  of  the  penmanship  of  the  period   and   the 

extraordinary  preservation  of  the  ink.    Found  in  old  Patent  Book  5,  page  499. 

New  Patent  Book  5,  page  611. — Cavaliers  and  Pioneers,  page  554. 


Of 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


545 


Mr.  Peter  Knight  &  Wly.  with  land  of 
James  Pope.  Trans,  of  5  pers:  Wm. 
Haines,  Andrew  Jones,  Paul  Stan,  Susan 
Petegrew,  Wm.  Alford. 

HENRY  BOGGUS,  130  acs.  N'um- 
berland  Co.,  24  Aug.  1664,  p.  469, 
(572).  From  a  poynt  on  the  maine  br. 
of  Wiccocomico,  Sly.  along  trees  of  Mr. 
Knight  &c.  to  James  Popes  Sw.  &c. 
Trans,  of  3  pers:  Martha  Peters,  Wm. 
Stone,  A (n)  drew  Peters. 

MAJOR  JOHN  SMITH,  500  acs.  of 
marsh,  Gloster  Co.,  8  Feb.  1665/6,  p. 

470,  (575).  Adj.  land  upon  which  he 
lives,  beg.  at  a  poynt,  running  N.W.  to 
little  Poropotanck,  downe  the  Cr.  to  the 
River  S.S.E.  &  E.S.E.  to  Purton  Bay, 
&  N.  by  E.  by  Purton  Cr.  to  beg.  Trans. 
of  10  pers:  Peter  Goffe,  Martha  Stan- 
ford, Wm.  Steward,  Susan  Hart,  An 
Jones,  Mary  Filmore,  Thomas  Norton, 
Jno.  Toms,  Arthur  Upshott,  Wm. 
Stevens. 

MR.  WM.  THORNTON,  164  acs. 
Gloster  Co.,  in  Petsoe  Parish,  16  Feb. 
1665/6,  p.  470,  (573).  Joyning  land 
he  now  lives  on,  beg.  in  the  old  line, 
running  E.N.E.  &c.  to  old  line  of  Mr. 
Richard  Barnard,  N.E.  by  N.  by  a 
branch,  S.E.  to  Rappahannock  path  &c. 
to  Robert  Lees  land  &c.  Trans,  of  4 
pers:  Wm.  West,  Mary  Shepard,  Row- 
land Cornelius,  Nich.  Corker. 

MR.  THOMAS  VICARS,  Clerke,  650 
acs.   Gloster   Co.,    16   Feb.    1665/6,   p. 

471,  (574).  Beg.  on  S.  side  of  a  little 
br.  deviding  this  from  land  of  Mr. 
Richard  Barnard  &  Mr.  Wm.  Thornton, 
S.E.  to  Rappa.  path,  S.  by  W.  &c.  to 
a  br.  deviding  this  from  Wm.  Roberts 
land  &c.  to  little  br.  on  N.  side  of  the 
swamp  deviding  this  from  land  of  Mr. 
Xtopr.  Regall  (or  Regalt)  &c.  Trans, 
of  13  pers:  An  Crosser  (?),  Rich. 
Finch,  David  Thomas,  Wm.  Pilgrim, 
James  Couchman,  Richard  Knott,  Tho- 
mas Crane,  Jno.  Conier,  Thomas  Fisher, 
Jno.  Greene,  Danll.  James,  Rich.  White, 
Samll.  Stub. 

WILLIAM  HUNT,  346  acs.  1  R,  4 
P.,  Chas.  City  Co.,  21  Mar.  1665/6,  p. 


471,  (574).  Beg.  at  a  pochikery  marked 
with  4  chops  by  a  small  Indian  feild 
about  a  mile  from  the  river  on  the  N. 
side,  adj.  Jno.  Stiff,  running  W.  &c. 
Trans,  of  7  pers:  Italy  Hopkins,  Jno. 
Pennull,  Jno.  Shorne,  Jno.  Taylor,  Jane 
Long,    Edmond   Jenkins,    Georg   Medly. 

HENRY  CREIGHTON  (Crightoun), 
321  acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  20  Mar.  1665/,  p. 

472,  (575).  In  the  freshes  on  the  N. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  beg.  at  a  swamp 
nere  the  head  of  a  cr.  deviding  the  lands 
of  Samll.  Nicholls  &  Thomas  &  Wm. 
Mosse,  running  N.W.  &c.  nere  a  poquo- 
son  &c.  to  corner  tree  of  Mr.  Grangers 
land,  formerly  Robt.  Tomlins  &  now  in 
possession  of  sd.  Creightoun,  S.  &c.  to 
a  pochikery  in  line  of  Robt.  Hopkins, 
thence  N.  by  E.  Ely.  &c.  to  beg.  Trans, 
of  7  pers:  Thomas  Cort,  John  Dike, 
Robt.  Davies,  Eliz.  Davies,  Joane 
Weeler,  Abram  Humphries,  Francisco 
Swarfe. 

RICHARD  BREDGAR,  ROBT.  HILL 
&  JOHN  MAYHEW,  1200  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  20  Mar.  1665/6,  p.  472,  (576). 
Beg.  at  the  Wwd.  side  of  a  white  marsh 
at  the  head  of  a  br.  issuing  out  of  the 
Dragon  Sw.  &  crossing  Mattapony  upper 
path,  running  W.N.W.  &c.  300  acs. 
formerly  belonging  to  Mr.  Rich.  Law- 
rence &  Wm.  Bauldine  by  pattent  dated 
15  June  1663  &  by  sd.  Lawrence  (the 
whole  remaining  in  him  after  the  death 
of  Bauldine)  assigned  to  sd.  Mayhew; 
900  acs.  granted  to  Mr.  Rich.  Lawrence, 
Evan  Davies  &  Tho.  Williamson  16 
June  1663  &  now  by  severall  assign- 
ments made  over  to  sd.  Bredgar  &  Hill. 

JAMES  SAMFORD  (Sandford),  800 
acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  on  N.  side  of  sd.  River, 
20  Mar.  1665/6,  p.  473,  (577).  E.  side 
of  Totoskey  Cr.,  beg.  on  the  back  line 
&  nere  S.E.  cor.  tree  of  land  which  Tho- 
mas Robbinson  now  lives  on,  running 
N.  by  E.  &c,  along  the  joynt  land  of 
Quantillian  Sherman  &  sd.  Robbinson, 
along  Miles  Reileys  land,  thence  E.  &c. 
to  land  of  Edward  Lewis,  thence  S.W. 
by  S.  &c.  to  land  of  Wm.  Barber,  thence 
S.Wly.  along  land  of  Jno.  Williams, 
N.Wly.  &c.  along  land  of  Michaell 
Hugell,  thence  N.W.  by  N.  to  beg.  736 


546 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


acs.  granted  to  him  8  Apr.  1662  &  64 
acs.  due  for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Margtt. 
Holford,   Susanna  Stevens. 

MR.  JOHN  WHETSTONE  (Whet- 
ston),  250  acs.  Wmoreland  Co.,  22 
Mar.  1665/6,  p.  473,  (578).  Upon 
Nomeny  bay,  on  back  line  of  land  of 
Jno.  Hollis,  extending  N.W.  &c.  Trans, 
of  5  pers:  Thomas  Holmes,  Alexander 
Wright,  Humphry  Thomas,  Alice  Grey, 
Lucy  Hollis. 

RALPH  &  THO.  BLAG  (Blagg), 
209  acs.  Wmoreland  Co.,  22  Mar. 
1665/6,  p.  474,  (578).  S.  side  of  Ap- 
pomattox Cr.,  bounded  N.  on  their  100 
acs,  W.  by  land  of  Major  Underwood, 
E.  by  the  greate  branch  whereby  the 
other  100  acs.  is  divided  from  land  of 
Thomas  Johnson.  100  acs.  part  granted 
unto  Thomas  Blag  23  Sept.  1654;  109 
acs.  due  for  trans,  of  3  pers:  Wm. 
Bunch,  Sarah  Wells,  Mary  Jones. 

WM.  OVERETT  &  GEORGE 
BROWNE,  400  acs.  Wmoreland  Co., 
22  Mar.  1665/6,  p.  474,  (579).  Upon 
branches  of  Nomeny  Riv.,  beg.  at  corner 
tree  of  land  surveyed  for  Thomas  Dias 
standing  in  Mr.  Richard  Steremans  line, 
running  S.W.  &c.  to  red  oake  in  line  of 
land  surveyed  for  Wm.  Basely  &  Edwd. 
Haly,  N.  E.  &c.  Trans,  of  8  pers: 
Joseph  Green,  Jno.  Milsop,  Jno.  Little, 
Henry  Wms.  (Williams),  Xtopr.  Tomp- 
son,  Hen.  Tompson,  Jone  Lucas,  Hanah 
Gray. 

RANDOLPH  KIRKE,  1000  acs.  W- 
moreleand  Co.,  22  Mar.  1665/6,  p.  475, 
(579).  Bet.  Potomack  &  Rappa.  Rivers 
on  branches  of  Nomany,  beg.  in  line  of 
Mr.  Rich.  Sturman  the  cor.  tree  of  400 
acs.  surveyed  for  Thomas  Dias  &  as- 
signed to  Wm.  Overett  &  George 
Browne,  S.E.  by  a  great  br.  in  the  line 
of  land  of  Wm.  Basely  &  Edward 
Haelly,  thence  S.W.  &c.  Trans,  of  20 
pers:  Jno.  Jones,  Jno.  Bardell,  Wm. 
Grimes,  Thomas  Legerton,  George 
Many,  Wm.  Burton,  Robt  .Pack,  Fran. 
Weekes,  Walter  Birch,  Thomas  Monkes, 
Richd.  Foron,  Henry  Hunt,  Mathew 
Alger,  Samll.  Lamb,  Wm.  Thwats  (?), 
George  Denton,  Wm.  Jones,  Wm.  Pack, 
Jno.  James,  Mary  Suer. 


WM.  BASELY  &  EDWARD  HAEL- 
LY, 1000  acs.  Wmoreland  Co.,  between 
Rappa.  &  Potomack  Rivers,  upon 
branches  of  Nomany,  22  Mar.  1665/6, 
p.  475,  (580).  Beg.  at  land  surveyed 
for  Thomas  Dios,  in  line  of  Mr.  Jno. 
Whetstone,  running  S.W.  &c.  Trans,  of 
20  pers:  James  Turner,  Robt.  Cole,  Jno. 
Yates,  Henry  Biggs,  Wm.  Wms.,  Robt. 
Dent,  Mary  Wms.,  Susan  Hunt,  An 
Toft,  Jno.  Browne,  Nicho.  Browne,  Rose 
Plevin,  Robt.  Day,  Morgan  Thomas, 
Robt.  Colton,  Noah  Edrop,  Wm.  Bock, 
Robt.  Johnson,  Mary  Jacob,  Tho. 
Ecalfe  (?),  Cicely  Poole,  Eliz.  Wood- 
ward. 

JAMES  GREEN,  FRANCIS  LEWIS 
&  WM.  BALDROP,  1050  acs.  Wmore- 
land Co.,  bet.  Rappa.  &  Potomack 
Rivers,  22  Mar.  1665/6,  p.  475,  (580). 
Beg.  at  back  line  of  Robt.  &  Jno.  Alex- 
ander &  Henry  Pate,  extending  W.  &c. 
Trans,  of  21  pers:  Jno.  Thomas,  7 
Negroes ;  Mary  Johnson,  Precilla  Parker, 
An  Frankes,  Roger  Eglestone,  Wm. 
Peirce,  Sarah  Peirce,  Jno.  Elston,  (or 
Eliton),  George  Walker,  Ann  Leviton, 
Francis  Nelson,  Wm.  Gilbert,  Nicholas 
Short. 

RICHARD  STERMAN  (Sturman), 
2000  acs.  Wmoreland  Co.,  22  Mar. 
1665/6,  p.  476,  (581).  Upon  branches 
of  Nomeny,  beg.  at  cor.  tree  of  land  of 
Coll.  Valentine  Payton,  N.E.  &c.  to  cor. 
tree  of  Mr.  Danll.  Hutt,  S.E.  &c.  to  land 
of  Mrs.  Ann  Brodhurst  ,S.S.E.  &c.  to  N. 
side  of  a  run  deviding  this  land  of  the 
sd.  Mrs.  Broadhurst,  thence  S.E.  &c. 
Said  land  formerly  granted  to  him  4  Oct. 
1664. 

WM.  BEACH  &  RICHARD  HAT- 
TOFT,  2200  acs.  Stafford  Co.,  22  Mar. 
1665/6,  p.  476,  (582).  Upon  main  run 
of  Quanticutt  Cr.  1200  acs.  extending 
N.  by  E.  &c.  &  1000  acs.  beg.  at  Xtopr. 
Luns  cor.  tree,  running  S.S.W.  &c. 
Trans,  of  44  pers:  Jno.  Wormenton, 
Rich.  Founding,  Mary  Core,  Edmond 
Eterman,  Grace  Hill,  George  Chadwin, 
Tone  East,  Garat  Christi,  Isaak  Hannock, 
Jno.  Bowler,  Cunny  Benigham,  Isaak 
Reynolds,  Abigail  Short,  Susan  Core, 
Tonr(?)     Evans,    Thomas    Durly,    Jno. 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


547 


Stone,  4,  Humphry  Mead,  Jno.  Machary, 
Isaak  Grethwait,  Jno.  Bourn eby,  Henry 
Cole,  Jno.  Blagrave,  Dorathy  Spilmore, 
Tho.  Bland,  Jno.  Waters,  Mary  Wms. 
(Williams),  Peter  Johnson,  7  Negroes; 
Mary  Thomas,  Phillip  Corwell,  Johanna 
Yates,  Francis  Willis,  Susan  Hart, 
Timothy  Gore. 

WILLIAM  OVERETT,  590  acs.  W- 
moreland  Co.,  22  Mar.  1665/6,  p.  477, 
(582).  S.W.  side  of  Nomany  Riv.,  beg. 
at  a  poynt  of  a  small  br.  &  swamp 
called  the  old  feild  Sw.,  up  the  same 
S.W.  to  a  red  oake  deviding  this  &  land 
of  Mr.  Daniell  Hutt,  S.E.  to  an  Indian 
feild,  S.S.W.  &c.  to  marked  chesnutt 
deviding  this  &  land  of  Ann  Hutt, 
E.S.E.  &c.  to  an  Indian  feild  deviding 
this  &  land  of  Mrs.  Ann  Broadhurst, 
N.W.  &c.  to  the  N.W.  poynt  of  Her- 
ring Cr.  which  devides  this  &  land  of 
Coll.  Nicholas  Spencer,  finally  down 
Nomeny  Riv.  to  beg.  400  acs.  by  pattent 
dated  15  Feb.  1661  &  190  acs.  for  trans, 
of  4  pers:  Wm.  Tart,  Francis  Nelson, 
Mary  Thomas,  Grace  Hill. 

WM.  PEARCE  (Perce-Peirce),  1810 
acs.  W'moreland  Co.,  22  Mar.  1665/6, 
p.  477,  (583).  250  acs.  on  E.  side  of 
Nomany  Riv.,  opposite  land  of  Mr. 
Lewis  Parrell,  beg.  at  a  sw.  deviding 
this  &  land  of  Gabriell  Odier,  extend- 
ing nigh  the  river,  W.  upon  a  br.  of 
same  &  upon  S.  side  of  Vasatiacon  path 
&c.  600  acs.  beg.  where  the  former  land 
ends  upon  a  br.  of  sd.  river  opposite  to 
Mr.  Rosiers  land,  running  W.  &c.  350 
acs.  beg.  betwixt  land  of  sd.  Odier  & 
this  land,  running  S.  &c.  Granted  to 
Jno.  Wood  12  Oct.  1653,  who  sould  to 
sd.  Pearce  &  renewed  in  his  name  31 
Dec.  1662.  610  acs.  beg.  at  a  Spanish 
oak  in  the  abovesaid  tract  of  sd.  Pearce, 
extending  N.W.  &c.  to  side  of  a  hill 
deveiding  this  &  land  of  Katharine 
Brent,  S.W.  &c.  to  N.W.  side  of  a  br. 
nere  the  horse  path  which  devides  this 
&  land  claimed  by  Mr.  Jno.  Lord  & 
Wm.  Horton,  thence  E.  &c.  to  sd.  1200 
acs.  610  acs.  due  for  trans,  of  13  pers: 
Edmd.  Eterman,  Joane  East,  Jno.  Kelson, 
Wm.  Peirce,  Peter  Massey,  Mary  Core, 
Richd.  Fonding,  Susan  Hunt,  Wm.  Gil- 


bert, George  Gilbert,  Susan  Shore,  Mary 
Pitman,  An  Kelson. 

MR.  THOMAS  MORRIS,  1280  acs. 
Stafford  Co.,  24  Mar.  1665/6,  p.  478, 
(584).  Upon  the  maine  run  of  Quanti- 
cutt  Cr.,  beg.  at  the  line  of  Mr.  Wm. 
Beck  &  Mr.  Richard  Hatoft,  S.Wly.  &c, 
crossing  sd.  run  &c.  Trans,  of  26  pers: 
Jno.  Grey,  George  Smith,  Wm.  Ester, 
George  Michell,  Jno.  Scull  (or  Snell), 
Mary  Nox,  Edwd.  RatlifTe,  Wm.  Nor- 
man, George  Fleet,  Humphry  Minor, 
Wm.  Burby,  Robt.  Warren,  Arthur 
Wright,  Robt.  Wedge,  Wm.  Dolton, 
Xpian.  (Christian)  Wood,  Patriack 
Miller,  Jno.  Davis,  Tho.  Godfrey,  Tho. 
Wharton,  Abram  Wright,  2  Negroes; 
Wm.  Wilson,  Mary  Wilson,  Peter  Stow 
(or  Stone),  Wm.  Wright. 

THOMAS  WELLS,  260  A.  2  R.  & 
24  P.,  Henrico  Co.,  24  Mar.  1665/6,  p. 
478,  (584).  N.  side  of  Appomattox 
Riv.  at  the  head  of  sd.  Wells  old  pat- 
tent,  extending  from  Flintons  Sw.  at  a 
great  pine,  running  N.N.E.  &c.  to  side 
line  of  James  Akin,  E.  along  same  &c. 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Susan  Francis,  Wm. 
Gore,  Jno.  Gore,  Timothy  Markham, 
Andrew  Stevens,  Wm.  Price  (or  Prie). 

JNO.  BURTON,  700  acs.  Henrico 
Co.,  22  Mar.  1665/6,  p.  479,  (585). 
300  acs.  Nly.  on  a  great  swamp.  Sly.  to- 
wards land  of  Alice  Edlowe,  Widdow, 
Wly.  over  the  river  &  Ely.  into  the 
woods,  called  by  the  name  of  the  old 
feild;  300  acs.  another  parte  joyning  on 
the  head  of  the  Long  feild  pattent,  beg. 
at  a  white  oake  marked  4  wayes  at  the 
extent  of  the  deviding  line  of  Jno.  Bur- 
ton &  Jno.  Davies.  running  along  the 
greate  slash  S.E.  by  S.  &c.  600  acs. 
granted  to  Robt.  Craddock  &  by  Hoell 
Prise,  his  Atty.,  sould  unto  Jno.  Cox, 
who  Tssfaned  to  sd.  Burton,  &  100  p.cs. 
due  for  trnns.  of  2  pers:  Ann  Coleman, 
Mark  Wms.  (Williams). 

COLL.      NATHANIELL      BACON, 

Esor.,  2000  acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  22  Mar. 
1.665/6,  p.  479,  C585>.  S.  side  of 
Yorke  Riv.  upon  the  freshes  thereof, 
beg.  at  a  marked  poplar  being  the  unper 
bounds  of  land  belonging  to  Capt.  Wm. 


548 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Bassett  &  Capt.  Phillip  Ludwell,  bound- 
ing upon  the  river  up  unto  a  marked 
red  oak  by  the  river  side,  thence  into 
the  woods  W.S.W.  345  po.,  thence  S. 
&c.  to  upper  line  of  sd.  land  of  Bassett 
&  Ludwell,  thence  downe  sd.  line  345 
po.  to  beg.  Trans,  of  40  pers:  Peter 
Key,  Ann  Browne,  Tho.  Hancock,  Jno. 
Morgan,  Jno.  Senton,  Margtt.  Wilson, 
Wm.  Floyd,  Rachaell  Boras,  Jno.  Run- 
ner, Richd.  Taylor,  An  Owen,  Henry 
Norman,  Jno.  Fisher,  Wm.  Thomas, 
David  Hamlett,  Tho.  Lawrence,  Faith 
Chaire,  Evan  (a)  Welchman,  7  more  by 
assig'mt.  from  Capt.  Gunnell,  Jno. 
Birch,  9  Negroes;  Thomas  Cort,  Eliz. 
Davies,  Eliz. ,  Roman  Barboe,  Tho- 
mas Michell. 

JOHN  READ,  300  acs.  Gloster  Co., 
26  Mar.  1666,  p.  479,  (586).  W.  side 
of  Cow  Cr.  Being  part  of  a  pattern  of 
800  acs.  granted  unto  Richard  Cox,  5 
June  1657,  who  sould  to  sd.  Read. 

ABRAHAM  IVESSON,  Senr.,  985 
acs.  Gloster  Co.,  10  Oct.  1665,  p.  480, 
(586).  Upon  the  N.  Riv.  of  Mobjack 
bay,  beg.  by  the  river,  running  N.N.W. 
&c.  to  a  branch  of  the  No.  river  mill 
Sw.,  down  sd.  branch  to  the  maine  run, 
up  same  to  a  hickory,  thence  S.S.W.  &c. 
thence  S.  deviding  this  from  land  of 
Richard  Cox,  thence  W.  &c.  to  the  horse 
path,  thence  S. S.E.Ely,  to  an  ancient 
marked  line  &c.  655  acs.  parte  granted 
to  sd.  Ivesson  10  June  1651  &  100  acs. 
granted  unto  Coll.  Anthony  Elliot  &  as- 
signed to  Abram  Ivesson,  Junr.  &  230 
acs.  for  trans,  of  5  pers:  An  Key,  Mary 
Jones,  Wm.  Steward,  Peter  Hart,  An- 
thony Jackson. 

MRS.  JUDETH  SOANES,  Widdow, 
450  acs.  Jas.  City  Co.,  26  Mar.  1666,  p. 
480,    (587).    N.    side    of    James    Riv., 
Ely.  side  of  Chikahomani,  bounded  Nly. 
on  Tyascun  Sw.,  Ely.  on  Edward  Galla 
&    Thomas    Brookes,    Sly.    on    Thomas 
Brookes  &  Richard  New  &  Wly.  on  Mrs. 
Dormans    land.    Granted    unto   Thomas 
Womesly  4  Mar.  1656  &  bv  sd.  Wolmes- 
ly   sould    unto   Mr.    Henry    Soanes,    by 
him    deserted    &   upon    petition    of    sd. 
Judeth  granted  unto  her  by  order  of  the 
Gov.  &c.  the  20th  Mar.  1661  &  further 


due  for  trans,  of  9  pers:  Wm.  Neale, 
Jno.  Store,  Wm.  Watson,  Jno.  Watson, 
Mary  Hosier,  Peter  Neale,  Jno.  Stuart, 
Wm.  Smart,  Andrew  Rider. 

ROBERT  TALIAFRO  (Tallifro)  & 
LAWRENCE  SMITH,  6300  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  26  Mar.  1666,  p.  481,  (587).  In 
the  freshes,  on  S.  side  &  about  4  mi. 
above  Waire  Cr.,  beg.  on  the  E.  side  of 
Snowe  Cr.,  running  up  sd.  river  on  the 
N.  side  of  sd.  Cr.  &c.  to  a  vale  nere 
the  mouth  of  Nusaponucks  Cr.  &c. 
Trans,  of  126  pers:  Samuell  Ratcliffe, 
Nathaniell  Mott,  William  Lobb,  Danll. 
Anderton,  Robt.  Thruston,  Thomas 
Morgan,  Samll.  Burgis,  Edward  Sadler, 
Edward  Graves,  Jno.  Seniore,  Tom — 
Negro,  Wm.  Trewin,  Robt.  Hull, 
Arthur  Poell,  Ambrose  Hamon,  James 
Walker,  Xtopr.  Tharnam,  Richd.  Mould, 
Abram  Watts,  Wm.  Brett,  Giles  Lovell, 
Benj.  Hall,  Jno.  Edwards,  Thomas 
Jackson,  Jno.  Griffen,  8  Negroes;  Jno. 
Jackson,  Peter  Malborne,  Jno.  Gore, 
Mary  Williams,  Thomas  Hix,  Jno. 
Burby,  Georg  Young,  Georg  Baker, 
Mary  Parker,  Robt.  Merham,  Ann 
Hardware  (?),  Jno.  Davies,  Dorcas, 
Young,  Danll.  Gouch  (or  Grouch),  Eiz. 
Sharp,  Wm.  Gratwich,  Georg  Roke 
James  Harrison,  James  Sewill,  Thomas 
Bone,  Wm.  Pratt,  Jno.  Robertson,  Leon- 
ard Cooke,  3  Negroes;  David  Jones, 
Jno.  Motley,  Jno.  Hamerson,  Jno.  Lew- 
cas,  Peter  Frissoll,  Mary  Bake,  Eliz. 
Griffin,  5  Negroes;  Henry  Cassell  Jno. 
Hayward,  James  Berkert,  Henry  Powell, 
Humphry  Thomas,  Wm.  Greene,  Jno. 
Hunt,  Peter  Cozon,  (or  Cozin),  Tho- 
mas Cheny,  Mary  Cheny,  Robt.  Edwards, 
Blanch  Harding,  Xpr.  Edee,  Arabella 
Singleton,  Lawrence  Smith,  Tho.  Ed- 
ward, Jno.  Edwards,  Wm.  Greene,  Peter 
Smith,  Wm.  Thomas,  Jno.  Nutt,  Eliz. 
Humphries,  Henry  Johnson,  Anthony 
Baker,  Martha  Jones,  Susan  Hunt,  An- 
thony Jones,  Mary  Greefore,  Ann  Town- 
send,  Jno.  Frissell,  Mursin  Lilly,  Jno. 
Jones,  Margtt.  Tompson,  Jno.  Wray, 
Wm.  Wright,  Robt.  Pate,  Jno.  Kelly, 
Jno.  Farrell,  Griffeth  Pratt,  Edwd, 
Hoyte,  Danll.  Adler  (or  Adlen),  Eliz. 
Tooth,  Samll.  Baker,  Arthur  Skinner, 
Margtt.  Tompson,  Jno.  Wray,  Wm. 
Wright,  Abram  Stone,  Martha  Haimon 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


549 


(?),  Wm.  Batten,  Wm.  Stanly,  Silvester 
Sparrow,  Jno.  Boucher,  Wm.  Thomas, 
Jonathan  Nutt,  Peter  Wms.  (Williams). 

WILLIAM  KNOTT,  312  acs.  Surry 
Co.,  28  Mar.  1666,  p.  482,  (588).  112 
acs.  on  S.  side  of  James  Riv.,  on  S.  side 
of  upper  Chipoake  Cr.,  bounded  N.W. 
on  land  of  Edward  Oliver,  N*  upon 
Wm.  Thomas,  E.  on  George  Gibson  & 
S.E.  on  Mr.  Fisher;  200  acs.  on  S.  side 
of  sd.  Riv.,  Wly.  on  Jeremiah  Clements, 
N.W.  on  Edward  Oliver,  Nly.  on  Wm. 
Thomas,  George  Gibson  &  Edward 
Minter,  Ely.  on  Wm.  Gapins  land  & 
Mr.  Thomas  Busbie  &  S.E.  on  Mr.  Rich- 
ard Hill.  112  acs.  granted  to  Wm. 
Knott,  dec'd.,  20  Nov.  1653  &  200  acs. 
in  sd.  Knotts  name  14  Oct.  1657  &  now 
due  him  as  son  &  heire  of  sd.  Wm. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  Peter  Bray,  Wm. 
Hawking,  Sarah  Willis,  Mary  Jones. 

MR.  JNO.  POCKETT,  an  Erregular 
tract  of  land  conteyning  500  acs.,  Henri- 
co Co,  27  Jan.  1665,  p.  482,  (589). 
Bristoll  Parrish  next  above  land  of  Mr. 
Wm.  Baugh  on  Perristoyle  Cr,  300  acs. 
beg.  on  head  of  sd.  Cr.  at  a  place  called 
the  spring  bottome  where  it  boundeth 
N.W.  &c,  S.W.  to  the  Ashen  Sw,  E. 

6  E.  by  N.  as  sd.  Sw.  &  line  of  Mr. 
Walthall  windeth;  200  acs.  beg.  at  the 
upper  side  of  the  3  chops  &  extendeth 
W.  over  the  Ashen  Sw.  160  ch.  at  a 
tree  next  above  land  of  Mr.  Wm.  Wal- 
thall on  sd.  Sw.  &c.    Trans,  of  10  pers: 

7  Negroes;  Wm.  Store,  Mary  Kemp, 
Peter  Stone. 

MR.  XTOPHER.  BRANCH,  Senior, 
an  Erregular  tract  of  land  in  Henrico 
Co,  on  S.  side  of  James  Riv,  commonly 
knowne  &  called  by  the  name  of  Kings 
land,  conteyning  1380  acs,  20  Oct. 
1665,  p.  483,  (590).  Beg.  93/4  chs. 
above  a  remarkable  greate  stone  lying 
above  the  house  of  Mr.  Wm.  Baugh, 
Jr.,  runneth  W.  by  S.  into  the  woods 
160  chs.  each  conteyning  2  pearchs  &  E. 
by  N.  on  the  maine  Riv,  extending  S. 
by  E.  295  chs.  for  the  breadth  of  the 
whole  tract  to  a  marked  tree  on  Proc- 
tors Cr.  or  run  whence  it  runneth  as  the 
sd.  run  &  Cr.  windeth  to  the  Riv.  250 
acs.  by  pattern  12  Feb.   1638;  450  acs. 


by  pattern  28  Feb.  1638;  50  acs.  granted 
to  Jno.  Griffin  25  Feb.  1619  &  lately 
found  to  escheate  &c.  by  inquisition 
dated  5  Sept.  1663  &  now  granted  sd. 
Branch  &c.  630  acs.  for  trans,  of  13 
pers:  Mary  Stevens,  Jno.  Jones,  5 
Negroes;  Andrew  Many,  Peter  Ashley, 
Jno.  Stany,  Henry  Stany,  Wm.  Goate, 
Wm.  Potter. 

ROBERT  ALEXANDER  &  GEORGE 
WEEDING,  800  acs.  W'moreland  Co, 
24  Mar.  1665/6,  p.  483,  (590).  In  the 
forrest  bet.  Potomack  &  Rappa.  Rivs, 
beg.  at  cor.  tree  of  the  back  line  of  land 
of  Robt.  &  Jno.  Alexander  &  Xtopr. 
Lunn  &c.  Trans,  of  16  pers:  Jno.  Cod, 
Wm.  Cole,  Anthony  Larton  (or  Laeton), 
Walter  Stevens,  Tho.  Norton,  Gabriell 
Norton,  Austin  Skinner,  Wm.  Peters, 
Jonathan  Higly,  Wm.  Start,  Mary  Nor- 
tant,  Peter  Wms.^  Susan  Goodale,  Mar- 
tha Wms,   Hanah  Tart,  Richard  Hans. 

JAMES  MILLICENT,  400  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co,  20  Oct.  1665,  p.  484,  (591). 
Beg.  on  a  poynt  at  the  mouth  of  Tan- 
ners Cr,  running  S.S.W.  480  po.  by  the 
river  to  a  poynt  by  the  mouth  of  a  cr. 
&c,  joyning  land  of  Mr.  Thomas  Lam- 
bard  &  land  of  George  Tatne  &c.  Trans, 
of  8  pers:  Enoch  Wines,  Wm.  Skinner, 
Timothy  Hart,  Andrew  Jones,  Wm. 
Stevens,  Jno.  Jones,  Peter  Store,  Susan 
Wms. 

MR.  ARGOLL  YARDLY,  2000  acs. 
in  Accomack  in  N'ampton  Co,  28  Mar. 
1666,  p.  484,  (591).  Bounded  on  W. 
on  a  former  devd't.  of  sd.  Yardlyes,  Sly. 
on  land  of  Lt.  John  Savidge,  Nly.  on 
land  of  Capt.  Wm.  Stone  &  Ely.  to  the 
Seaside.  Granted  to  Col.  Argoll  Yardly, 
Esqr.  8  June  1654  &  now  due  the  above 
as  sonn  &  heire. 

JOHN  WILLIAMS,  100  acs.  accord- 
ing to  the  ancient  bounds  thereof,  Acco- 
mack Co,  28  Mar.  1666,  p.  484,  (592). 
Granted  to  Francis  Martin,  dec'd.  & 
lately  found  to  escheate  &c.  by  inquisi- 
tion dated  24  Aug.  1665  by  Col.  Jno. 
Stringer,  Escheator  for  sd.  county,  & 
now  granted  &c. 

MAJOR  JOHN  TILNEY,  100  acs. 
according  &c,  Accomack  Co,   28  Mar. 


550 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


1666,  p.  485,  (592).  Granted  unto 
Francis  Martin,  dec'd.,  lately  found  to 
escheate  &c.  inquisition  dated  24  Aug. 
1665  &  now  granted  &c. 

JOHN  HAGGAMAN,  Junr.  & 
ISAAK  HAGGAMAN,  200  acs.  accord- 
ing &c,  in  N'ampton  Co.,  28  Mar.  1666, 
p.  485,  (593).  Granted  unto  Capt.  Tho- 
mas Burbage,  deed.,  lately  found  to 
escheate  &c,  by  inquisition  dated  19 
Jan.  1665  &  now  granted  &c. 

WM.  GELDING,  400  acs.  according 
&c,  in  N'ampton  Co.,  28  Mar.  1666,  p. 
485,  (593).  Granted  to  Wm.  Birditt, 
dec'd. ,  found  to  escheate  &c.  by  inquisi- 
tion dated  11  Jan.  1665  &  now  granted 
&c. 

WILLIAM  GASKING  (Gaskin),  550 
acs.  according  &c,  in  N'ampton  Co.,  28 
Mar.  1666,  p.  485,  (594).  Granted  to 
Thomas  Burbage,  dec'd.,  lately  found 
Sec.  by  inquisition  dated  19  Jan.  1665  & 
now  granted  &c. 

MR.  JOHN  PATE,  200  acs.  Gloster 
Co.,  31  Dec.  1662,  p.  486,  (594).  N. 
side  of  Yorke  Riv.  &  E.  side  of  Poropo- 
tank  Cr.,  Wly.  upon  land  granted  to  Mr. 
Jarnew,  Sly.  on  Wm.  Ginsies  land  & 
Nly.  on  his  own.  Granted  to  Michaell 
Grafton  2  Nov.  1658,  by  him  deserted 
&  granted  sd.  Pate  27  Mar.  1661  by 
order  of  court.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Jno. 
King,  Eliz.  White,  Mary  Bates,  George 
Steines. 

SAME.  300  acs.  Gloster  Co.,  22 
Mar.  1665/6,  p.  486,  (594).  On  a  br. 
of  Ware  Riv.  in  Mockjack  bay,  beg.  at 
the  head  of  another  tract,  running  up  a 
br.  or  swamp  Wly.  &c.  to  br.  that 
cometh  uo  by  Robbinhoods  Well  & 
down  sd.  br.  to  beg.  Granted  unto  Mor- 
decay  Cooke  31  Mar.  1662,  by  him  de- 
serted &  upon  petition  of  sd.  Pate 
granted  to  htm  by  order  of  the  Govr. 
&c.  bearing  date  with  these  presents  & 
further  due  for  trans,  of  6  pers:  Walter 
Bradley,  Wm.  Farmer,  Susan  Tine,  Mary 
Groome,  Timothy  Fine,  Anthony  West. 

MR.  TOHN  OKEHAM.  200  acs. 
Gloster   Co.,    22   Mar.    1665/6,   p.   486, 


(595).  N.  side  of  Yorke  Riv.  &  E.  side 
of  Poropotanck  Cr.,  bounding  Wly.  up- 
on land  of  Mr.  Jarnew,  Sly.  on  Wm. 
Ginseyes  land  &  Nly.  on  land  of  Mr. 
Pate.  Granted  to  Mr.  Jno.  Pate  31  Dec. 
1662,  by  him  deserted  &  upon  petition 
granted  to  sd.  Okeham  &c,  &  further 
due  for  trans,  of  4  pers:  Wm.  Crone, 
Ant.  Jones,  Ralph  Lenor,  Timothy  Flips. 

STEPHEN  HAMELYN  (Hamlyn), 
1400  acs.  Chas.  Citty  Co.,  according  Sec. 
29  Mar.  1666,  p.  487,  (595).  Granted 
unto  Mr.  Stephen  Hamelyn,  dec'd.,  late- 
ly found  &c.  by  inquisition  dated  3  Nov. 
1665  under  the  hand  &  seale  of  Mr. 
Henry  Randolph,  by  virtue  of  a  deputa- 
tion from  Col.  Miles  Cary,  Escheator, 
Genr'l.  &c.  &  now  granted  &c.  Provided 
that  the  Widdow  &  Relict  of  sd.  Stephen 
Hamlyn,  dec'd.,  bee  noe  way  prejudiced 
in  her  thirds  &  that  shee  enjoy  the  same 
in  as  full  &  ample  manner  to  all  intents 
&  purposes  as  any  other  Widdow  of  his 
Maties.  (Majesties)  naturall  borne  sub- 
jects by  the  lawes  of  England  or  this 
Country  may  or  can  enjoy  the  same  as 
if  the  land  had  bin  Escheated. 

MR.  DAVID  FOX,  860  acs.  on  N. 
side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  between  sd.  River  & 
Corrotoman  Riv.,  29  Mar.  1666,  p.  487, 
(596).  Beg.  on  the  brow  of  a  hill  & 
running  N.W.  along  land  of  Col.  Bur- 
bage &c,  along  the  severall  lands  of 
Henry  Davis,  John  Senior's  orphant,  & 
Capt.  Hackett  &c,  adj.  land  of  Anthony 
Stephens  to  marked  tree  nere  Moratico 
path,  thence  N.Wly.  to  beg.  350  acs.  by 
pattent  dated  21  Aug.  1663  &  510  acs. 
by  pattent  dated  8  Sept.  1663. 

CHARLES  ROANE,  100  acs.  Gloster 
Co.,  6  Dec.  1665,  p.  488,  (597).  Upon 
branches  of  Peancketanck  Riv.,  beg.  at 
the  side  of  a  br.  &c,  N.E.  along  land  of 
Col.  Warner  &c.    Trans,  of  2  pers.* 

THOMAS  SAMPSON,  202  A.  64  P., 
James  Citty  Co.,  10  Apr.  1666,  p.  488, 
(597).  Beg.  nere  a  br.  of  Coxes  Sw., 
thence  bv  line  of  trees  deviding  this 
from  land  of  Richard  Smith,  running  S. 
&c.  to  N.W.  side  of  Capt.  Ellysons  Sw., 
being  lower  cor.  tree  of  Richard  Brusters 
line,   thence  N.W.   by  W.   to  Brusters 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


551 


path,  thence  downe  a  bottome  &  br.  of 
Ware  Cr.  W.N.W.  &c.  to  br.  of  the 
Plantation  (Cr.)  &c.  Part  of  750  acs. 
granted  to  Wm,  Davis  &  lately  found 
to  escheate  &c,  by  inquisition  dated  12 
Apr.  1664  by  Col.  Myles  Cary,  Escheator 
&c.  and  now  granted  &c. 


490,  (600).  E.  side  of  Machepungo 
Bever  Dam  branch,  bounded  on  W.  by 
W.  side  of  sd.  branch,  S.  by  lands  of 
Richard  Kellum  &c.  Trans,  of  6  pers: 
James  Pewring,  David  Lucas,  Edmond 
Croffs,  Jno.  Duckett,  Alice  Gwilford, 
Sarah  Powell. 


MR.  JUSTINIAN  AYLMER,  495  acs. 
Gloster  Co.,  4  Apr.  1666,  p.  489,  (598). 
300  acs.  at  Mockjack  bay  on  E.  side  of 
the  mouth  of  Pepper  Cr;  120  acs.  on 
Ewd.  of  sd.  Cr.  &  75  acs.  in  Mockjack 
bay,  beg.  at  S.W.  cor.  tree  of  a  former 
devdt.  at  sd.  Cr.  &c.  by  Mr.  Plummers 
trees  to  the  bay  side  &c.  300  acs. 
granted  to  Richard  Grigson  13  Sept. 
1651,  assigned  to  Wm.  Armistead  &  by 
Jno.  Armistead  his  lawfull  heire  as- 
signed to  sd.  Aylmer;  120  acs.  &  75  acs. 
granted,  assigned  &  sold  as  abovestated. 
Further  due  for  trans,  of  2  pers:  Margtt. 
Jones,  Wm.  Stevenson. 

THOMAS  RIDEING  (Riding),  1000 
acs.  Accomack  Co.  at  Occocomson,  5 
Apr.  1666,  p.  489,  (599).  Bounded 
Swd.  by  trees  of  Col.  John  Stringer,  W. 
by  Curratowoman  br.  &  E.  by  Seaboard 
side.  Trans,  of  20  pers:  Thomas  Ride- 
ing,  Charles  Gerrard,  Walter  Mathews, 
Katharine  Ellis,  Eliz.  Gilford.  Sarah 
Knight,  Wm.  Vaughan,  Henry  Mather, 
Thomas  Travis,  Mary  James,  Alice 
Turner,  Griffin  Morgan,  Thomas  Roach, 
Samll.  England,  Hester  Davis,  Henry 
Moore,  Thomas  Turry.  Michll.  Lingsly, 
Jno.  Morefeild,   Sara  Wittaker. 

TOBIAS  SELVEY,  600  Accomacke 
Co.,  5  Apr.  1666,  p.  490,  (599).  On 
the  head  of  land  of  Robt.  Parker, 
bounded  S.W.  partly  by  the  valley  of  a 
br.  &  a  line  of  marked  trees  running 
from  sd.  valley  S.  300  po.  to  land  of 
Dorman  Swillivant  &c,  N.N.W.  by  land 
formerly  Mr.  Richard  Bundocks  &c. 
Trans,  of  12  pers:  Alex.  Clarke,  Ed. 
Clarke,  Jeff  Daniell,  Tho.  Bassett,  Hen. 
Trenchard.  Giles  Manning,  Rowland 
Ash,  Walter  Stricland,  Joan  Ramsey, 
Barbery  Fisher,  Wm.  Vaughan,  Sisly 
Okely. 

BARTHOLOMEW  ME  ARES  (Mews), 
300  acs.  Accomacke  Co.,  5  Apr.  1666,  p. 


JOHN  SMITH,  500  acs.  Accomacke 
Co.,  5  Apr.  1666,  p.  490,  (600). 
Bounded  on  S.  &  E.  by  two  branches  of 
Machepungo  Cr.  &  on  the  N.  by  a  right 
line  parting  this  from  land  of  Timothy 
Coe.  Sd.  land  being  a  Southern  parte  of 
1500  acs.  granted  to  Capt.  Francis  Potts 
24  Jan.  1653  &  since  confirmed  to  Lt. 
Col.  Wm.  Kendall  29  May  1661,  who 
assigned  to  sd.  Smith. 

MR.  JOHN  FAWSETT  (Fawcett), 
937  acs.  Accomacke  Co.,  on  N.  side  of 
Occohanneck  Cr.,  5  Apr.  1666,  p.  491, 
(601).  Bounded  on  W.  by  land  of 
Richard  Kellum,  E.  by  land  of  Dorman 
Swillivant  &  N.  by  land  of  Mr.  Jno. 
West.  250  acs.  parte  hereof  being  one- 
halfe  of  land  granted  to  Richard  Smith 
24  Mar.  1650;  387  acs.  another  parte 
granted  to  Wm.  Thorne,  21  Nov.  1654 
&  by  their  heires  conveyed  to  sd.  Faw- 
cett; 300  acs.  for  trans,  of  6  pers: 
Henry  Merrell,  Wm.  Landers,  George 
Canneck,  Elizabeth  Moulton,  Ann  March, 
Mary  Gilman. 

WILLIAM  CHASE,  650  acs.  Acco- 
macke Co.,    S.   side   of  Pocomooc  Riv., 

5  Apr.  1666,  p.  491,  (601).  Bounded 
on  N.  by  sd.  Riv.,  &c.  marked  trees 
separating  this  from  land  of  Jno.  Renny 

6  land  of  Charles  Ratcliff  &c.  Trans. 
of  13  pers:  7  Negroes;  Jno.  Dickeson 
(or  Dukeson),  Francis  Branson,  Mary 
Trotman.  Ellinore  Pockett,  Jno.  Celly, 
Sarah  Gill. 

MR.  JOHN  MICHAELL,  500  acs. 
Accomack  Co.,  at  Occocomson,  5  Apr. 
1666,  p.  491,  (602).  Bounded  Swd.  by 
trees  of  Mr.  Rideing,  running  from  the 
Sea  alongst  his  line  N.W.  &c.  to  the  sea 
separating  this  from  land  of  Edward 
Smith,  Milriaht  &c.  Trans,  of  10  pers: 
Jno.  Michaell,  Senr.,  Wm.  Gray,  Peter 
Fantaine,  Jno.  Aleworth,  Jno.  Michaell, 
Jr.,  5  Negroes. 


552 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


ROBERT  HOUSTONE,  500  acs.  Ac- 
comacke  Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Pocomook 
Riv.,  5  Apr.  1666,  p.  492,  (602). 
Bounded  on  W.  by  sd.  Riv.  &  Hous- 
tones  Cr.,  S.Ewd.  by  trees  of  Jno.  Wil- 
liams &c.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Robt. 
Crumpton,  Jno.  Ventris,  James  Eveling, 
Jno.  Cow,  Rich.  How,  Henry  Baniton 
(or  Bainton),  Tho.  Wanklin,  Wm. 
Grubb,    Thomas    Kent,    Mary   Pithouse. 

RICHARD  ROBINSON,  150  acs. 
Accomacke  Co.,  5  Apr.  1666,  p.  492, 
(602).  At  the  bay  side  of  N.  side  of 
Muddy  Cr.  branch,  bounded  on  S.  by 
sd.  br.  &  lands  of  Samll.  Jones  &  Wm. 
Smith,  W.  by  the  bay  &  N.  by  lands 
surveyed  for  Mr.  Jno.  Custis,  now  in 
possession  of  Benjamin  Lawrence.  Trans, 
of  3  pers:  Thomas  Joy,  Edwd.  Lewis, 
Jno.  Nordett  (or  Nordell). 

NICHOLAS  LAYTER,  200  acs.  Ac- 
comack Co.  on  N.  side  of  Mesango  Cr., 
5  Apr.  1666,  p.  492,  (603).  Bounded 
on  S.  therewith,  W.  by  land  of  Charles 
Radcliffe  &  E.  by  trees  running  from  a 
little  gutt  on  the  marsh  issuing  out  of 
sd.  Cr.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Will.  Winn, 
Martha  East  Court,  Tho.  Carne,  Jane 
Vaughan. 

JAMES  TAYLER  (Taylor),  200  acs. 
Accomack  Co.,  on  N.  side  of  Mesango 
Cr.,  5  Apr.  1666,  p.  493,  (603). 
Bounded  on  S.  therewith,  E.  bv  land  of 
Charles  Ratcliff  &c.  Trans,  of  4  pers: 
George  Lore  (?),  Jno.  Foyle,  Will. 
Hawlis,  Jane  Southby. 

WILLIAM  AYLWORTH  (Ayle- 
worth),  400  acs.  Accomack  Co.,  on  S. 
side  of  Mesango  Cr.,  5  Apr.  1666,  p. 
493,  (603).  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Jno. 
Risby  (or  Rislv),  Robt.  Bute,  James 
Herbert,  Oliver  Evans,  Rebecca  Wallmg- 
ford,  Alice  Roberts,  Edwd.  Gannes, 
Robt.  Bedford. 

JOHN  WILLIAMS,  500  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Pocomook  River, 
5  Apr.  1666,  p.  493,  (604).  Bounded 
S.Ewd.  bv  Kings  Cr.  &  a  bever  Dam 
br.,  N.Wwdly.  by  land  of  Robt.  Hous- 
tone  &c.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Francis 
Bruse,    Lodwick   Browne,    Tho.   Winch, 


Samll.  Palmer,  Wm.  Beverly,  Heny 
Blundell,  Oliver  Osborne,  Francis  Tay- 
lor, James  Cotton,  Jno.  Roll. 

THOMAS  DAVIS,  400  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  S.  side  of  Pocomook  Riv.,  5 
Apr.  1666,  p.  493,  (604).  Beg.  at 
Davis  Br.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Jno. 
Browne,  Roger  Nuppar,  Jno.  Chester, 
Wm.  Warden,  Jno.  Armiger,  Step. 
Tompson,  Wm.  Dines  (?),  Wm.  Snagy. 

JOHN  PRETIM  AN  (  Prettiman ) , 
200  acs.  Accomack  Co.,  at  Matchepungo, 
5  Apr.  1666,  p.  494,  (604).  On  head 
of  the  lands  of  Thomas  Browne, 
bounded  on  S.  by  land  of  Wm.  Robbin- 
son  &c,  on  N.  by  br.  deviding  this  from 
land  of  Major  John  Tilney.  Trans,  of 
4  pers:  James  Boone,  Jno.  Kendall, 
Jane  Shepard,  Tho.  Ayres. 

JAMES  HENDERSON,  400  acs.  Ac- 
comack Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Pocomooke 
Riv.,  5  Apr.  1666,  p.  494,  (605). 
Bounded  on  E.  by  land  surveyed  for 
Thomas  Davis.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Jno. 
Long,  James  Collins,  Edwd.  Top,  Eliz. 
White,  Jno.  Price,  Jno.  Aubry,  Alice 
Stewkly,  Florence  Evans. 

ROBERT  RICHARDSON,  500  acs. 
Accomack  Co.,  at  the  head  of  Occa- 
hannock  Cr.,  5  Apr.  1666,  p.  494, 
(605).  Bounding  Swd.  of  450  acs.  that 
was  formerly  Richard  Smiths,  now  in 
possession  of  the  sd.  Robert  &c,  run- 
ning N.  by  E.  unto  land  formerly  Rich- 
ard Budicks  (or  Birdick)  &c.  to  the 
slashes  at  the  head  of  James  his  br.  unto 
land  now  in  possession  of  sd.  Richard- 
son. Trans,  of  10  pers:  3  Negroes; 
Robt.  Richardson,  Tobias  Bull,  Eliz. 
Passell,  Sarah  Passell,  Katharine  Stubbs, 
Wm.  Fetherstone,  Sebilla  Bullock. 

DORMAN  SUELLIVANT,  450  acs. 
Accomack  Co.  at  Occahannock  Cr.,  5 
Apr.  1666,  p.  495,  (606).  Bounded 
on  W.  by  land  of  John  Fawcett,  E.  by 
a  br.  &  trees  deviding  this  from  land  in 
possession  of  Robt  Richardson  &c.  250 
acs.  being  parte  of  500  acs.  granted  to 
Richard  Smith  24  Mar.  1650  &  by  his 
relict  assigned  to  sd.  Suellivant.  200 
acs.  for  trans,  of  4  pers:  Tho.  Gabell, 
Rich.  Archer,  Tho.  Gibbs,  Edwin  Males. 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


553 


TIMOTHY  COE,  1000  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  5  Apr.  1666,  p.  495,  (606). 
Bounded  on  E.  by  the  greate  N.  br.  of 
Machepungo  Cr.,  on  S.  by  a  right  line 
parting  this  from  land  of  Jno.  Smith 
&c.  Parte  of  1500  acs.  granted  to  Capt. 
Francis  Pott,  24  Jan.  1653  &  since  con- 
firmed unto  Lt.  Col.  Wm.  Kendall  29 
May    1661,    who   assigned    to    sd.    Coe. 

JOHN  WALLOP  alias  WADLOW, 
1700  acs.  Accomack  Co.  nere  Occocom- 
son  at  the  seaboard  side,  5  Apr.  1666, 
p.  495,  (606).  Lying  between  his  line 
&  Gingoteage  Riv.,  bounded  on  E.  by 
the  seaboard,  Swd.  along  same  to  a 
Cedar  br.  on  N.  side  of  Samll.  Taylor 
&c.  100  acs.  granted  unto  him  12  June 
1664  &  700  acs.  for  trans,  of  14  pers: 
Tho.  Mackrell,  Edgar  Halsey,  Margtt. 
Hill,  Roger  Draper,  Jno.  Cotswell,  Robt. 
Horton,  Jean  Stanly,  Jeames  Huberd, 
Luke  Roe,  Abraham  Willett,  Jno.  Gold- 
ing,  Jeames  Weatly,  Ed  Long,  Walter 
Booth. 

MR.  ROBT.  BRISTOW,  184  acs. 
Gloster  Co.  in  Mocjack  bay,  upon  N. 
side  of  Ware  Riv.,  7  May  1666,  p.  496, 
(607).  Beg.  at  a  white  oake  parting 
this  &  his  own  land  &  the  head  of 
Harris'  land  &c.  to  an  Oyster  Shell 
poynt  &c.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Eliz.  Bos- 
ton, Wm.  Browne,  Doll  a  Negro,  Jno. 
Dowdy. 

MR.  WM.  PORTEEN,  500  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  in  the  E.  br.  of  Eliz.  River,  9 
May  1666,  p.  496,  (607).  Running 
along  marked  trees  seperating  this  from 
land  of  Jno.  Gater  &c.  alongst  a  branch 
side  to  the  mouth  of  the  broad  Cr. 
Trans,  of  10  pers:  Isaack  Barrington, 
Edward  Gage,  Jno.  the  Indian,  Wm. 
Porteen,  Mary  Boddin,  Joane  Ravening, 
Wm.  Vahan,  Eliz.  Gwin,  James  Car- 
penter, Mary  Jones. 

SAME.  200  acs.,  same  county,  date 
&  page.  S.  side  of  Daniell  Tanners  Cr., 
beg.  at  Jno.  Wms.  (Williams)  cor.  tree, 
running  S.S.E.  &c,  being  severall  necks 
of  land.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Susan  Mason, 
Martha  Williams,  Peter  Store,  Wm. 
Thomas. 


THOMAS  WYATT,  500  acs.  in 
Mockjack  bay;  9  May  1666,  p.  497, 
(608).  250  acs.  on  Eastermost  side  of 
Ware  Riv.,  beg.  nere  a  little  poynt  (of) 
Oyster  shell,  running  N.  &c;  &  250  acs. 
abutting  upon  the  narrow  of  Ware  Riv. 
&c.  unto  Cow  Cr.  &c.  Granted  to  Rich- 
ard Wyatt,  deed.  20  Aug.  1645  &  now 
due  sd.  Thomas,  his  son  &  heire. 

JOHN  WILLIAMS,  500  acs.  in  Acco- 
mack, formerly  N'ampton  Co.,  at  Anan- 
cock  Cr.,  being  the  one-half  of  an  neck 
faceing  the  mouth  of  sd.  Cr.,  lying  be- 
tween the  N.  &  S.  branches  thereof,  5 
Apr.  1666,  p.  497,  (609).  Bounding 
on  S.  by  land  of  George  Truitt,  on  N. 
by  main  br.  of  sd.  Cr.  &c.  Trans,  of  10 
pers:  Jude  Morgan,  Benj.  Pride,  Wm. 
Seward,  Arthur  Shore,  Wm.  Fennett, 
Mary  Tye,  Peter  Scott,  Ann  Morgan, 
Judith  Smart,  Wm.  Stevens. 

CHARLES  RATCLIFF,  500  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  5  Apr.  1666,  p.  497,  (609). 
On  the  head  of  the  lands  of  Crooked 
Cr.,  bounding  Nwd.  by  land  of  John 
Renny  &c.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  James 
Duncomb,  George  Peggott,  Jno.  Ander- 
son, Richard  Crawley,  Thomas  Ceety 
(?),  Walter  Neale,  Thomas  Chandy, 
Walter  Cary,  Jno.  Denton,  Edwd. 
White. 

ROBERT  JOHNSON,  600  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  5  Apr.  1666,  p.  498,  (610). 
Bounded  on  S.  by  Mesango  Cr.  Trans, 
of  12  pers:  John  Vann,  James  Dalston, 
Jno.  Ottowaes,  Thomas  Rouse,  Jno. 
Freeman,  Ralph  Bromfeild,  Rich.  Lent- 
hall,  Edmond  Howard,  John  Haward 
(or  Howard),  Nich.  Broderick,  Ed. 
Temple,  Ed.  Phillips. 

JNO.  WALLOP  alias  WADLOW, 
300  acs.  Accomack  Co.,  On  S.  side  the 
head  of  Mesango  Cr.,  5  Apr.  1666,  p. 
498,  (610).  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Mary 
Jones,  Susan  Trott,  Wm.  Evans,  Jno. 
Evans,  Margtt.  Johnson,  Peter  Plummer. 

JOHN  DAVIS,  700  acs.  Accomack 
Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Pocomook  Riv.,  5  Apr. 
1666,  p.  498,  (610).  Trans,  of  14  pers: 
Miles  Seyes,  Ri.  Wartrop,  Jno.  Pile,  Ri. 
Holt,  Ed.  Jarvis,  Wm.  Orly,  Jno.  Harvy, 


554 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Wm.  Sunden,  Robt.  Spencer,  Jno. 
Wingatt,  Jonah  Wallis,  Henry  Corker, 
Jno.  Pleydell,  Thomas  Gore. 

DAVID  WILLIAMSON,  6000  acs. 
Accomack  Co.,  beg.  at  a  right  line  drawn 
from  Crooked  Cr.,  running  alongst  side 
of  Col.  Edmond  Scarburgh  s  land  to  land 
of  Mr.  Henry  Smith,  bounded  on  W.  by 
land  of  the  Ratcliffs  &  Nicholas  Layter 
(or  Layler),  S.  by  Mesango  Cr.,  lands  of 
Robert  Johnson  &  Germon  Gilliot  &  Ely. 
to  land  of  Jno.  Stockly.  5  Apr.  1666,  p. 
499,  (611).  Trans,  of  120  pers:  Rich- 
ard Combs,  William  Maston,  Robt. 
Sadler,  Thomas  Oxton,  John  Bristoll, 
Algerwell  Cecill,  Thomas  Cotton,  John 
Coltrop,  Robt.  Apreetee,  Nicholas  Pedly, 
Jno.  Heron,  Robt.  Paine,  Richard  Nay- 
lor,  Richard  Ashley,  Maurice  Digg,  Tho- 
mas Hardess,  Rich.  Masters,  Jno.  Marsh, 
Nicholas  Tooke,  Jno.  Zouch,  Wm.  Flud, 
Jno.  Smith,  Jno.  Mason,  Francis  Twis- 
den,  Thomas  Breader,  Xp.  Allenson, 
Robt.  Oliver,  Francis  Baston,  Henry 
Pettis,  Thomas  Fortree,  Edward  Mastor, 
Richard  Masters,  Jacob  Eaton,  Jno. 
Sacker,  Jeremy  Stanford,  James  Pashly, 
Robt.  Watson,  Tho.  Brett,  George 
Midleton,  Roger  Bradshaw,  Jno.  Nowell, 
James  Bracke,  Jno.  Bowes,  Anto.  Fowte, 
Wm.  Rooke,  Robt.  Larker,  Thomas 
Belois,  James  Albester,  George  Curtis, 
James  Troutts,  Rich.  Manly,  George 
May,  Peter  Pett,  Edward  Wyatt,  James 
Newman,  Jno.  Cason,  Fortree  Stephen, 
Herbert  Randall,  Thomas  Peale,  James 
West,  Lewis  Price,  Ri.  Amhust,  (or 
Amherst),  Ri.  Duck,  Thomas  Hinman, 
James  Brooke,  Edwd.  Marlington, 
Walter  Gilson,  Roger  Wye,  Ralph 
Massy,  Thomas  Stanny,  Wm.  Bur- 
ford,  9  Negroes;  Susan  Williams,  Jane 
Cole,  Ann  Jones,  Peter  Plumer,  Alex. 
Edwd.,  Wm.  Stone,  Stephen  Cher  (or 
Chore),  Peter  Store,  Susan  Hart,  Henry 
Cary,  Henry  Wms.,  Jno.  James,  Jno. 
Johnson,  James  Stoner,  Peter  Corton, 
Edwd.  Watters,  Sarah  Jackson,  Jno. 
Tatton,  Jno.  Tart,  Edmd.  Williams, 
Peter  Norton,  Thomas  Norton,  Thomas 
Coulson,  Edward  Say,  Wm.  Saver.  Nor- 
ton Phillips,  Jno.  Evans,  Robr.  Coleman, 
Henry  Creeke,  Peter  Plumer,  Eliz.  Hart, 
Mary  Jones,  Wm.  Tony,  Susan  March, 
Alex  Mecanter,  Edwd.  Seward,  Thomas 


Nort,  Thomas  Coleby,  Thomas  Pewter, 
Edward  Jones. 

JNO.  WALLOP  alias  WADLOW, 
800  acs.  in  Accomack  Co.  at  Pocomook, 
5  June  1666,  p.  499,  (611).  Wwd.  by 
the  head  of  Mr.  Pitts  3000  acs.,  Nwd. 
by  Kings  Cr.  &  a  Beverdam  br.  of  fresh- 
water running  into  sd.  Cr.,  Swd.  by  a 
right  line  from  land  of  Mr.  Robt.  Pitts 
&c.  Granted  10  June  1664,  400  acs.,  & 
400  acs.  for  trans,  of  8  pers:  Margtt. 
Jones,  Wm.  Seward,  Andrew  Jones,  An- 
thony Sewes  (?),  Wm.  Harris,  Edward 
Williams,  Peter  Stone,  Walter  Granger. 

MR.  JOHN  ROBINS,  3150  acs. 
N'ampton  Co.,  at  the  Seaboard  side,  5 
Apr.  1666,  p.  500,  (612).  Bounded  on 
S.  by  a  br.  parting  this  from  land  of 
Mr.  Wilkins  &c,  unto  land  of  Mr.  Wm. 
Mel  ling,  which  was  formerly  Jno.  Ma- 
jors, on  W.  by  sd.  Major,  Wilkins's 
former  grant,  Mr.  Taylor  &  lands  of 
Mr.  Robins  former  grant,  on  S.  by  the 
Otterdam  branch  &c.  running  to  cor. 
tree  of  Jno.  Harmanson  &c.  2000  acs. 
granted  to  Mr.  Obedience  Robins  3  Dec. 
1640  &  since  come  to  sd.  John  by 
descent;  &  1150  due  for  trans,  of  23 
pers:  8  Negroes;  Wm.  Story,  Susan 
Knott,  Edw.  Stone,  Wm.  Edwards, 
Susan  Edwards,  Peter  Kellum,  Edm. 
Norton,  Nathan  Jones,  Edw.  Stevens, 
Wm.  Skinner,  Robt.  Evans,  Walter 
Jones,  Jno.  Allum,  James  Ettrig,  Peter 
Core.  (Note:  Marginal  reference  gives 
this  name  as  Robinson). 

ELIZ.,   SARAH  &  MARGTT.  DYE, 

children  of  John  Dye,  deed.,  600  acs. 
Accomack  Co.,  5  Apr.  1666,  p.  600, 
(612).  At  Metomkin,  beg.  (at  a  place) 
commonly  called  &  knowne  by  the  name 
of  Dyes  Bridge,  &c,  nere  land  of  Col. 
Edmond  Scarburgh  &c.  450  acs.  granted 
sd.  Dye  10  Aug.  1664  &  now  descended 
to  the  abovenamed  in  partnership  &  150 
acs.  for  trans,  of  3  pers:  Thomas  Nor- 
cott,  Wm.  Monrow,  Edward  Walker. 

LAWRENCE  ROBINSON.  1200  acs. 
Accomack  Co.,  part  hereof  being  a 
peninsula  called  Hills  Choyce,  the  other 
part  lying  on  the  S.  side  of  the  middle 
branch  of  Muddy  Cr.,  bounded  on  the 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


555 


N.  therewith,  on  the  E.  by  a  right  line 
parting  this  from  land  of  Robt.  Hill 
&c,  on  W.  by  the  bay  &  Sunken 
Marshes;  5  Apr.  1666,  p.  501,  (613). 
500  acs.  by  pattern  dated  23  Feb.  1663 ; 
300  acs.  by  pattern  29  Nov.  1664  & 
400  acs.  for  trans,  of  8  pers:  Edward 
Rice,  Owin  Williams,  Rebecca  Moore, 
Martha  Morris,  Thomas  Mouse,  Mary 
Gibbons,  Mathew  Gosling,  Thomas 
Stanly. 

SAMUELL  TAYLOR,  950  acs.  Acco- 
mack Co.,  nere  Occocomson,  5  Apr.  1666 
p.  501,  (613).  Running  from  the  head  of 
a  Cedar  br.  &c.  to  a  line  deviding  this 
from  land  of  Mr.  Southby  Littleton.  600 
acs.  by  pattern  dated  12  Sept.  1664  & 
350  acs.  for  trans,  of  7  pers:  Francis 
Clacke  (or  Clarke),  Edward  Master, 
Tho.  Godfry,  Edm.  Pirce,  Richard  Gray, 
Wm.  Orton,  James  Luellin. 

MR.  HENRY  SMITH,  1700  acs.  Ac- 
comack Co.  nere  branches  of  Pocomook 
Riv.,  5  Apr.  1666,  p.  501,  (614). 
Bounded  on  W.  by  land  of  Col.  Ed- 
mond  Scarburgh  &  David  Williamson, 
N.  by  land  of  Mr.  Robt.  Pitts  &  a  br. 
of  sd.  Riv.  &  on  S.  by  land  of  sd.  Wil- 
liamson. Trans,  of  34  pers:  Henry 
Smith,  Phillip  Smith,  Wm.  Hately, 
James  Angle,  Jno.  Astope,  Thomas 
Wheeler,  Jno.  Higgs,  David  Hamleton, 
Margtt.  Ray,  Eliz.  Carter,  Margtt.  Fartree, 
Mary  Jones,  Edward  Ludlow,  Alice  Hunt, 
Arthur  Robins,  Mary  Lewis,  James  Powell, 
An  Ossipe  (?),  Ann  Frowne,  Jno.  Will- 
mott,  Andrew  Rider,  Heugh  Yeo,  Jno. 
Browne,  Wm.  Twisden,  Henry  Parker, 
Robt.  Bowman,  Isaak  Hillier,  Ri.  Barnes, 
Henry  Rider,  Peter  Browne,  Susan 
Coates,  Jonas  Smelt,  Edward  Filmore, 
Susan  Carter. 

ROBERT  BEVERLY,  165  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  N.  side  of  Peancketanck,  12 
Apr.  1666,  p.  502,  (614).  Beg.  at  a 
small  Cr.  mouth,  running  N.W.  by  W. 
&c.  to  marked  tree  of  Mr.  George 
Keibles,  late  deed.,  thence  E.N.E.  &c. 
Trans,  of  4  pers:  Hanah  Wild,  Ann 
Trotter,  Wm.  Tompson,  Margtt.  Jones. 

WALTER  AUSTON,  Gent.,  200  acs. 
according  to  the  ancient  lawfull  bounds 


thereof  in  James  Citty  Co.,  23  Sept. 
1663,  p.  502,  (614).  Formerly  belong- 
ing to  Benj.  Carroll,  deed.,  lately  found 
to  escheate  &  by  inquisition  dated  27 
Mar.  last,  under  hands  &  seals  of  Col. 
Myles  Cary,  Esqr.,  Escheator  &  a  Jury 
sworne  &c.  &  now  granted  &c. 

HENRY  BIGGS,  -100  acs.  of  wood 
land  &  40  acs.  of  marsh  land,  New  Kent 
Co.,  20  Nov.  1665,  p.  502,  (615).  N.E. 
side  of  Mattapony  Riv.  about  2  mi.  up 
the  same,  W.S.W.  upon  the  Riv  &c.  by 
line  of  marked  trees  keeping  equall  dis- 
tance from  Tassiatums  Cr.  &c.  100  acs. 
granted  to  Edmond  Simpson  2  Oct.  1651 
&  sould  to  Thomas  Bell,  who  sould  to 
Phineas  Gibson,  by  whom  it  was  sould 
to  sd.  Biggs;  40  acs.  for  trans,  of  Ann 
Harloe. 

WM.  TODD,  500  acs.  Gloster  Co.,  7 
May  1666,  p.  503,  (615).  N.  side  of 
Chas.  Riv.  &  commonly  called  by  the 
name  of  Tindalls  neck.  Being  parte  of 
4000  acs.  granted  to  Col.  Argold  Yardly, 
Esqr.  &  purchased  of  him  by  George 
Ludlow  &  Mr.  Wm.  Whitby,  &  by  Lud- 
low, Esqr.  sould  to  Thomas  Beale,  Esqr. 
who  sold  unto  Robert  Todd,  dee'd.  & 
now  becoming  due  unto  sd.  Wm.  as 
sonn  &  heire  of  sd.  Robt. 

ROBERT  HARMON,  800  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  27  Mar.  1666,  p.  503,  (615). 
Beg.  by  Mattadecum  Cr.,  being  the  upper 
bounds  of  a  devdt.  belonging  to  Wm. 
Stone  &c,  bounding  on  land  of  Jno. 
Garraway.  Trans,  of  16  pers:  Jeremy 
Graves,  Jno.  Garraway,  Wm.  Ashton, 
Jno.  Wouden,  Arthur  Young,  Susan 
Jones,  Peter  Gore,  Andrew  Wms.,  Ed- 
ward Masters,  Wm.  Whiting,  Margtt. 
Childers,  Andrew  Gibson,  Jno.  Jones, 
Susan  Godlad,  Hanah  Boyce,  Hannah 
Coates. 

MAJOR  THOMAS  WALKER.  2350 
acs.  called  Mattapony  fort  in  Gloster 
Co.,  26  Feb.  1665,  p.  503,  (616).  N. 
side  of  Mattapony  Riv.  bee.  at  a  small 
run  called  Potataweno,  S.E.  by  E.  &c. 
Granted  to  Edward  DI^s,  Esqr.  1  June 
1653.  bv  him  deserted  &  upon  petition 
of  sd.  Walker  it  was  granted  unto  him 
by  order  of  the  Govr.  &c,  dated  with 


556 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


these  presents.  Further  due  for  trans, 
of  47  pers:  Will.  Carvill,  And.  Jenkins, 
Thomas  Holt,  Mary  Castle,  Jno.  Nor- 
cott,  Andrew  Jones,  Susan  Carry,  Mary 
Tye,  Wm.  Crump,  Antho.  Longman, 
Margtt.  Twisden,  An  Langston,  Ann 
Bray,  Peter  Sacott,  Jno.  Evans,  Wm. 
Castle,  Jno.  Parson,  Antho.  Jones, 
Arthur  Upshott,  Margtt.  Light,  Wm. 
Tompson,  Edward  Trott,  Edward 
Wms.,  An  Longman,  Edm.  Pratt,  Wm. 
Senior,  James  Store,  Wm.  Harrer,  David 
Wms.,  Jno.  Harris,  Arthur  Cort,  Wm. 
White,  Mary  Strang,  (or  Strong),  Wm. 
Strong,  An  Lovell,  Susan  Sparshott,  Ed. 
Trottham,  Norton  Wms.,  Phillip  Lang- 
stone,  Margtt.  Hart,  Susan  Strang,  Ed- 
ward Wms.,  Margtt.  Jones,  Edward 
Walker,  Jno.  White,  Susan  Wms.,  Ann 
Toft. 

JOHN  WILSON,  100  acs.  Henrico 
Co.,  N.  side  of  Appomattox  Riv.,  6 
June  1666,  p.  504,  (616 V  Part  of  1100 
acs.  purchased  of  Wm.  Clarke  which 
was  granted  by  pattent  6  May  1638  & 
by  him  sould  to  Leonard  Laughton  29 
Oct.  1638,  who  sould  to  Seath  Ward  3 
Jan.  1639,  as  by  record  of  sd.  deed  at 
James  Citty  24  Sept.  1640  &  assignments 
thereon  endorsed  may  appeare;  &  for 
better  confirmation  the  Widdow  Dora- 
thy  Clarke  surrendered  the  land  to  sd. 
Seath  Ward  at  a  Court  held  at  Veriana 
25  Mar.  1640,  who  at  a  Ct.  held  at 
Variana  9  Nov.  1640  surrendered  to 
Wm.  Worsnam  200  acs.  being  part  of 
300  acs.  at  the  Ould  Towne  Cr.  as  bv 
the  records  of  that  Ct.  &  by  a  deed  of 
sayle  thereof  dated  2  Nov.  1640  &  as- 
signment thereon  doth  appeare;  sd. 
Seath  Ward  for  good  consideration  as- 
signed the  other  100  acs.  to  Michaell 
Masters  at  a  Ct.  held  at  Variana  28  Oct. 
1642  &  sd.  Masters  at  the  same  Ct.  sur- 
rendered the  100  acs.  to  Henry  Rowen, 
who  at  the  same  Ct.  in  like  manner  as- 
signed same  to  Peter  Feepond,  who  at 
the  same  Ct.  assigned  sd.  100  acs.  to  sd. 
Wilson:  beg.  at  the  river  side,  running 
W.  bv  N.  1/3  NIv.  along  an  old  knnwne 
fence  being  the  line  parting  sd.  Wilson 
&  the  Orphants  of  George  &  Wm. 
Worsnam  &c:  631  acs.  25  po.  beg.  about 
100  paces  above  Mr.  Randolphs  Mill, 
extending  E.  by  S.  51  po.  by  same,  S.E. 


by  S.  88  po.  to  a  greate  black  oake  at 
the  Cr.  side  &c.  to  the  old  line  of  sd. 
Wilsons  first  grant  where  there  is  a 
greate  pine  marked  for  a  cor.  tree  of 
this  new  survey  which  place  is  called  the 
Sv/ift  Cr.  round  aboute,  W.N.W.  237 
po.  against  the  second  fall  of  sd.  Cr.  &c. 

THOMAS  WEBSTER,  251  A.  20  P., 
Henrico  Co.,  N.  side  of  Appomattox 
Riv.,  6  June  1666,  p.  505,  (618). 
Granted  unto  sd.  Webster  20  Oct.  1665 
&  now  augmented  as  followeth:  at  the 
heads  of  the  old  Towne  Land,  extend- 
ing into  the  woods  W.N.W.  204  po., 
S.S.W.  197  po.,  E.S.E.  204  po.,  N.N.E. 
197  po.  to  the  Stony  run,  the  place 
aforementioned;  76  A.  &  27  P.  adj.  &c, 
being  in  all  327  A.  1  R.  &  15  P.  Trans. 
of  2  pers:-  Edward  Holmewood,  Francis 
Bland. 

WM.  RICHARDSON,  700  acs.  Isle 
of  Wight  Co.,  29  Sept.  1664,  p.  505, 
(619).  On  the  3rd  Sw.  of  the  Black 
water  beg.  at  a  marked  greate  Cyprus 
for  350  acs.  at  the  mouth  of  a  br.  part- 
ing this  from  Mr.  Bouchers  land,  run- 
ning down  the  Sw.  &c.  The  other  350 
acs.  being  opposite  this  on  the  other  side 
of  the  Sw.  Trans,  of  14  pers:  Jno. 
Archer,  Susan  Jones,  Peter  Pluit,  Edw. 
Morris,  Jno.  Rigby,  Wm.  Stone,  Mary 
Wise,  Ed.  Godson,  Henry  Filpot,  Jno. 
Jones,  Ed.  Achely  (or  Ackely),  Wm. 
White,    Peter    Rigby,    Tristrum    Eaton. 

RICHARD  LYNNY,  1200  acs.  N'- 
umberland  Co.,  22  Mar.  1665/6,  p.  505, 
(619).  Upon  the  high  lands  above  the 
head  of  Deviding  Cr.,  Ely.  upon  the 
head  of  lands  of  Col.  Lee,  Jno.  Hull  (or 
Hutt),  Thomas  &  others  &  the  glade, 
Sly.  upon  land  of  Jno.  Cussens  &  Tho- 
mas Steed  &  Nly.  upon  land  of  Mr. 
Xtopr.  Garlington.  Granted  unto  Tho- 
mas Dodson  29  Nov.  1658,  by  him  de- 
serted &  upon  petition  of  sd.  Lynny  it 
was  granted  to  him  by  order  of  Govr. 
&c,  dated  with  these  presents  &  further 
due  for  trans,  of  24  pers:  Will.  Water- 
ton,  Jno.  Jackson,  Margtt.  Jones,  Susan 
Evans,  Wm.  Wilson,  Jonathan  Tye, 
J.  fary  Jones,  Edward  Ison.  Abram  More, 
Edward  Wms.,  Jno.  Godlad,  Marg. 
Wms,  Peter  Plumer,  Edwd.  Jenkins,  Jno. 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


557 


Stone,  Wm.  Peterson,  Edward  Jackson, 
Susan  Williams,  Edward  Hart,  Edward 
Jons,  Susan  Margetts,  Edwd.  Jnoson, 
Peter  Story,  Edwd.  Wms. 

ROGER  RICHARDSON,  600  acs. 
upon  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  at  miles 
end  of  Silvester  Thatcher  &  Thomas 
Whitlock,  6  June  1666,  p.  506,  (620). 
Beg.  at  the  head  of  a  br.  of  Mr.  Wm. 
Smarts  Cr.,  extending  E.N.E.  &c. 
Granted    to    Richard    Coleman    9    June 

1654  &  renewed  in   his   name   9   May 

1655  &  since  assigned  to  sd.  Richardson. 

USTUS  SANDERS,  150  acs.  N'amp- 
ton  Co.,  at  the  seaboard  side,  6  June 
1666,  p.  506,  (620).  Ewd.  by  the  sea, 
Nwd.  from  a  line  of  trees  from  a  poynt 
at  Muddy  Byte,  W.  &c.  Granted  to  Jno. 
Manny,  sonn  to  Wm.  Manny,  dec'd.,  & 
lately  found  to  escheate  &c.  By  inquisi- 
tion recorded  under  the  hands  &  seals  of 
Col.  Jno.  Stringer,  deputy  Escheator  for 
sd.  county,  &  a  Jury,  dated  17  Apr. 
1663  &c,  now  granted  unto  sd.  Sanders. 

WM.  DUDLY,  600  acs.  Lancaster 
Co.,  N.  side  of  Peancketank  Riv.,  5  Sept. 
1665,  p.  506,  (621).  Opposite  land 
formerly  in  the  occupation  of  Mr.  Wm. 
Hackady,  beg.  at  the  mouth  &  upon 
S.E.  side  of  a  small  Cr.,  extending  along 
sd.  Riv.  S.E.  by  E.  to  poynt  opposite 
Hoccadyes  Cr.  &c.  Granted  to  Peter 
Rigby  &  George  Keible  8  Oct.  1656  & 
by  them  assigned  to  the  abovenamed. 

JOHN  WEIRE  (Weir),  Gent.,  2502 
acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  Sittingborne  Parish  & 
on  N.  side  of  the  River,  6  June  1666, 
p.  507,  (621).  1200  acs.  granted  sd. 
Weir  20  Feb.  1662,  beg.  upon  a  poynt 
on  the  upper  side  of  Clifts  Cr.,  E.  by  N. 
&c.  to  miles  end  of  Mr.  George  Taylor, 
thence  W.  by  S.  &c.  1302  acs.  in  the 
freshes  between  Rappa.  &  Potomack 
Rivs.,  beg.  at  cor.  tree  parting  this  & 
land  he  now  lives  on  &  land  of  James 
Mathews  at  their  miles  end,  thence  E. 
bv  N.  &c.  to  land  of  Robt.  Tomlin  &c. 
Granted  sd.  Weire,  20  June  1663. 

CAPT.  THOMAS  HAWKINS.  81254 
ncs.  on  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  bee;,  at 
the  lowest  fall  thereof  &c.    2  June  1666, 


p.  507,  (622).  Transs.  of  17  pers: 
Martin  Jnoson,  Jno.  Evans,  Edwd.  Wil- 
liams, Peter  Plummer,  Stephen  Har- 
wood,  Jno.  Jones,  Wm.  Spite,  Edw. 
Davis,  Mary  Core,  Wm.  Conton,  Edward 
Harris,  Mary  Stephens,  Eliz.  Newhous, 
Faith  Edwards,  Eliz.  Senior,  Jno.  Gore, 
Wm.  Whiting. 

DANIELL  GAINES  &  NICHOLAS 
WILLARD,  1376  acs.  Rappa.  Co.  in  the 
freshes  &  on  the  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
24  Jan.  1665,  p.  508,  (623).  Aboute  5 
mi.  from  the  river  side,  beg.  nere  a  br. 
falling  into  Occupason  Cr.,  across  same 
S.W.  &c.  to  Mattapony  path,  thence  S. 
by  W.  &c.  Trans,  of  28  pers:  Samll. 
Gibbs,  Jno.  Downham,  Nicholas  Web- 
ster, Margtt.  Webster,  Pat  Webster,  Paule 
freebody,  Martin  Hawwood,  James  Gas- 
kins,  Peter  Warman,  David  Warman, 
Mar.  Hopkins,  Jno.  Tramps,  Jo.  Wil- 
mott,  Sarah  Wilmott,  Mary  Wilmott, 
Jane  Wilmott,  Fran.  Pine,  Tim  Clarke, 
Ralph  Wood,  Rich.  Pecock,  Robt.  Frap- 
ney,  Peter  West,  Thomas  Holly,  David 
Griffin,  Samll.  Peach,  Red.  Holt,  Mary 
Fisher,  James  Jelly  (or  Jolly). 

COL.  JOHN  CATLETT  (Cattlett), 
200  acs.  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.,  2  June 
1666,  p.  508,  (623).  Aboute  3  mi.  be- 
low the  lowest  fall.  Trans,  of  40  pers: 
An  Kingstone,  George  Norman,  Jno. 
Packwood,  Ann  House,  Robt.  Mada- 
vile,  Row.  Vaughan,  Katharine  Peirce, 
Jno.  Smithhouse,  Mary  Smithhouse, 
Susan  Smithhouse,  Francis  Hooper, 
Cor.  Pemberton,  Joseph  Phills,  Barnaby 
Forston,  Peter  Matson,  James  Coleman, 
Samll.  Plainton,  Tymothy  Hobson, 
Sampson  Pallin,  Tho.  Sheppard, 
Martin  Jnoson,  Thomas  Goodman, 
George  Jones,  Ralph  Crompton,  Hugh 
Serjant,  Jno.  Parsons,  Edward  Mason, 
Wm.  Kellum,  Jno.  Harwood,  Thomas 
Jones,  Peter  Godson,  Henry  Nicholls, 
Thomas  Hart,  Peter  Hone,  Wm.  Massy, 
Susan  Harmon,  Thomas  Norton,  Ed- 
ward Moore,  Judeth  Sones,  Mary 
Forston. 

PETER  CORNEHILL,  947  acs.  Rap- 
pa. Co.,  S.  side  of  Riv.,  24  Mar.  1664/5, 
p.  509,  (624).  Aboute  V/2  mi.  from 
the  Riv.  &  on  the  head  of  Mr.  Lucas 


558 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Cr.,  adj.  land  of  Thomas  Wilkenson, 
extending  W.  by  S.  &c.  across  the  head 
of  sd.  Cr.  to  cor.  tree  of  Mr.  Daniell 
Gaines,  thence  W.S.W.  &c.  400  acs. 
purchased  of  Jno.  Speed  &  Wm.  Wilton 
&  547  acs.  for  trans,  of  11  pers:  Ed- 
ward Hopkins,  Jno.  Jnoson,  Rebecca 
Peake,  Wm.  Short,  Edmond  Norm  (?), 
Stephen  Nicholls,  Thomas  Norton, 
Henry  Michaell,  Thomas  Nelmes,  Wm. 
Sanders,   Samll.  Peterson. 

CORNELIUS  DEB  ANY  (Debney), 
640  acs.  upon  the  lower  side  of  Totto- 
potomoys  Cr.,  beg.  at  upper  line  of 
land  of  Root.  Henderson  &  Jno. 
Fleming,  purchased  of  Mr.  Littlepage  & 
James  Turner,  running  to  the  extent 
thereof,  S.S.E.Ely.  &c.  7  June  1666,  p. 
509,  (625).  Trans,  of  13  pers:  Grace 
Andrews,  Benj.  Daniell,  Thomas  Moss, 
Roger  Meakes,  Symon  Gray,  Wm. 
Crofts,  Jno.  Grant  (or  Grout),  Jno. 
Sexton,  Jno.  Huchenson,  Jno.  Brenner, 
Stephen  Michell,  Jno.  Mullins,  Jarvis 
Robert. 

COL.  JOHN  CATLETT,  500  acs. 
within  the  mouth  of  Omen  Cr.  upon  the 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  &c.  through 
parte  of  the  Doeggs  Cleare  ground  &c. 
2  June  1666,  p.  509,  (625).  Trans,  of 
10  pers:  Jno.  Steed,  Sarah  Goodard, 
Eliz.  Lellett  (?),  Mary  Wilkins,  Walter 
Holliday,  Francis  Deford,  Calet  Lyon, 
Stephen  Twelves  (?),  Jno.  Garwood, 
Samll.  Gamefield  (or  Garnefield). 

MR.  JOHN  SIMPSON,  2100  acs.  in 
the  freshes  &  on  N.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
6  June  1666,  p.  510,  (626).  Bounding 
on  land  of  Mr.  Charles  Grimes,  running 
S.S.E.  &c.  Trans,  of  42  pers:  Wm. 
Watts,  Jno.  Dawling,  Wm.  Deane,  Tho. 
Rogers,  Jno.  Saxby,  Robt.  Staple,  George 
Fuller,  Jno.  Dent,  Thomas  Wells, 
Ralph  Tedman,  Samll.  Raynolds,  Wm. 
Wise,  Edw.  Godlar,  Jno.  Lambe,  Joane 
Mead,  Thomas  Tolter,  Jno.  Well,  Jos. 
Farrant,  Tho.  Twig,  George  Stead,  Jno. 
Maning,  Charles  Bray,  An  Belthar,  Jno. 
Traram  (?),  Eliz.  Paine  twice,  Jno. 
Harmon,  Jno.  Jones,  Jno.  James,  Henry 
Woolock,  Robert  Broker,  Margtt.  Pol- 
lard, James  Jnoson,  2  Negroes;  Wm. 
Watts,    Peter   Bray,    Susan    Cant,    Mary 


Adams,  Peter  Store,  Wm.  White,  Tob. 
Short. 

CAPT.  DANIELL  PARKE,  700  acs. 
on  Eastermost  side  of  Chickahomany 
Riv.,  commonly  called  by  the  name  of 
Warrany  Old  Towne,  E.N.E.  180  ch. 
from  the  further  end  of  the  Ridge, 
thence  N.N.W.  160  ch.  to  a  br.  of 
Warreny  Cr.  &c.  7  June  1666,  p.  510, 
(626).  Granted  unto  Nicholas  Mere- 
wether  last  day  of  July  1656  &  sould  to 
Danll.  Sommerton,  who  sould  to  Xtoper. 
Harris  &  by  sd.  Parke  purchased  of 
Harris. 

DOCTOR  ROBERT  WILLIAMSON, 

3350  acs.  Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  6  June 
1666,  p.  511,  (626).  On  the  greate  sw. 
of  the  Black  Water,  beg.  at  a  greate 
Cyprus  in  the  Sw.,  running  S.S.E.  &c. 
by  Sewards  br.,  crossing  the  same  &c. 
295  acs.  granted  sd.  Williamson  26  Apr. 
1661  &  3055  acs.  for  trans,  of  62  pers: 
Joane  Williamson,  Herbett  Richardson, 
Edw.  Robbinsonn,  Ann  North,  Connise 
Tonge  (?),  Tristram  Estan,  Luke  Man- 
sens,  Merrick  Edwards,  Jane  Edwards, 
Nathaniell     Simonds,     Rich.     Morgan, 

Hester    Northern,    George    ,    John 

Johnson,  Edw.  Sanders  Edwd.  Morgan. 
Edward  Dover  (or  Douer),  Henry 
Baker,  Katherine  Langford,  Ri.  Jenkins, 

Simon    ,    Robt.    Sampson,    Merlin 

Cant,  Joseph  Baker,  Wm.  Downham, 
Silvester  Hill,  Winefre  Evans,  Tane 
Wheler,  Wm.  Stephens.  Jno.  Williams, 
Peter  Jnoson,  Jno.  Jenkins,  James  Legee, 
Mary       Estwood.       Wm.        Carpenter, 

Emanuell  ,  Fran.  Reppington,  Ann 

Chew,  Ann  Thomas,  Wm.  Tucker,  Jno. 
Browne,  Jno.  Wilson,  Wm.  Axum   (?), 

Sarah ,  Peter  Nicholls,  Peter  Harris, 

Susan  Hunt,  Charles  Dennison,  Mary 
Wannan,  Jno.  Sheppard,  Peter  Laster, 
4  Negroes;  Abigail  Counter,  Grace  Bul- 
lock, Wm.  Love,  Eliz.  Hill,  Jno.  Barnes, 
Jno.  Hilliard.  Wm.  Stone,  Edward 
Tones,  Wm.  Thomas,  Jno.  Wms.,  David 
Jolis  (?). 

THOMAS  ADDAMS  (Adams)  & 
RICHARD  RICE,  700  acs.  N'umberland 
Co.,  4  July  1664,  p.  511,  (627).  400 
acs.  betwext  two  main  br.  at  the  head 
of    Chikacone    Riv.,     running    up    the 


Patent  Book  No. 


559 


br.  W.S.W.  &c.  &  300  acs.  beg.  at 
Tuccasion  (?)  Sw.,  running  S.  by  W. 
&c.  Trans,  of  14  pers:  Jno.  Gore,  Wm. 
Greene,  Jno.  Wise,  Edw.  Story,  Wm. 
Jones,  Jno.  James,  Margtt.  Seward,  Ed- 
ward Miles,  Nathan  Edwards,  Jno.  Jno- 
son,  Edward  Ison,  Mary  Wms.,  Jno. 
Scott,  Jno.  North. 

CAPT.  JOSEPH  BRIDGER  &  MR. 
WM.  BURGH,  7800  acs.  Isle  of  Wight 
Co.,  or  Nancimond  Co.,  7  June  1666,  p. 
512,  (628).  Beg.  by  a  White  Marsh, 
a  Medow  aboute  halfe  a  mile  from  the 
maine  run  of  the  Black  Water,  running 
up  S.E.  860  po.  by  a  sw.  side,  S.E.  by 
S.,  thence  N.E.  by  E.  &c.  Trans,  of 
156  pers:  James  Barrett,  Wm.  Jnoson, 
Jno.  Jnoson,  Henry  Mason,  Edward 
Jones,  Phillip  Trott,  Ann  Lewis,  Wm. 
Spigh,  Jane  Wright,  Edward  Cole, 
Margtt.  Jones,  Peter  Plum,  Jno.  Jnoson, 
Ant.  Mathews,  Ann  Turner,  Marke 
Clary,  Row.  Handy,  Har.  Keely,  Jno. 
Crofts,  Charles  King,  Jno.  Clother,  Ann 
Collins,  Ri.  Robbins,  Jno.  Hacker,  Roger 
Larriner,  Rich.  Terry,  Ann  Nicholls,  An 
Jones,  Edward  Harris,  Wm.  White,  Ed. 
Godlad,  Mary  Jones,  Susan  Edwin,  Wm. 
Bray,  Edm.  Nicholls,  Norton  Charlton, 
Ed.  Filmott,  Nicho.  Sabrell,  Nicho. 
Smith,  Wm.  Tatton,  Jno.  Powell,  Stephen 
Might,  Jane  Spencer,  Robert  Collier, 
Andrew  Rogers,  Susan  Norton,  Henry 
Mason,  Isaak  Edmonds,  Tristrum 
Knowles,  Jno.  Haris,  Toby  Keeble,  Evan 
Tones,  Walter  Cole,  Eliz.  Hobson,  Wm. 
Ward,  Jno.  Seriant,  Peter  Lugg,  Ann 
Beiford'(or  Berford),  Wm.  Lewis.  Eliz. 
Losse,    Mathew    Filton,    Maria    Cooke, 

EhVabeth    ,    Isee    ,    Nicholas 

DofTell,  Tno.  Gusere,  Danll.  Murry.  Jno. 
Sandv,  Wm.  Hampton,  Lidia  Dickeson, 
George  Harmor,  Walter  Spencer.  Mary 
Lott,  Sarah  Cooke,  John  Greene.  8 
Negroes;  Wm.  Hunt.  9  Negroes;  Wm. 
Thomas,  Edw.  Thomas,  Antho.  Tov.  Tho. 
Evans,  Peter  Plumer.  Susan  Cooke, 
Marstt.  Tames,  Peter  Godson,  Edward 
Pearson,  Tho.  Callowav,  W^.  Thomas, 
Ed.  Mav.  Thomas  Story.  Wm.  Hart, 
Henrv  Stephens,  Margtt.  Harw,  Sarah 
CoMiVr.  Jno.  Jones.  Thomas  Pitt,  Tames 
Brideer.  Jno.  Menlock.  Susan  Tacob, 
Wm.  Lewin,  Daniell  Dennv,  Mirina 
Nicholas,  Jnoson  Spencer,  Patriak  Allen, 


Edmd.  Froland,  Alexander  Anderson, 
Teage  O  Kenedy,  Thomas  Martin, 
Marke  Clary,  Amy  Skewes,  Jno.  Drink- 
water,  Mary  Drinkwater,  Walter  Turner, 
William  Bellew,  Rich.  Fryar,  Ab. 
Bumstone  (or  Burnstone),  Eliz.  Taylor, 
Walter  Weekes,  Tho.  Reding,  Ann 
Penogee,  Henry  Hart,  Edw.  Summers, 
Ed.  Sanders,  Susan  Mason,  Peter  Major, 
Walter  Edward,  Jno.  Harris,  Edward 
Thomas,  Norton  Wms.,  Jno.  Gore, 
Wm.  Ayherst  (or  Ayhust),  Jno.  Ackdon, 
Tho.  Guy,  Margtt.  May,  Wm.  Tompson, 
Leo.  Snow,  Wm.  Harris,  Mary  Jones, 
Jno.  Evans,  Wm.  Evans,  Edw.  Major, 
Josep  Bridger. 

MR.  DAVID  NEWELL,  324  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  6  Sept.  1665,  p.  513, 
(628).  Beg.  at  Southermost  cor.  tree 
of  land  of  Robt.  Garrett,  thence  S.  & 
by  W.  &c.  cross  the  Indian  path  &c. 
to  Westover  path  &c.  Trans,  of  7  pers: 
Hanah  Wms.,  Jno.  Harker,  Wm.  John- 
son, Peter  James,  Henry  Tyler,  Wm. 
Maunders,  Susan  Harrison. 

MR.  JOHN  TATEM,  160  acs.,  21 
May  1666,  p.  513,  (629).  50  acs.  beg. 
on  Mr.  Wms.,  running  W.N.W.  &c.  & 
110  acs.  beg.  at  cor.  tree  of  Sandburnes 
40  acs.  standing  in  Mr.  Birds  line, 
thence  N.N.W.  Nly.  &c,  parallel  to  the 
first  line  upon  Mr.  Birds  land  that  was 
formerly  Hackers  &c.  to  the  first  station 
scituate  in  Martins  Brandon  Neck.  50 
acs.  granted  to  Capt.  Francis  Grey  20 
Aug.  1663,  who  assigned  to  sd.  Tatem 
&  110  acs.  by  purchase  from  Marke 
Avory. 

XTOPR.  (CHRISTOPHER)  WADE, 
300  acs.  Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  12  May 
1665,  p.  513,  (630).  Beg.  nere  Jno. 
Nevills  land,  running  E.  by  Robt.  Cole- 
man, then  E.  by  Jno.  Garners  marked 
trees  &c.  to  a  white  oake  in  a  Medow 
br.,  &c.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  Jno.  Wms., 
Walter  Grimes,  Mary  Stone,  Hanah 
Watson,  Peter  Store,  Jno.  Gore. 

LT.  COL.  HENRY  MEESE,  2000  acs. 
Stafford  Co.,  7  Tune  1666,  p.  514, 
(630).  S.  side  of  Potomack  Cr.,  1000 
acs.  beg.  on  E.  side  of  a  Sw.  &  small 
gutt     deviding    this     &    land     now    in 


560 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


possession  of  sd.  Meese,  extending  S. 
&c.  to  a  greate  E.  br.  of  Whiptewasin 
Cr.  &  1000  acs.  bounded  N.  by  sd.  1000 
acs.,  E.  by  land  of  Thomas  Griggs,  W. 
by  land  now  in  possession  of  Mr.  Wm. 
Horton  &  Mr.  Wm.  Heaberd.  1000  acs. 
by  pattern  dated  20  Oct.  1665  &  1000 
acs.  due  for  trans,  of  20  pers:  Jno. 
Hale,  Neale  O  dannell,  Wm.  Rushton, 
Andrew  Lewis,  Richd.  Cole,  Andrew 
Dollert,  Charles  Elliott,  ABram  Beching- 
ton,  Peter  Codring,  Robert  May,  Roger 
Collingwood,  Richd.  Plimridg,  Jno. 
Plason,  Jno.  Barrett,  Ri.  Thorpe,  An 
Hayes,  Jno.  Mader,  Gabriell  Thorpe, 
Wm.  Wmson,  Jno.  Scolcroft. 

WM.  SANDBURNE,  40  acs.  in  Mar- 
tins Brandon  Necke,   21   May   1666,   p. 

514,  (631).  Bounded  S.S.E.Sly.  upon 
Mr.  Birds  land,  formerly  Jno.  Haskers, 
running  N.N.W.  Nly.  &c.  Granted  to 
Marke  Avery  &  by  Wm.  Radway  pur- 
chased of  Avery  &  "since  falling  to 
Escheate  it  was  granted  unto  the  Chil- 
dren of  Wm.  Sandburne"  by  the  Govr. 
&c. 

LT.  COL.  THOMAS  BROWNE,  1210 

acs.  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  7  June  1666,  p. 

515,  (631).  800  acs.  upon  the  W.  br. 
of  Eliz.  Riv.  being  a  necke  of  land, 
bounded  on  E.  by  Clarkes  Cr.  which 
runneth  N.  &c,  bounding  on  S.W.  by  a 
Cr.  or  br.  called  Browne  bay  which  runs 
N.W.,  &c.  adj.  to  mouth  of  br.  on  land 
of  Thomas  Sparrow;  240  acs.  on  Clarkes 
Cr.  on  Swd.  side  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  adj. 
sd.  800  acs.  &  adj.  land  of  George 
White  &c.  to  the  Indian  path  &c.  800 
acs.  by  pattern  dated  27  Nov.  1640  & 
240  acs.  granted  7  Oct.  1646.  170  acs. 
the  residue  by  purchase  from  Jno. 
White. 

THOMAS  GREEG  (Greg),  450  acs. 
W'moreland  Co.,  upon  branches  of  Pass- 
betansee,  18  Mar.  1662,  p.  515,  (632). 
S.E.  with  the  main  br.  or  run  of  sd. 
creek,  which  devides  this  &  land  of 
Wm.  &  Jno.  Heaberd,  &c.  to  land  form- 
erly belonging  to  Jno.  Bainely,  N.W. 
with  land  of  Henry  Meese,  Merchant,  & 
N.E.  with  a  tract  called  Whitbyes  land. 
Trans,  of  9  pers:  Jno.  Nicholls,  Wm. 
Jones,  Susan  Hamon,  Edward  Niker  (?), 


Jno.  Harvey,  Wm.  Daines,  Jno.  Gore, 
Edward  Wms.,  Peter  Store. 

ELIZABETH  &  SUSAN  WILLIAMS, 
Orphants  of  Thomas  Williams,  deed., 
326  acs.  Nancimond  Co.,  9  June  1666, 
p.  516,  (632).  On  SwcL  side  nere  the 
mouth  of  New  Towne  haven  river,  beg. 
on  a  poynt  by  the  river  side,  running 
S.E.  129  po.  to  land  of  George  Salis- 
bury deserted  &c,  butting  on  the  miles 
end  of  land  of  Capt.  Danll.  Gookin, 
cross  the  Island  Cr.  &c.  Granted  to  sd. 
Thomas  17  Oct.  1648  &  now  due  as 
above. 

THOMAS  ATWELL  alias  COLLINS, 
462  acs.  N'umberland  Co.,  29  June 
1666,  p.  516,  (633).  On  Lower  Macho- 
tick;  212  acs.  opposite  to  land  of  Henry 
Roach,  beg.  at  a  small  cr.  deviding  this 
&  land  of  Jno.  Bennett,  dee'd.,  extend- 
ing along  the  head  br.  of  Machoatick 
Riv.  S.E.  over  a  small  cr.  to  land  of 
Walter  English;  &  250  acs.  S.S.W.  &c. 
212  acs.  granted  sd.  Atwell  alias  Collins 
20  Dec.  1661  &  250  acs.  purchased  of 
Walter  English  &  Alice  his  wife. 

HARMAN  KELDERMAN,  800  acs. 
Rappa.  Co.,  according  to  the  ancient 
lawfull  bounds  thereof,  11  July  1666,  p. 
517,  (634).  Granted  to  Jno.  Frumpton, 
lately  found  to  escheat  &c,  as  by  in- 
quisition under  the  hands  &  seals  of 
Major  Jno.  Weire,  Dep.  Escheator,  & 
the    Jury    sworne    &c,    dated    17    Mar. 

1665,  &  now  granted  sd.  Kelderman  who 
hath  made  his  composition  according 
to  act.  &c. 

ELIZABETH  HAMPSHIRE,  100  acs. 
Rappa.    Co.,     according    &c,     11    July 

1666,  p.  517,  (634).  Granted  to  Jno. 
Hampshire  &  lately  found  to  escheate 
&c,  as  by  inquisition  dated  2  Nov. 
1665  &c. 

SARAH  DRUMMOND,  halfe  an  acre 
in  James  Citty,  20  Mar.  1662,  p.  517, 
(634).  N.W.  on  Mr.  Randolph,  E.  on 
the  Church  Yard,'  S.E.  on  Mr.  Warren 
&  S.W.  on  the  maine  river  to  beg. 
Granted  to  Edwd.  Prescott  4  Apr.  1661 
&  given  by  will  to  sd.  Sarah  &  also 
granted  by  order  of  Court  &c. 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


561 


CAPT.  LAWRENCE  BAKER,  350 
acs.  Surry  Co.,  Lawnes  Cr.  Parish,  11 
Dec.  1665,  p.  517,  (635).  Beg.  in  a 
br.  of  the  black  water  Sw.  &c.  Trans, 
of  7  pers:  Mary  Wms.,  An  Baker,  Jno. 
Evans,  Edward  Colles,  Jno.  Jobson,  An- 
drew James,  Mary  Sturdivant. 

DAVID  LUELLIN  (Lewellin),  636 
acs.  Chas.  Citty  Co.,  15  May  1666,  p. 
518,  (635).  270  acs.  commonly  knowne 
by  the  name  of  Rich  Levell,  bounding 
W.  upon  the  head  of  Shirly  Hundred, 
E.  &  S.  upon  land  of  Mr.  Walter  Ash- 
ton  &  N.  upon  his  own  land;  200  acs. 
in  or  nere  Shirly  Hundred,  which  was 
late  in  the  possession  of  Edward  Gard- 
ner, deed.,  bounding  W.  upon  the  River, 
N.  upon  40  acs.  purchased  of  Edward 
Maddin  &  S.  upon  land  lately  belong- 
ing to  Serj.  Jno.  Harris;  63  acs.  in 
Shirly  hundred,  beg.  at  land  sd.  Luellin 
lately  purchased  of  Robt.  Partin,  Sr.  & 
Robt.  Partin,  Jr.  &  sould  to  Mr.  Jno. 
Meres,;  63  acs.  another  part  in  Shirly 
or  Burmody  hundred  lately  belonging  to 
Mr.  Michaell  Turpin;  &  40  acs.  being 
next  to  and  lately  belonging  to  Joseph 
Royall,  deed.,  next  towards  Shirly  hun- 
dred. Granted  unto  Capt.  Danll.  Luel- 
lin, deed.,  10  Mar.  1655  &  now  become 
due  sd.  Danll.  as  son  &  heire. 

MR.  NICHOLAS  HEALE  (written 
Nathaniell  &  erased),  738  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co.,  18  May  1666,  p.  518,  (636). 
Upon  N.W.  br.  of  Corrotoman  Riv.  up- 
on the  N.E.  side,  beg.  at  the  mouth  of 
a  small  cove  which  runs  up  to  sd.  Heales 
house  &c.  Being  one-halfe  of  land 
granted  to  Enoch  Hawker  &  Anthony 
Doney  (or  Dowey)  29  July  1652  con- 
teyning  1000  acs.  &  sould  to  sd.  Heale 
by  sd.  Hawker,  soe  that  more  land  be- 
ing conteyned  within  the  bounds  of  sd. 
pattent  then  the  pattent  expresseth  the 
residue  above  the  one  moyety  thereof 
being  238  acs.  is  due  sd.  Heale  for  trans. 
of  5  pers:  Jno.  Jancy,  Mary  Wms., 
Ann  Hubberd,  James  Hawley,  Will. 
Miles. 

WALTER  HEARD,  350  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co.,  1  June  1666,  p.  519,  (636).  On 
the  head  of  the  E.most  br.  of  Corroto- 
man Riv.  &c.  S.W.  to  the  Deviding  br. 


&c.  Part  of  a  pattent  of  700  acs. 
granted  to  Wm.  Ironmonger  12  Dec. 
1663  &  300  acs.  parte  thereof  sould  to 
sd.  Heard  by  sd.  Ironmonger  &c.  but 
upon  new  survey  there  being  50  acs. 
more,  which  is  due  sd.  Heard  for  trans, 
of  Walter  Young. 

ANTHONY  MATHEWES,  1300  acs. 
Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  10  July  1666,  p.  519, 
(637).  Upon  Sewards  Sw.,  beg.  at  cor. 
tree  of  Robt.  Williamson  &c.  Trans,  of 
26  pers:  Lawrence  Baker,  Lawrence 
Baker,  Elizabeth  Baker,  John  Baker, 
James  Baker,  Joseph  Baker,  Jno.  Ma- 
coms,  James  Wilson,  Robt.  Bruce,  Jno. 
Stoops,  Jno.  Phillips,  James  Clarke,  And. 
Overing,  Wm.  Heate  (or  Heale),  Tho. 
Powell,  James  Richards,  Ann  Reeve, 
Alice  Lee,  An  Milington,  James  Downes, 
Robt.  Bennett,  Rich.  Miller,  Jane  Good- 
man, Jno.  Dobson,  Edwd.  Poynter,  Rich. 
Luas. 

DAVID  MILLES  (Mills),  600  acs. 
Lancaster  County,  1  June  1666,  page 
520,  (638).  Upon  the  head  of  the 
Eastermost  br.  of  Corrotoman  River, 
beginning  at  the  mouth  of  a  main  br. 
thereof  &c,  along  N.E.  side  of  De- 
viding br.  &c.  to  S.W.  side  of  a  path 
knowne  by  the  name  of  Moratico  & 
Wiccocomico  path  &c.  Parte  of  a  pat- 
tent of  700  acs.  granted  to  Wm.  Iron- 
monger 12  Dec.  1663  &  400  acs.  parte 
thereof  sould  to  sd.  Milles;  and  there 
being  more  land  found  within  the 
bounds  thereof  which  is  due  sd.  Milles 
for  trans,  of  4  pers:  Jno.  Jones,  Wm. 
Ivery,  Edward  Wilson,  Peter  Shepherd. 

MRS.  ANN  PITT,  150  acs.  Isle  of 
Wight  Co.,  19  Oct.  1665,  p.  521,  (639). 
Upon  a  br.  of  Pagan  Cr.,  beg.  at  the 
mouth  of  a  small  br.  which  parts  this 
from  land  of  Thomas  Grosse  &c.  then 
N.E.  to  Capt.  Pitts  former  line  &c.  Be- 
ing parte  of  750  acs.  granted  to  Mr. 
Jno.  Sparkes,  3  June  1635. 

MR.  THOMAS  BUTTON  (Butten), 
3650  acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  on  S.  side  of  sd. 
Riv.,  about  5  mi.  back  into  the  woods, 
19  July  1666,  p.  521,  (639).  Beg.  in 
the  N.N.W.  line  of  Mr.  Daniell  Gaines, 
N.N.W.  to  Occupation  Cr.  &c.  to  maine 


562 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


run  of  Major  Gilsons  Cr.  &c.  Trans,  of 
73  pers:  Wm.  Stevens,  Ed.  Thomas, 
Mary  Cutts,  John  Evans,  Ed.  Taylor, 
Thomas  Norton,  Jno.  Edwards,  Anthony 
Wmson.,  Peter  Seward,  Susan  James, 
Timothy  Cole,  Henry  Filmore,  Henry 
Thomson,  Mary  Andrewes,  Edmond 
Walton,  Samll.  Newman,  Wm.  Dennis, 
Jno.  Cray,  Edmond  Boulton,  Jno.  Steed, 
Sarah  Godard,  Eliz.  Lettett,  Mary  Wil- 
liams, Walter  Holladay,  Francis  Deford, 
Richard  Silvester,  Calett  Lyon,  Stephen 
Twelves  (?),  Jno.  Garwood,  Samll. 
Garnefeild,  Susan  Stewards,  Jno.  Jno- 
son,  Edmd.  Ivery,  Jno.  Fisher,  Thomas 
Cray,  Susan  Lidmy,  Peter  Nicholls,  Tho. 
Lellett,  Jno.  Edwards,  Thomas  Say, 
Xtopr.  Wills,  Mary  Jones,  Henry  Store, 
Henry  Tyler,  Mary  Thomas,  Wm.  Fox- 
croft,  Jonathan  Towne,  Margtt.  Wilard, 
Nicholas  Wilard,  Edward  Harris,  Jno. 
Bauford,  Ed.  Sanders,  Jno.  Barow,  Eliz. 
Stiles,  An  Mason,  Andrew  Goodman, 
Edward  Silvester,  Mary  Grove,  Wm. 
Jordan,  Susan  Coates,  Jno.  Tilney,  Peter 
Baucomble,  Edward  Henderson,  Laur- 
ence Long,  Jonathan  Burlock,  (or  Bur- 
rock), An  Taylor,  Blanch  Randall,  Wm. 
Dingly,  Jno.  Morris,  Barth.  Harrison, 
Joyce  Belfe,  Tno.  Hutchenson,  Jno. 
Meekins;  19  of  these  rights  taken  out 
of  a  pattent  of  Jno.  Weir  &  others, 
dated  7  Sept.  1654. 

PHILLIP  HUNIFORD.  800  acs.  in 
Surry  &  Isle  of  Wight  Co..  14  May 
1666.  p.  522,  (640).  400  acs.  beg.  at 
the  Ewd.  side  of  the  3rd  Sw.  of  the 
Black  Water,  running  up  E.  160  do. 
&c;  &  400  acs.  on  the  W.  side  of  the 
third  Sw.,  thence  W.  160  po.  &c.  Trans, 
of  16  pers:  Jno.  Mears,  Tames  Leach, 
Hen.  Bi£gs.  twice.  Tho.  Rovall,  Robt. 
Harris,  Jno.  Evans,  Jno.  Floon.  Tno. 
Phillips,  Tane  Steele,  Margtt.  Phillips, 
Hannah  Ery,  Wm.  Cockerham,  Tno. 
Charles,   Abram  Odion,   Jno.  Trewicks. 

CAPT.  WM.  COCKERHAM  &  MR. 
CHARLES  BARHAM,  850  acs.  Surry 
Co.,  14  May  1666.  p.  522,  C640).  Ewd. 
side  of  the  third  Sw.  of  the  Bhck 
Water.  Trans,  of  17  pers:  Jonane  Rav, 
Fllinor  Wms.,  Ri.  Huees  (or  Hueer), 
Cor.  Watkenson.  Tno.  Mayo.  Katharine 
Mathew,    Hugh    Kettle,    Robt.    Minson, 


Jno.  Cockerham,  Mary  Cockerham,  Ed. 
Tanner,  Michll.  Perott,  Jonas  Wms.,  Jno. 
Woodward,  Ed.  Browne,  Eliz.  Browne, 
Edward  Bray. 

JOHN  ROGERS,  200  acs.  Surry  Co., 
14  May  1666,  p.  523,  (641).  Beg.  on 
S.  side  the  Cyprus  Sw.,  S.S.W.  along 
Danll.  Regans  land,  N.W.  over  sd. 
Swamp,  N.N.E.  upon  a  Reedy  br.  issu- 
ing out  of  sd.  Sw.  &  along  same  to  the 
beg.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Ellinor  Bray, 
Ri.   Shelly,   Mary  Edridge,   Eliz.   More. 

ANTHONY  SPILTIMBER,  460  acs. 
Surry  Co.,  14  May  1666,  p.  523,  (641). 
Beg.  in  a  greate  Cyprus  Sw.,  E.S.E. 
along  Mr.  Merewethers  line,  thence  S. 
&c.  Trans,  of  10  pers:  Ann  Cooke, 
Roger  Davis,  Owin  Griffith,  Robt.  Hues, 
Ri.  Cheston,  Joane  Froast,  Margtt, 
Stainer,  Joseph  Patridg,  Jno.  King,  Eliz. 
his  wife. 

THOMAS  GAULTNEY  (Gualtney), 
200  acs.  Surry  Co.,  14  May  1666,  p. 
523,  (641).  Bounded  upon  Major 
Sheppards  land  N.,  beg.  on  the  E.  side 
of  the  maine  Black  water  swamp,  thence 
E.  &c.  Trans,  of  4  pers:  Henry  Neale, 
Margtt.  Bush,  Jno.  Jones,  Wm.  Evans. 

ANN  &  MARY  JONES,  Orphants  of 
Richard  Jones,  dec'd.,  596  acs.  40  chs., 
30  Aug.  1665,  p.  524,  (642).  Beg.  in 
Capt.  Floyds  line,  on  S.  of  Nicholas 
Bush  his  Swamp  &  nere  a  br.  thereof, 
up  the  same  &c.  to  Stampes  Sw.  &c.  to 
N.  side  of  the  head  of  Jones  his  Cr.  &c. 
to  nere  the  cleare  ground  of  the  planta- 
tion of  sd.  Ann  &  Mary  &c.  288  acs. 
granted  sd.  Richard  Jones  6  Apr.  1654 
&  given  by  will  to  his  abovenamed 
daughters.  The  remainder  due  for  trans, 
of  7  pers:  Wm.  Everidge,  Jno.  Als- 
worth,  Peter  Maynard,  Ed.  Hayman, 
Susan  Edwards,  John  Johnson,  Sarah 
Cooke. 

FRANCIS  SOWERBY,  211  acs.  Surry 
Co.,  21  May  1666,  p.  525,  (643).  Up- 
on heads  of  the  two  northermost 
branches  of  Greyes  Cr.,  N.E.  &  S.E. 
upon  land  of  Thomas  Woodhouse, 
N.E.  &  S.E.  upon  Jno.  Watkins  &  S.E. 
upon  James  Mason.    Granted  unto  Mr. 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


563 


Jno.  Jennings  11  Apr.  1649,  assigned  to 
Wm.  Rose,  who  assigned  to  Mathew 
Bade  &  Richard  Tyas;  Bade  assigned 
his  moyety,  being  105^4  acs.  to  sd. 
Sowerby;  the  other  halfe  thereof  sould 
by  sd.  Tyas  to  Daniell  Massengall,_  who 
sould  to  James  Sowerby,  who  assigned 
to  Mr.  Wm.  Tompson  &  by  sd.  Tomp- 
son  assigned  to  Francis  Sowerby,  all  of 
which  assignments  are  recorded  in  Surry 
County. 

MR.  JOHN  TATEM,  110  acs.  21 
May  1666,  p.  525,  (643).  Beg.  at  cor. 
tree  of  Sandburnes  40  acs.  in  Mr.  Birds 
line,  thence  N.N.W.Nly.  &c,  conteyning 
100  acs;  the  other  10  acs.  butting  upon 
the  end  of  sd.  Sandburnes  40  acs.,  S.S.E. 
Ely.  &c.  parallel  to  the  second  line  to 
the  first  scituate  in  Martins  Brandon 
necke.  50  acs.  granted  to  Capt.  Francis 
Grey  20  Aug.  1663  &  assigned  to  sd. 
Tatem;  60  acs.  by  purchase  from  Marke 
Avery. 

JOHN  MERRYMAN,  300  acs.  James 
Citty  Co.,  24  May  1664,  p.  525,  (644). 
E.  side  of  Chikahomany  Riv.,  bounded 
N.  on  Warrany  Sw.,  N.W.  by  W.  on 
Taylors  neck,  S.E.  on  Michaell  Goodale 
&  the  Demension  line,  S.E.  on  Tho. 
Tarins  (?)  line;  150  acs.  purchased  of 
Henrry  Soane  bv  Jno.  Merryman,  father 
to  sd.  John,  5  Dec.  1656;  150  acs.  for 
trans,  of  3  pers:  Henry  Rye,  Jno. 
Chouninge,  Edward  Young. 

LT.  COL.  WM.  HOCKADY  (Hocka- 
day),  1000  acs.  New  Kent  Co.,  31  Mar. 
1664/5,  p.  526,  (644) .  N.  side  of  Matta- 
pony  Riv.  &  S.  side  of  the  maine  sw.  of 
Peanketank  Riv.,  beg.  at  a  cor.  red  oak 
at  the  maine  sw.,  being  Jno.  Pig  & 
Evan  Davis  their  corner,  running  W.  in- 
clining Sly.  &c.  to  Jno.  Exolls  Br.  &c. 
Granted  to  Jno.  Roberts  28  Sept.  1661, 
by  him  deserted  &  granted  sd.  Hockaday 
upon  petition  by  order  of  the  Govr. 
&c,  dated  with  these  presents,  &  fur- 
ther due  for  trans,  of  20  pers:  Mary 
Wiseman,  Hanah  Boyce,  Peter  Store, 
Jno.  Evans,  Peter  Evans,  Wm.  Gosling, 
Ed.  Ivery,  Jno.  Simons,  Edward  Jones, 
Mary  Wms.,  Jno.  Simpson,  Edw. 
Vaughan,  Jno.  Townes,  Matha  Evans, 
Sarah    Cooke,    Tho.    ap    Tho.,    Mathew 


Beavis,  Francis  Deane,  Jno.  Tray,  Henry 
Godyer. 

WM.  BOREN,  1000  acs.  Stafford  Co., 
5  June  1666,  p.  526,  (644\  N.E.  side 
of  Accaquon  Cr.  Trans,  of  20  pers: 
Wm.  Prohing  (?),  Jno.  Plinton,  Tho. 
Williams,  Giles  Dement,  Presilla  Cotto, 
Rebecca  Warrin,  Bridgett  Teverton, 
Wm.  Cooper,  Tho.  Cooper,  Tho.  Palmer, 
Mar.  JefTurd,  Wm.  Frissell,  Tho. 
Downes,  Tho.  Allen,  Mary  Holmes, 
Tho.  More,  Robt.  Fuller,  Charles  Webb, 
James  Miller,  Henry  Oride  (?). 

MR.  DANIELL  HUTT,  875  acs. 
Wmoreland  Co.,  5  June  1666,  p.  527, 
(645).  S.W.  side  of  Nomenie  Riv., 
beg.  at  the  mouth  of  a  Cr.  commonly 
knowne  as  Coss  Coss  on  the  S.E.  side 
thereof,  extending  up  the  same  S.W. 
by  S.  320  per.  to  a  poynt  on  the  same 
(on)  S.E.  side  which  devides  this  & 
land  in  possession  of  Wm.  Robertson 
&c.  to  N.W.  poynt  of  the  old  feild  Sw. 
which  devides  this  &  land  of  Wm. 
Overett  &  N.W.  by  W.  &c,  including 
525  acs;  350  acs.  running  to  S.E.  side 
of  a  br.  &  greate  Sw.  falling  into  Coss 
Coss,  thence  N.E.  &c.  850  acs.  granted 
to  sd.  Hutt  9  Dec.  1662  &  25  acs.  for 
transs.  of  John  Jnoson. 

ANDREW  READ,  400  acs.  Wmore- 
land Co.,  bet.  Rappa.  &  Potomack  Rivs., 
nere  branches  of  Nomeny  Riv.,  5  June 
1666,  p.  527,  (645).  Beg.  at  cor.  tree 
of  land  of  Randolph  Kirke,  N.W.  56 
per.  to  land  of  Col.  Payton,  dec'd., 
thence  S.W.  &c.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Wm. 
James,  James  Clarke,  Andrew  Strong, 
Edward  Davis,  Mary  Wms.,  Fran.  Toms, 
Hardrop  Wilson,  Jno.  Tomlin. 

ANDREW  READ,  400  acs.  Wmore- 
land Co.,  nere  head  of  Nomany  Riv.,  on 
the  E.  side  of  the  W.most  Herring  Cr., 
5  June  1666,  p.  527,  (646).  Beg.  on 
Ewd.  side  of  the  maine  br.  of  sd.  Cr., 
extending  W.S.W.  &c.  to  white  oak  de- 
viding  this  &  land  of  Ann  Hutt,  S.  &c. 
to  red  oak  nere  sd.  maine  br.  which 
devides  this  &  land  of  Mr.  Richard 
Sterman,  &  finally  down  same  N.E.Nly. 
which  br.  devides  this  &  tract  surveyed 
for  Tho.  Dyos.    Trans,  of  8  pers:    Ste- 


564 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


phen  Warman,  Ed.  Willison,  Jno.  Jno- 
son,  Everd  Edmonds,  Tho.  Brewer, 
Henry  Nicholls,  Jno.  James,  Mary  Hart. 

FARDINANDO  AUSTIN,  1500  acs. 
in  Chas.  Citty  &  James  Citty  Counties, 
5  Jan.  1664,  p.  528,  (646).  On  N.  & 
S.  side  of  the  head  of  Moyses  Run, 
bounding  S.  on  Henry  Cantrells  land, 
now  in  possession  of  Mr.  Horsmanden, 
S.  on  Mr.  Hamlins  land,  Wly.  on  Queens 
Cr.  run  &  Nly.  on  the  head  of  Pease 
hill  Sw.  1200  acs.  by  pattern  25  Feb. 
1653  &  300  acs.  for  trans,  of  6  pers: 
Jno.  Roberts,  Wm.  Thomas,  Evan  Davis, 
Jno.  Hogg,  Wm.  Frisell,  Jno.  Morecroft. 

THO.  MORE  (Moore),  400  acs.  Surry 
Co.,  Lawnes  Cr.  Parish,  6  June  1666,  p. 
528,  (647).  E.  on  the  third  sw.  of  the 
Black  Water,  S.  upon  the  br.  that  parts 
Tho.  Atkinsons  land,  N.  upon  the  br.  that 
boundeth  Jno.  Clarkes  land  &  W.  upon 
the  Barrens.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Edw. 
James,  Sam  Haward,  Jno.  Godale,  James 
Bancks,  Henry  Creeke,  Ed.  Ivory,  Mary 
Jones,  Sarah  Simons. 

MR.  ROBERT  SPENSOR,  300  acs. 
Surry  Co.,  22  Aug.  1666,  p.  528,  (647). 
150  acs.  on  S.  side  of  James  Riv.  aboute 
a  mile  up  Chrouches  Cr.,  bounded  S.E. 
by  E.  from  the  same,  thence  S.S.W.  &c. 
N.W.  by  W.  to  the  Reedy  Sw.  &c.  150 
acs.  lying  at  the  head  of  the  former 
tract.  Granted  to  Henry  Meadowes  28 
Sept.  1649  &  by  him  assigned  to  sd. 
Spensor. 

THOMAS  SMITH,  100  acs.  upon 
branches  of  Milford  Haven,  beg.  at 
Peach  poynt,  running  up  a  Cr.  Sly.  to 
trees  of  Rich.  Long,  thence  N.W.  by  W. 
to  another  br.  or  Cr.  &c.  Granted  to 
George  Billips  20  Nov.  1653,  assigned 
to  Roger  Lennalls,  who  assigned  to  sd. 
Smith.    27  Aug.   1666,  p.   529,    (647). 

MR.  GUY  KNIGHT,  400  acs.  Gloster 
Co.,  on  Milford  Haven,  knowne  by  the 
name  of  the  Egles  Nest,  27  Aug.  1666, 
p.  529,  (648).  Beg.  on  land  of  Abram 
English,  running  W.  by  N.  up  the  Cr. 
called  the  Western  Br.,  thence  upon  land 
of  Jno.  Smith  &c.  Trans,  of  8  pers: 
Sam  Bridges,  John  Begg,  Will.  Martin, 


Will.  Groves,  Thomas  Stint,  Hugh  Row, 
Thomas  Monke,  Jno.  Stores. 

WILLIAM  WHITEHURST,  1000  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  6  Nov.  1665,  p.  529, 
(648).  At  the  head  of  the  Indian  Cr., 
beg.  nere  a  greate  swamp,  running  N. 
by  W.  &c.  700  acs.  granted  to  Richard 
Whitehurst,  dec'd.,  22  Nov.  1651  &  now 
due  sd.  William  as  his  son  &  heire,  & 
300  acs.  for  trans,  of  6  pers:  Alexan- 
der Rose,  Daniell  Maswello,  Donagh 
Conah,  Jno.  Stephens,  Margtt.  Souleman 
(?),  Peter  Edwards. 

WILLIAM  DAVENALL,  150  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  6  Nov.  1665,  p.  529, 
(648).  S.  side  of  the  W.  br.  of  Eliz. 
Riv.,  beg.  on  the  E.  side  of  the  Muddy 
Br.,  running  E.S.E.  along  the  Riv.  to 
the  W.  side  of  Goose  Cr.  &c.  Trans, 
of  3  pers:  Edward  James,  Mary  Jones, 
Jno.  Harris. 

THO.  GREENE,  520  acs.  Low.  Norf. 
Co.,  6  Nov.  1665,  p.  530,  (649).  S. 
side  of  the  W.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.,  beg.  on 
a  poynt  at  the  mouth  of  Loyds  Cr.,  run- 
ning along  the  maine  Riv.  E.  by  N.  &c. 
to  poynt  on  the  W.  side  of  Greenes  Cr. 
&c.  400  acs.  granted  sd.  Green  18  Mar. 
1662  &  120  acs.  for  trans,  of  3  pers: 
Wm.  Grindon,  Robt.  Watson,  Edward 
James. 

WILLIAM  GOULDSMITH,  300  acs. 
Low.  Norf.  Co.,  6  Nov.  1665,  p.  530, 
(649).  S.  side  of  the  E.  br.  of  Eliz. 
Riv.  &c,  bounding  on  Tho.  Cartwrights 
marked  trees  &c,  running  by  land  of 
Henry  Nicholls  &c.  160  acs.  purchased 
of  Richard  Acton  &  140  acs.  for  trans, 
of  3  pers:  Wm.  Gouldsmitbs  wife; 
Lidia  Richardson,  Thomas  Standley. 

THOMAS  EVERIDGE,  430  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  6  Nov.  1665,  P.  531,  (650). 
On  Swd.  side  of  Robt.  Butts  devdt.,  at 
the  bead  of  the  S.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv.  be- 
ing formerlv  called  bv  the  name  of  the 
Northward  Neck  Thickett;  bounding  on 
his  former  *?rant  called  the  povnt  Corner, 
thence  S.W.  by  S.  on  John  Brights 
erant  &c.  Trans,  of  9  pers:  Henrv 
Piatt,  Richard  Bacheler.  Stephen  Powre, 
Negro    Yoake,    Richard    Hartwell,    Jno. 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


565 


James,  Eliz.   Sedcott,  Polack  Jack,   Jno. 
Edwards. 

THO.  NASH  &  RICHARD  TAY- 
LOR, 446  acs.  Low.  Norf.  Co.,  6  Nov 
1665,  p.  531,  (651).  Nere  the  head  of 
Julians  Cr.  in  the  Swd.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv., 
beg  on  a  poynt  on  the  S.  side  of  the 
Cr.  &c.  Trans,  of  9  pers:  Jno  Knowles, 
Jno.  Browne,  Mary  Gage,  Tho.  Web- 
ster Wm.  Thomas,  Mat.  Wms,  Jno. 
Short,  Alex.  Davis,  Charles  Greene. 

ANTHONY    BENFORD,     320    acs. 

Low.  Norf.  Co.,  5  Nov.  1665,  p.  531, 
(651).  On  Ewd.  side  of  Robt.  Butts 
land.  Trans,  of  7  pers:  Jno.  Kippm, 
Wm.  Sanders,  Edward  Frost,  Wm. 
Jones,  Tho.  Carr,  Edw.  Cooper,  Francis 
Parker. 

FRA.  PRESCOTT,  400  acs.  Low. 
Norf.  Co.,  6  Nov.  1665,  p.  532,  (652). 
E  side  of  the  Swd.  br.  of  Eliz.  Riv., 
bounding  Nly.  upon  Edmond  Creek- 
mans  markt  trees  &c,  Sly.  on  Jno.  Biggs 
line  &c.  Trans,  of  8  pers:  Barbara 
Sidnv.  Robt.  Sidny.  Rose  Browne,  Xpian. 
Wickham,  Joane  Griffin,  Daniell  Neach, 
Robt.  Briggs,  Walter  Turner. 

CAPT.  GILES  BRENT,  1000  acs.  bee 
it  more  or  less,  W'moreland  Co.,  29 
Mar.  1666.  p.  532,  (652).  Upon  the 
head  of  Oqui  Riv.,  lying  W.N.W.  upon 
Mr.  Pavtons  land  &c,  E.N.E.  upon  the 
head  of  Chapawansick  &c.  Granted  un- 
to John  Harrison  4  Sept.  1655  "and  for 
want  of  heires  of  his  body  to  his  sister 
Mrs.  Francis  Harrison,  and  for  want  of 
heires  of  her  body  to  Capt.  Giles  Brent" 
&c. 

EDMOND  COWLES  &  PHILLIP 
CHARLES,  242  A.  1  R.  of  Marsh  Land, 
being  a  neck  lving  in  Chikahomany  Riv. 
on  the  N.  side  of  James  Riv.  in  James 
Citty  Co.,  6  Aug.  1666,  p.  532,  (652). 
Beg.  over  against  a  Clay  poynt  of  Gri- 
gory  Wells  land  next  towards  Old  feild, 
running  N.W.  &c.  Trans,  of  5  pers: 
Toane  Lucas,  Hanah  Grev,  John  Jones, 
Tno.  Bardell,  Wm.  Graynes,  Tho. 
Layerton. 

ELIZABETH  WAREHAM.  150  acs. 
Cumberland  Co.,  14  May  1666,  p.  533, 


(653).  Ely.  upon  a  Cr.  issueing  out  of 
Yeocomico  Riv.  &c.  Granted  to  Jno. 
Wareham,  deed.,  20  May  1652  &  now 
become  due  sd.  Elizabeth  as  his  daugh- 
ter &  heire. 

JNO.  PROSSER,  418  A.  56  per.  on 
S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv.  in  the  freshes, 
beg.  aboute  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from 
Nanzenin  Sw.,  being  the  miles  end  of 
Mr.  Jno.  Paine  &  Abram  Moone,  run- 
ning thence  E.  &c.  Trans,  of  9  pers: 
Ed.  Jones,  Symon  Earle,  Jno.  Johnson, 
Wm.  Thomas,  Mary  Miles,  Hanah  Due, 
Timothy  Coale,  Edward  James,  Jno. 
Goodale.    3  Apr.  1666,  p.  533,   (653). 

RICHARD  SMITH,  300  acs.  Cum- 
berland Co.,  19  Oct.  1666,  p.  533, 
(653).  Wly.  upon  land  of  Daniell 
Neale,  Sly.  upon  land  of  James  Hawley, 
Ely.  upon  land  of  Jno.  Motly  &  Col. 
Wm.  Clayborne  &  Nly.  upon  land  of 
Edward  Coale.  Granted  unto  Wm.  Tho- 
mas 4  Mar.  1661  &  by  him  assigned  to 
sd.  Smith. 

COL.  FRANCIS  WILLIS,  Esq.,  100 
acs.  Gloster  Co.,  11  July  1666,  p.  533, 
(654).  S.W.  side  of  Ware  Riv.,  beg.  at 
Tho.  Tracyes  corner,  by  sd.  Terry es 
trees  &c.  up  the  same  to  Snare  Cr.  &  up 
the  same  to  the  head.  Trans,  of  2  pers: 
Jno.  Bryant,  Wm.  Bush. 

JOHN  MADDISON,  350  acs.  New 
Kent  Co.,  19  Oct.  1666,  p.  534,  (654). 
Upon  N.  side  of  Mattapony  &  upon  br. 
of  Whorecock  Sw.,  beg.  at  Richard 
Morlyes  cor.  tree  next  the  land  of  Mr. 
Lockey,  running  up  his  line  N.  160  po., 
E.  with  the  head  line  of  Morley  & 
Arnoll  320  po.,  S.  160  po.  to  land  of 
Anthony  Arnoll,  W.  bv  his  head  line  & 
the  head  of  Morly  to  beg.  Trans,  of  7 
pers:  Ellinor  Brvant,  Howell  Window 
(or  Windon).  Wm.  Berry,  Tho.  Broad- 
hurst,  Jno.  Farrall.  Samson  Meredeth, 
Tho.  Orburns  (or  Osburns). 

ROBERT  MIDDLETON.  700  acs. 
W'moreland  Co.,  26  Sept.  1665,  p.  534, 
(654).  Beg.  on  a  br.  of  Yeocomico  by 
a  vally  side,  running  S.W.  &c.  300  acs. 
bv  pattent  17  Mav  1662  &  remainder 
due  for  trans,  of  8  pers:    Jane  Harris, 


566 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Giles  Allin,  Tho.  Martin,  Jno.  Ellis,  his 
Wife  &  Child,  Mary  Simonds,  Elnor 
Ewins,  Wm.  Copes. 

RICHARD  COX,  375  acs.  beg.  on 
W.  side  of  Chicacone  Riv.,  extending 
W.N.W.  &c.  to  W.  side  of  Machotick 
path,  thence  N.  by  E.  &c.  to  the  head 
of  the  Bevor  dam  swamp,  E.  by  S.  140 
po.  to  Tho.  Towers  land  &c,  E.  by  S. 
to  Tho.  Adams  land,  thence  S.  by  W. 
to  the  beg.  19  Oct.  1666,  p.  534,  (655). 
Trans,  of  8  pers.  Barbary  Churchyard, 
Eliz.  Duffeild,  Dorothy  Milles,  Jno. 
Jnoson,  Pope  Alby,  Tho.  Loveless,  Wm. 
Symonds,  Robt.  Booker. 

JOHN  MADDISON,  280  acs.  Rappa. 
Co.,  upon  the  N.  side  of  a  greate  br.  of 
Peanketanck  Swamp,  2^4  mi.  from  Capt. 
Claybornes  quarter,  18  Feb.  1663,  p. 
535,  (655).  Beg.  in  the  br.  a  little 
above  another  br.,  running  N.  92  po. 
over  the  path  leading  to  Mr.  Paines  of 
Rappa.  &c.  Trans,  of  6  pers:  James 
Sampson,  Stephen  Hardick,  Xtopr. 
Charleton,  Henry  Bayly,  Thomas  Wigg, 
Sarah  Willus. 

HENRY  BRADLY,  58  acs.  Cumber- 
land Co.,  on  S.  side  of  greate  Wiccoco- 
mico  Riv.,  19  Oct.  1666,  p.  535,  (655). 
Beg.  in  Mr.  Weldyes  line  on  the  E.  side 
of  the  greene  Sw.,  extending  E.S.E.  &c. 
Trans,  of  2  pers:  Mary  Bradly,  Eliz. 
Bembow. 

RICHARD  LYNNY,  950  acs.  Cum- 
berland Co.,  on  the  N.  side  of  the  De- 
viding  Cr.,  22  Mar.  1665/6,  p.  535, 
(656).  Abutting  Sly.  upon  land  of 
George  Waterman  &  James  Witty. 
Granted  to  Mr.  John  Hany  30  Jan. 
1650,  by  him  deserted  &  upon  petition 
granted  to  sd.  Lynny  by  order  of  the 
Govr.  &c,  dated  with  these  presents  & 
further  due  for  trans,  of  19  pers:  David 
Davis,  Jno.  Bowles,  Tho.  Bryars,  Hester 
Haily,  Wm.  Reaid,  Henry  Fisher, 
Nathanll.  Ward,  Edwd.  Morris,  Wm. 
Casewell,  Jno.  Casewell,  Wm.  Hutfeild, 
Marke  Fossick,  George  Mundan,  Phillip 
Evans,  Benj.  Busshell,  Jane  Wiggin, 
Wm.  James,  Edward  Jones,  Symon 
Overett. 


THOMAS  HANCOCKE,  350  acs. 
New  Kent  Co.,  6  Apr.  1666,  p.  536, 
(656).  Beg.  on  Wm.  Halls  cor.  tree 
on  Rockahock  path,  up  the  same  to 
James  Hurds  line,  down  the  same  E. 
S.E.  untill  it  meets  with  Lt.  Col. 
Hockady  his  land,  along  his  bounds  to 
the  path  that  goeth  to  sd.  Hockadyes  & 
Bakers,  Sly.  down  the  path  to  Hancocks 
spring,  thence  S.W.  to  the  beg.  120 
acs.  purchased  of  Jno.  Atkins  &  Benja- 
min Strang  &  230  acs.  for  trans,  of  5 
pers:  Wm.  James,  Edw.  James,  Peter 
Store,  Wm.  James,  Edw.  Manning. 

WM.  JUSTICE,  21  A.  2  R.  11  P.  in 
Weynock  in  Chas.  Citty  Co.,  on  N. 
side  of  James  Riv.,  20  Oct.  1665,  p. 
537,  (657).  Beg.  at  a  stake  parting  his 
own  &  land  of  Margarett  Hewes,  run- 
ning N.  by  W.  300  po.,  then  S.W.  along 
Kittawan  Br.  &c.  Being  due  &  con- 
firmed by  order  of  the  Genii.  Ct.  etc., 
dated  16  Sept.  1663. 

JOHN  CANNON,  80  acs.  upon 
Kittawan  Cr.  on  the  back  of  Weynock 
in  Chas.  Citty  Co.,  on  N.  side  of  James 
Riv.,  20  Oct.  1665,  p.  537,  (658). 
Running  along  head  line  of  David  Jones 
N.  &c.    Due  &  confirmed  as  above. 

MR.  NICHOLAS  MEREWETHER 
(MERRIWEATHER),  430  acs.  Surry 
Co.,  14  May  1666,  p.  536,  (657).  Beg. 
on  the  S.  side  of  the  Pigeon  Sw.,  thence 
S.S.E.  &c.  to  the  greate  Cyprus  Sw. 
&c.  Trans,  of  9  pers:  Jno.  Alsop,  Wm. 
Meredeth,  Hanah  Due,  Arthur  Cossum, 
Wm.  Wildy,  Jno.  Wright,  Henry 
Meares,  Edwd.  Iveson,  Hanah  Boyce. 

NEDD  GUNSTOCKER,  Indian,  150 
acs.  Rappa.  Co.,  N.  side  of  the  Riv.  in 
the  freshes,  14  Oct.  1665,  p.  536, 
(657).  Beg.  nere  a  branch  called  Comi- 
stanck  on  the  Eastermost  side,  running 
N.  by  E.  &c.  to  a  marked  ash  nere  a 
branch  called  Weequionedike  &c. 
Granted  by  order  of  the  Govr.  &c.  bear- 
ing date  herewith,  &  further  due  for 
trans,  of  3  pers:  Henry  Bardell,  Tho. 
Cooper,  Jno.  Fowke. 

WM.  TUSTICE,  143  A.  24  po.  in 
Wevnock  at  the  heads  on  the  other  side 
of  Kittawan  in  Chas.  Citty  Co.,  20  Oct. 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


567 


1665,  p.  537,  (658).  Beg.  at  a  stake 
parting  Wm.  Justice  &  Wm.  Laurence, 
running  N.  by  W.  &c,  joyning  Jno. 
Cannon,  thence  E.  &c.  Due  &  confirmed 
by  order  of  the  Genii.  Ct.  &c,  dated 
16  Sept.  1663. 

MR.  JNO.  CURTIS,  250  acs.  Lan- 
caster Co.,  on  S.  side  of  Rappa.  Riv., 
8  Mar.  1665/6,  p.  537,  (659).  Beg.  at 
land  of  Mr.  Henry  Corbin  &  against 
the  land  of  Wm.  Copelin,  running  W. 
to  land  of  Robt.  Price,  thence  W.  &c. 
Trans,  of  5  pers:  Mary  Cliffe,  Mary 
Baldine,  Eliz.  Smith,  Robt.  Hailes,  Robt. 
Cliffe. 

JOHN  BOWIN,  550  acs.  in  the 
freshes  of  Rappa.  Co.,  on  the  maine  br. 
of  Rappa.  Cr.,  20  Oct.  1665,  p.  538, 
(659).  Adj.  land  of  Mr.  Wm.  Lane, 
running  up  the  br.  N.N.W.  &c.  to  a 
poplar,  supposed  to  be  a  line  tree  of 
Mr.  Vaus  standing  nere  the  run  or 
beavor  dam  side,  thence  S.W.  by  S.  &c. 
Trans,  of  11  pers:  Phillip  Wading 
Thomas  Jones,  Ralph  Walding,  Mary 
Dudly,  James  Walding,  Jane  Walding, 
Mary  Wotton,  Peter  Axtin,  Wm.  Ser- 
jant,  Edmd.  Pagget,  Jno.  Dudly. 

ROBERT  HOPKINS,  100  acs.  in  the 
freshes  of  Rappa.  Riv.  on  the  N.  side, 
adj.    land    he    now    liveth    on,    20    Oct. 

1666,  p.  538,  (660).  Beg.  nere  the 
river  side,  running  to  Rappa.  Cr.  S.S.E. 
&c.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Tho.  Smart,  Wm. 
Hobbs. 

CHARLES  SNEAD,  of  Rappa.  Co., 
1933  acs.  in  sd.  Co.,  on  the  N.  side 
thereof,  20  Oct.  1666,  p.  539,  (660). 
700  acs.  beg.  at  a  marsh  N.W.  upon 
land  of  Jno.  Paine,  N.E.  into  the  woods 
&c;  due  by  purchase  from  Jno.  Paine, 
who  purchased  the  same  from  Jno. 
Merryman  &  Morgan  Haines  the  first 
proprietors  hereof,  to  whom  it  was 
granted  26  Feb.  1663.  800  acs.  bounded 
by  miles  end  of  the  sd.  700  acs.  &  land 
of  Maj.  Jno.  Weire,  beg.  nere  an  In- 
dian path,  over  the  sd.  path  &c.  83 
acs.  beg.  at  the  E.most  extent  of  sd. 
700  acs.,  parallel  to  the  river  &c.  Said 
883  acs.  granted  to  sd.  Snead  21  Apr. 
1657  &  renewed  in  his  Majesties  name 


by  order  of  the  quarter  Ct.,  18  Mar. 
1662;  as  alsoe  350  acs.  more  making 
up  the  full  quantity  of  1933  acs.,  being 
aboute  a  mile  from  the  mouth  of  a  Cr. 
that  parts  the  said  Paine,  now  Mr.  Wm. 
Lane,  &  sd.  Snead,  beg.  at  S.W.  cor.  of 
sd.  883  acs.  &c.  nere  land  of  David 
Warrin  &c.  Trans,  of  3  pers:  Daniell 
Willis,  Jno.  West,  Samll.  Watts,  Ann 
Wilson,  Eliz.  West,  Ri.  Clifton,  Henry 
Martin. 

WM.  SERJANT  &  EDMOND  PAG- 
GETT,  707  acs.  on  S.  side  of  Rappa. 
Riv.  on  the  head  of  Mill  Cr.  alias  Tig- 
nors  Cr.,  beg.  at  cor  tree  of  Jno.  Dan- 
gerfeild  alias  Andrew  Gilsons,  W.  by 
N.  &c.  to  line  of  trees  belonging  to  Lt. 
Col.  Guterige  (Guttredge),  N.E.  by  E. 
&c.  to  line  trees  of  Tho.  Rauson  (or 
Ranson),  N.  bv  E.  &c.  20  Oct.  1666,  p. 
540,  (661).  Trans,  of  15  pers:  Wm. 
Farmer,  Tno.  Bowin,  Robt.  Bowin,  Mary 
Bowin,  Fran.  Bowin,  Wm.  Atkins,  Tho. 
Sharpe,  Robt.  Walton,  Samll.  Parker, 
Danll.  Hudson,  James  Hudson,  Mary 
Wms.,  Margtt.  Willis  (or  Wilbis), 
Charles  Cough  (or  Couch),  Wm.  Adson. 

PHILLIP  WADDING.  300  acs.  on 
N.  side  of  Rappa.  Co.  aboute  \T/2  mi. 
from  the  head  of  Popes  Cr.  nere  a  path 
side  that  goeth  from  Rappa.  Co.  to 
Popes  Cr.  in  Potomack  Riv.,  beg.  at  cor. 
tree  of  Major  Jno.  Weire  &  Tho.  Vein, 
running  N.  &c.  to  line  trees  of  Tho. 
Pheos  &c.  20  Oct.  1666,  p.  540,  (662). 
Trans,  of  6  pers:  Tho.  Dallv.  Marv 
Wallett,  Tane  Davis.  Henry  Wilton, 
Francis  Dumott,  Charles  Goach. 

NATHANIELT.  BAXTER,  500  acs. 
Rappa.  Co.,  S.  side  of  Purcaticon  Cr., 
20  Oct.  1666,  p.  541,  (662).  200  acs. 
bounded  from  the  upoer  &  outward  cor. 
tree  of  land  of  Mr.  Samuell  Perry, 
S.S.W.  &c.  on  Swd.  side  of  the  maine 
br.  or  run  of  Perrves  Cr.,  E.S.E.  &c. 
Said  200  acs.  granted  to  sd.  Perry  2  Tan. 
1663  &  sould  to  sd.  Baxter  29  Dec. 
1664.  300  acs.  being  the  upper  part  of 
a  devdt.  of  1250  acs.  granted  sd. 
Perry  7  Feb.  1652  &  since  renewed  by 
pattern  13  Jan.  1661;  adj.  upon  upper 
line  of  Richard  Hawkins,  with  the 
breadth  upon  Puscaticon  Cr.,  extending 


568 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


for  length  with  a  line  of  Francis 
Brownes  land  &  Tho.  Cooper,  &  soe 
with  the  upper  line  of  the  grand  pattern. 
Conveyed  as  beforementioned. 

THOMAS  FRESHWATER  &  THO- 
MAS CEELY,  126  acs.  on  N.  side  of 
Rappa.  Co.,  at  the  mouth  of  Totaskey 
Cr.,  22  Oct.  1666,  p.  541,  (663).  Run- 
ning N.W.  &  bounding  on  land  of  Tho- 
mas Robbinson  &  Francis  Gower.  Trans, 
of  3  pers:  Henry  Walton,  Mary  Tho- 
mas, Peter  Evans. 

JOHN  ELLIS,  550  acs.  Nancimond 
Co.,  29  Mar.  1666,  p.  542,  (664).  Beg. 
in  a  greate  Sw.  &  running  for  length 
320  po.,  joyning  land  of  Mr.  Wm. 
Wright,  &  soe  again  for  breadth  S.W. 
275  po.  &c.  Trans,  of  11  pers:  Eliz. 
Billinsley,  Lewis  Denners,  Purger  (?) 
Vandsable,  Annes  (?)  Addersy,  Rendry 
Wates,  Francis  Grimes,  Margtt.  Allis, 
Mary  Alexander,  Tho.  Johnson,  Row. 
Tobate,  Peter  Jude. 

CHARLES  CAMELL,  150  acs.  in  the 
S.  branch  of  Nancimond  Riv.,  29  Mar. 
1666,  p.  542,  (664).  Beg.  in  a  greate 
arrow  read  Swamp,  running  for  length 
W.  by  S.  &c,  butting  on  land  of  Mr. 
Wm.  Wright  &c.  Trans,  of  3  pers: 
James  Young,  Xtian.  Cornixe,  Ralph 
Loyd. 

THOMAS  MASON,  1000  acs.  in  the 
upper  parrish  of  Nancimond  Co.,  29 
Mar.  1666,  p.  542,  (665).  Beg.  nere 
the  head  of  the  Southern  Br.,  running 
S.  by  E.  &c.  Trans,  of  20  pers:  Marcus 
Clares,  Senr.,  Marcus  Clares,  Junr., 
Charles  Ling,  Jno.  Cross,  Eliz.  Ball, 
Susan  James,  George  Feete  (or  Feele), 
Robt.  Hudd,  Patrick  Allin,  Jno.  Nichola 
(or  Nicholas),  George  Davis,  Alexr. 
Williams,  Robt.  Stoicks,  Richard,  Laur- 
ence, Andrew,  Thomas,  Peeter,  Francis, 
Margarett — Negroes . 

EDWARD  HUDSON,  356  acs. 
Rappa.  Co.,  upon  branches  of  the 
Dragon  Swamp,  adj.  land  of  Robt. 
Davies  &  Tho.  Prickett,  24  May  1666, 
p.  543,  (665).  Beg.  by  a  br.,  running 
N.  to  Davies  land,  along  same  N.N.E., 
thence  E.  over  certaine  branches  by  land 


of  Evan  Davies,  S.E.  by  S.  &c.  Trans, 
of  8  pers:  Jno.  Smithouse,  Mary  Smith, 
Susan  Smithous,  Francis  Hooper, 
Cornelius  Pemberton,  Joseph  Phelps, 
Barneby  Forstan,  Mary  Forstan. 

EVAN  DAVIES  (David),  861  acs. 
in  Rappa.  Co.  upon  branches  of  the 
Dragon  Sw.  &  Puscaticon,  24  May  1666, 
p.  543,  (666).  Beg.  by  Mr.  Evans  path, 
running  S.S.W.  &c.  to  Edward  Hudsons 
line,  along  same  E.  &c,  N.W.  by  W. 
over  certaine  branches  cf  Oascation  (?) 
Cr.  to  an  ancient  devdt.  belonging  to  sd. 
Davies  (or  Davids)  &  Jno.  Coale,  W. 
by  S.  inclining  Wly.  &c.  Trans,  of  18 
pers:  Peter  Watson,  James  Coleman, 
Samll.  Payton,  Tim.  Hobson,  Samp. 
Pullin,  Tho.  Sheppard,  Martin  Jnoson, 
Thomas  Godman,  George  Jones,  Ralph 
Crompton,  Hue  Serjant,  Jno.  Parsons, 
Jno.  Bowin,  Rebecca  Bowin,  Mary 
Bowin,  Francis  Bowin,  Wm.  Atkins, 
Tho.  Sharpe. 

JNO.  OVERSTREET,  37  A.  77  Ch. 
in  Hampton  Parish,  Yorke  Co.,  7  Sept. 
1667,  p.  543,  (666).  Beg.  at  land  of 
Jeoffry  Moore,  thence  along  Thomas 
Dennets  &  Zachary  Padeyes  (?)  lyne 
&c.  to  corner  hickery  near  Edward 
Wades  line  &c.    Trans,  of  1  per.* 

RICHARD  HOLT,  400  acs.  on  N. 
side  of  Puscaticon  Cr.,  upon  S.  side  of 
Rappa.  Riv.,  24  May  1666,  p.  544, 
(667).  Extending  along  land  of  Oliver 
Segar  for  breadth  400  po.,  by  or  nigh 
the  side  of  the  maine  Br.  of  said  Cr.  W. 
by  N.  &c.  Granted  to  Wm.  Denby  1 
Aug.  1661  &  sould  to  Edward  Hudson 
&  Rich.  Holt,  &  by  sd.  Hudson  his  part 
thereof  sould  to  sd.  Holt. 

THO.  BOSWELL,  100  acs.  Gloster 
Co.,  10  June  1666,  p.  544,  (667).  On 
N.  poynt  of  Ware  River,  running  S.E. 
by  S.  to  a  small  Cr.  or  gutt  on  the  poynt 
of  marsh  of  Ware  poynt,  thence  S.E. 
&c,  including  Racoune  Island,  thence 
S.W.  to  pine  tree  of  Nathanll.  Fletcher 
&c.  Trans,  of  2  pers:  Mathew  Hutson, 
Stephen  Coleman. 

EDWARD  VAUGHAN,  100  acs.  in 
the   upper   parrish   of  Nancimond   Co., 


Patent  Book  No.  5 


569 


29  Mar.  1666,  p.  544,  (668).  Beg.  at 
cor.  tree  of  Silvester  Bakers  land,  run- 
ning S.W.  320  po.  on  the  miles  end  of 
Randolph  Crewes  land,  butting  on  land 
of  Rich.  Parker,  S.E.  &c.  joyning  land 
of  Mr.  Wright  &  Tho.  Harrowes  &c. 
Trans,  of  2  pers:  Jno.  Olliver,  Walter 
Brookes. 

NICHOLAS  HALE,  234  acs.  Lancas- 
ter Co.,  upon  N.E.  side  of  the  N.W. 
branch  of  Corrotoman  Riv.,  18  May 
1666,  p.  545,  (668).  Beg.  at  the  mouth 
of  a  small  cove  which  runs  up  to  the 
house  of  sd.  Hale,  running  N.E.  &c, 
bounded  by  other  land  sd.  Hale  bought 
of  Enoch  Hawker,  S.Ely.  &c,  bounded 
by  joynt  land  of  Wm.  Thatcher  &  Wm. 
Michaell,   now  in  the  tenure  of  Henry 


Davies  (&)  Jno.  Arnold  &c.  Trans,  of 
5  pers:  Jno.  Carrington,  Jno.  Pery, 
Daniell  Lawrence,  Tho.  Jnoson,  Jno. 
Wms. 

MR.  JOHN  HARDIE  (Hardy),  1150 
acs.  Isle  of  Wight  Co.,  5  June  1666,  p. 
545,  (669).  Beg.  at  upper  cor.  tree  of 
Mathew  Tomlins  old  land,  running 
S.S.E.  by  Wm.  Westwrayes  land  &c, 
S.W.  on  Mathew  Tomlins  new  land, 
then  S.  &c.  Trans,  of  23  pers:  Jno. 
White,  4,  Erasmas  Harris,  Henry  Baker, 
Charles  Baker,  Joane  Baker,  Jno.  Hardy, 
Oliver  Hardy,  An  Quimby,  William 
May,  Roger  Wright,  Jno.  Edwards,  Rich. 
Powell,  Roger  Peele,  Jno.  Dockstone, 
Jno.  Cooke,  Xtopr.  Marshamp,  Wm. 
Walker,  Eliz.  Ruffin,  2,  Rich.  Lannum. 


Greatest  Number  of  Acres  in  a  Single  Patent 


YEAR   ACRES    P 

B.   PAGE 

C.&P. 

YEAR  ACRES 

P.  B. 

PAGE 

C.&P. 

1619—  200 

L     648 

109 

1643—4550 

1 

910 

147 

1620—  450     i 

?     125 

226 

1644 — 1200 

2 

16 

155 

1621—  200 

L       1 

2 

1645—2450 

2 

32 

158 

1622* 

1646—2000 

2 

50 

160 

1623—  60  rods  ' 

L       1 

2 

1647—1800 

2 

130 

173 

1624—  400 

L      16 

4 

1648—2350 

2 

181 

184 

1625* 

1649—3760 

2 

195 

187 

1626—  450 

L      49 

7 

1650—5350 

2 

230 

194 

1627—  300     1 

L      49 

8 

1651—5000 

2 

358 

223 

1628—1000 

L      59 

9 

1652 — 4300 

3 

200 

277 

1629* 

1653—5000 

3 

34 

244 

1630—  500     1 

102 

14 

1654 — 4000 

3 

283 

293 

1631—  500 

L     103 

14 

1655—3550 

3 

328 

311 

1632—  350 

L     104 

14 

1656—3500 

4 

35 

328 

1633—  350     ] 

L     124 

16 

1657—5211 

4 

158 

348 

1634—2550     ] 

L     158 

20 

1658—6000 

4 

305 

375 

1635—5350     1 

L     178 

22 

1659—5380 

4 

379 

391 

1636—8000     ] 

410 

53 

1660—2476 

4 

450 

405 

1637—5350     ] 

L     480 

71 

1661—4750 

4 

446 

403 

1638—3700     ] 

L     595 

96 

1662—5798 

5 

141 

468 

1639—3000     ] 

L     704 

120 

1663—4054 

5 

29 

444 

1640 — 4000     ] 

L     759 

126 

1664—9000 

5 

461 

524 

1641—1300     ] 

L     755 

126 

1665—4892 

5 

479 

528 

1642—3500     1 

771 

128 

1666—7800 

5 

628 

559 

'Leases 


Index  to  Introduction 


Governors,   Deputy  Governors   and 
Officials* 

Argall,  Samuell  xiv,  xv,  xvi,  xxi. 
Bennett,  Richard  xx. 
Berkeley,  Sir  William  xix,  xx. 
Clayborne,  Wm.  xviii,  xix,  xxiii. 
Dale,  Sir  Thomas  xiii,  xiv,  xv,  xx,  xxvi, 

xxvii,   xxviii,  xxx,  xxxi,  xxxii,  xxxiv. 
Digges,  Edward  xx. 
Gates,  Sir  Thomas  xi,  xiii,  xiv,  xv,  xx, 

xxvii,  xxix,  xxx. 
Hackluit,  Richard  xi. 
Harvey,  Sir  John  xix. 
Kemp,  Richard  xix. 
Mathews,  Samuel  xx. 
Morryson,  Francis  xx. 
Percy,  Capt.  George  xii,  xiv. 
Pott,  D*.  John  xviii,  xix. 
Sandys,     Sir     Edwin     xvi,     xviii,     xxil, 

George  xviii,  xxiv. 
Smith,  Capt.  John  xii. 
Smith-Smyth,  Sir  Thomas  xii,  xvi,  xviii, 

xxvi 
Somers,  Sir  George  xi. 
Warr,  de  la,  Thomas,  Lord  xiii,  xiv,  xx, 

xxxi. 
West,     Capt.    Francis    xiii,     xix,     xxxi, 

xxxiii,  Capt.  John  xix. 
Wingfield,  Edward  Maria  xi,  xii. 
Wyatt,  Sir  Francis  xviii,  xix,  xxx. 
Yeardley,  Sir  George  xiv,  xvi,  xvii,  xix, 

xxi,  xxiv,  xxvii,  xxix,  xxxii. 

PERSONS 

Allington,  Lt.  Giles  xxxiii. 
Andrews,  Wm.  xxxiii. 
Askew,  Wm.  xxix. 

Bacon,  Nath.  xxiv. 

Bagwell,     Henry    xxviii,    Robt.     xxviii, 

Thomas  xxxiii. 
Bainham,  John  xxxiii. 
Baker,  Wm.  xxix. 
Baltimore,  Lord  xix. 
Banum,  Eliz.  xxxiii,  John  xxxiii. 
Barker,  Wm.  xxv. 
Bayley,  Wm.  xxix. 


Baynham,  Mary  xxxiii. 

Baywell,  Thomas  xxxiv. 

Beriston,  Theophilus  xxxii. 

Biggs,  Richd.  xxix,  xxxiii,   Sarah  xxix. 

Booth,  Reynold  xxix. 

Bouldin,  Mary  xxix,  Wm.  xxix. 

Boulding,  Thomas  xxix,  Wm.  xxix. 

Boulton,  Richd.  xxix. 

Boyes,  Cheney  xxxiv. 

Boyse,  Cheney  xxxiv. 

Brookes,  Wm.  xxxi. 

Brown,  Alexander  xxi. 

Burchitt,  Wm.  xxxii. 

Burras,  Ann  xxvii. 

Burrows,  John  xxxii. 

Bush,   Susan  xxxiii. 

Capps,  Wm.  xxxiv. 

Causey,     Nathaniel     xxviii,     Thomasine 

xxviii. 
Cawsey,     Nathaniel    xxviii,    Thomasine 

xxviii. 
Cawsy,  John  xxviii. 
Chandler,  John  xxix. 
Chaplaine,  Isaak  xxxi,  John  xxxi. 
Chapman,  Francis  xxviii. 
Clarke,  Edward  xxxiv,  Nathaniel  xxxiv. 
Clause,  Phettiplace  xxviii. 
Claye,  John  xxxii. 
Close,  Phettiplace  xxviii. 
Cole,  Francis  xxxiii. 
Collins,  John  xxxii,  Susan  xxxii. 
Coltman,  Henry  xxix. 
Coxe,  Wm.  xxix. 
Crawshaw,  Raleigh  xxviii. 

Davis  James   xiv,   xxxiv,   Rachel   xxxiv, 

Thomas  xxxiv. 
Dawkes,  Henry  xxvii,  xxviii,  Wm.  xxvii, 

xxviii. 
Dixon,  Adam  xxxii,  Agnes  xxxii,  Eliz. 

xxxii. 
Dodds,  John  xxviii. 
Downeman,  John  xxxi. 
Dunthorne,  Eliz.  xxix,  Thomas  xxix. 

Epes,  Capt.  xxxii. 
Evand,  Clement  xxxiii. 


*Names  in  italics  indicate  the  Governors,   or  Deputies,   who   executed   patents   abstracted   in 
this  volume. 


572 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Fairefax,     Margery    xxxi,     Wm.     xxiv, 

xxv ii,  xxxi. 
Farmer,  Thomas  xxxiii. 
Farrar,  Wm.  xxx. 
Felgate,  Capt.  Robert  xxxiii. 
Fisher,  Robt.  xxxi. 
Flint,  Mary  xxxiv,  Thomas  xxxiv. 
Fllinton,     Farrar     xxxii,     Joane     xxxii, 

Pharoah  xxxii. 
Flood,  John  xxx. 
Fludd,  John  xxx. 
Forrest,  Mrs.  xxviii. 

Gany,  William  xxxiii. 
Garnett,  Thomas  xxx. 
Godby,  Thomas  xxviii. 
Graies,  Thomas  xxviii. 
Graves,  Thomas  Capt.  xxviii. 
Grayes,  Capt.  Thomas  xxviii. 
Gray,  Thomas  xxviii. 
Greenleafe,  Robt.  xxx,  Susan  xxx. 
Grendon,  Edward  xxiv. 
Gundry,  John  xxxi,  Mary  xxxi. 

Harris,  Capt.  Thomas  xxxiv. 
Harrison,  Edward  xxiii. 
Harvard,  John  xxv. 
Hatton,  John  xxxii. 
Hobert,  Bertram,  xxiv. 
Hodgskines,  Nicholas  xxxiii. 
Hospkins,  Bartholomew  xxxiv. 
Hoskines,  Nicholas  xxxiii. 
Hutchinson,  Sergt.  James  xxii. 

Jenkines,  Oliver  xxxi. 

Johnson,  John  xxxiv,  Richard  xxxii. 

Joones,  Eliz.  xxix. 

Jordan,  Cicely  xxx,  Samuel  xxx,  Sisley 

xxx. 
Julian,  William  xxviii. 

Key,  Martha  xxxiv,  Thomas  xxxiv. 

Lane,  Thomas  xxxii. 

Lansden,  Wm.  xxxiv. 

Laydon,  John  xxviii. 

Lea,  Wm.  xxv. 

Leyden,  John  xxviii. 

Lunsford,  Sir  Thomas  xxiv. 

Lupo,  Albiano  xxx,  Elizabeth  xxxiii. 

Lytefoote,  John  xxx. 

Markham,  Mr.  xvii,  Susan  xxx,  Thomas 

xxx. 
Martian,  Capt.  Nicholas  xxv. 
Martiau,  Elizabeth  xxv,  Capt.  Nicholas 

xxv. 


Martin,  Capt.  John  xiii,  xiv. 
Mason,  Anne  xxxii,   Francis  xxxii. 
Maye,  Cornelius  xxxiii. 
Morgan,  Wm.  xxxi. 
Mountney,  Alexr.  xxx. 

Old,  Susan  xxxiii. 
Opachankano,  xvii. 
Opechancanough,  xviii. 

Pace,  Richard  xxxi. 

Parker,  Wm.  xxxiii. 

Partin,  Margt.  xxix,  Robert  xxix. 

Paule,  Francis  xxxiv,  Thomas  xxxiv. 

Percy,  Abraham  xxxiii. 

Perry,  Henry  xxxi,  Izabella  xxxi,  Wm. 

xxxi. 
Perse,  Capt.  William  xxx. 
Pierce,  Capt.  Wm.  xxx,  Jane  xxx. 
Piercey,  Abraham  xxxiii. 
Place,  James  xxxiv. 
Pocahontas,  xii. 
Powhatan,  xviii. 
Powell,    John    xxix,    xxxi,    Capt.    Wm. 

xxx. 
Prickett,  Miles  xxxi. 
Proctor,  Alice  xxx,  John  xxx. 

Quiney,  Richd.  xxv,  Thomas  xxv. 

Reade,  George  xxv. 
Reynold,  Nicholas  xxxi. 
Rolfe,  John  xii,  xxx. 

Sadler,  John  xxv. 

Safford,  Christopher  xxxii. 

Salford,  Joane  xxxii,  John  xxxii,  Robert 

xxxii,  Sarah  xxxii. 
Savage,  Hannah  xxix,  Thomas  xxix. 
Sharpe,  Samuel  xxx. 
Sleight,  John  xxx. 
Smith,  John  xxxii. 
Smythe,  John  xxxii. 
Sparkes,  Wm.  xxxiii. 
Sparshott,  Edw.  xxxiii. 
Spelman,  Thomas  xxxiii. 
Spencer,  Wm.  xxx. 
Stepney,  Thomas  xxx. 
Stevens,  Eliz.  xxxiii. 
Sulley,  Thomas  xxxii. 
Sully,  Thomas  xxxii. 

Taylor,      John     xxx,      Thomas      xxxiii, 

Richard  xxix. 
Thornbury,  Thomas  xxxiii. 
Tisdale,  Richd.  Sergt.  xxxiii. 
Tredescant,  John  xxiv. 


Index  to  Introduction 


573 


Tredeskin,  John  xxv. 

Truelove,  Mr.  xviii. 

Tucker,  Wm.  xxxi. 

Turner,  Henery  xxxii,  Thomas  xxxiii. 

Ward,  Capt.  xxi,  Elizabeth  xxxiv,  John 

xxxiv. 
Washington,  George  xxv. 
Waters,  Lt.  Edwd.  xxix. 
Wayne,  Amyle  xxxi. 
West,  Nathaniel  Capt.  xxxiii. 
Williams,  Henery  xxxii,  xxxiv. 
Willoby,  Tho.  xxix,  xxxi. 
Willoughby,  Thomas  xxxi. 
Wright,  Robt.  xxix. 
Wyatt,  Rev.  Haute  xviii. 

Yeardley,  Lady  Temperance  xxix. 
Yonge,  Richard  xxxiii. 

PLACES 

Accomac,     xxi,     xxxiii,     Plantation     of 

xxviii,  Shore  xx. 
Argall's  Gift  xvi,  xxi. 
Arrahattock,  xvi. 

Brandon,  xxv. 

Bermuda,  xiii. 

Burroughs,  four  old  xvi,  xxi,  xxvi. 

Burrough  of:  Charles  City  xxii,  Hen- 
rico xxii,  James  City  xxii,  Kiccotan 
xxii. 

Burrows  Hill,  xxxii. 

Cape  Charles,  xx. 

Causey's  Care,  xxviii. 

Chaplaine's  Choice,  xxxi. 

Cornwall,  xxxiii. 

Counties:  Accomack  xxxiv,  Charles 
City  xxiv,  xxxiii,  Elizabeth  City 
xxxiii,  Isle  of  Wight  xxxii,  Nansi- 
mond  xx,  Northampton  xx,  Lower 
Norfolk  xxxi  xxxiv,  Warwick  xx, 
Warwick  River  xxi,  Warwicksqueake 
xxi. 

Coxendale,  xv. 

City,  the  chief  xxvi. 

Cities:  Charles  xvi,  xxi,  xxvi,  xxx, 
xxxii,  Elizabeth  xxi,  xxvi,  xxix,  xxxi, 
xxxii,  xxxiii,  James  xvi,  xxi  xxix, 
xxx,  xxxii. 

Corporations:  Elizabeth  City  xxiv,  xxix, 
xxxiv,  James  City  xxiv,  xxxiii. 

Curls,  xv. 

Denbigh,  xx,  xxviii,  xxxiv. 
Dutch  Gap  xiv. 


England,  xii,  xiii,  xiv,  xvi,  xix,  xx,  xxii, 
xxxi. 

Forts:  Algernourne  xiv,  Charles  xiv, 
Henry  xiv. 

Greenspring  (Berkeley's  estate)  xx. 

Hampton  River  xiv. 

Henrico,   xvi,  xxvi,   xxxiv,   Towne  xiv. 

Henricopolis  xiv,  xv. 

Henricus  xxi. 

Hundreds,  xx,  xxi,  xxii,  Bermuda  xiv, 
Charles  City  xiv,  xvi,  Flower  de  xvi, 
Flowerdieu  xxi,  Flower  Dew  xxx, 
Martin's  xvi,  xxi,  xxii,  Maycock  xvi, 
Piercey's  xxx,  Shirley  xv,  xvi,  West 
Shirley  xxix,  Smith's  xvi,  Smythe's 
xxi,  xxviii,  Southampton  xvi,  xxii. 

Island:  Hogg  xxxi,  Kent  xix,  Mulberry 
xxviii,  Shirley  Hundred  xxiv,  Smythe 
xxxi,  Sommer  xiii  . 

Jamestown,  xii,  xiii,  xiv,  xviii,  xix,  xx, 

xxiv,  xxvi. 
Jordan's  Journey,  xxviii,  xxx. 

Kiccoughtan,  xvi,  xxi,  xxvi,  xxviii,  xxix, 
xxx,  xxxii,  xxxiv. 

Lands  End,  xiv. 
Lawnes  Plantation,  xxi. 
London,  xi,  xvi,  xxxi. 

Marie's  Mount,  xxix. 
Martin,  Brandon  xvi. 
Merchants  Hope,  xxv. 
Merry  Point,  xxxiii. 

Nansamun,  xiii. 
Neck  of  Land,  xxx. 
Newfoundland,  xiii. 
Newport  Newes,  xxix. 

Pace's  Paines  xxxi,  xxxii. 
Pasbehay,  xxxiii. 
Philpott  Lane  xvi. 
Point  Comfort,  xiii,  xiv,  xx. 
Proctor's  Creek,  xxx. 

Ships:  Blessinge  xxix,  Charles  xxxiii, 
Deliverance  xxviii,  xxix,  Discovery 
xii,  Dutch  xvii,  Edwin  xxxiii,  Eliza- 
beth xv,  xxxi,  xxxii,  Faulcon  xxix, 
George  xxx-,  xxxii,  xxxiii,  Godspeed, 
xii,   xxix,   Hercules   xiv,   xxviii,  xxix 


574 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


John  &  Francis  xii,  xxix,  xxxi,  xxxiii, 
Jonathan,  Lyon  xxviii,  Marygold 
xxxiii,  Mary  &  James  xxix,  xxx,  xxxi, 
MaryMargett  xii,  MaryMargrett  xxviii, 
xxix,  Mary  &  Margarett  xxviii,  Mary 
Ann  Margett  xxxi,  Noah  xxix,  Patience 
xxix,  Phenix  xii,  xxviii,  Prosperous 
xxix,  xxxiv,  Providence  xxxiii,  Sarah 
xv,  Sea  Adventure  xiii,  xxx,  Starr 
xxviii,  xxxi,  xxxii,  Susan  xv,  xxxii, 
xxxiii,  Susan  Constant  xii,  xxviii, 
Swallow  xxix,  Swan  xxix,  xxx,  xxxi, 
xxxii,  Treasurer  xxxii,  Tresorer  xv, 
Tryall  xxix,  xxx,  the  Companies  xxvi, 
Private  xxvi. 

Truro,   xxxiii. 

Verinas,  xxvii,  xxviii. 

Warrisquyoake  xxi. 
Warwicksqueake,  xxxi,  xxxii,  xxxiv. 
Warwick  River,  xxxiv. 
Waters  Creek,  xxviii. 
West  Indies,  xiv. 
Westminster,  xi. 
Westover,  xxx. 
Weyanoke,  xvi. 

TOPICAL 

Adventurers,   xi,   xix,   xxi,   xxxiv. 
Adventure,  bill  of  xxvii,  xxviii. 
Ancient  Planters,  xxvi,  xxviii. 
Assembly,    xvii,    xviii,    xx,    General    xx, 

of   1623/4  xx,   xxvii,   of   1619  xxxiv, 

xxi,  xxii. 
Barbarians,   xv. 
Barques,  two  xiii. 
Burgesses,  people  to  choose  xviii. 
Burgesses   mentioned   xxviii,   xxix  xxxi, 

xxxii,  xxxiii. 

Cattle,  goats,  kine  etc.  xv. 

Caulker,  a  Master  mentioned  xxxiii. 

Charters,  the  First  xii,  Second  xii,  xiii, 
the  Great  of  1618  xxii,  the  Great  of 
Privileges,  orders  &  Laws  xxii,  of 
Orders  xxvi,  Abrogated  by  Courts 
xviii. 

Church,  Plan  for  erection  of  xix. 

Churches,  Twenty  in  Va.,  xx. 

Civil  War  in  Britain,  xx. 

Colonists,   120  mentioned  xii. 

Colony,  Population  of  in  1621  xviii, 
Senle  of  xvii,  xviii. 

Chief  Commander,  xx. 


Commissioner  of  Plantattion,  xxi. 

Commissioners,   xxi  xxxi. 

Commodities  of  Va.,  xxii. 

Commonwealth,  establishment  of  in 
England  xx. 

Convention  of  1625,  xxviii,  Members 
of  xxix,  xxxi. 

Conversion  of  Infidels,  xvi. 

Council  of  Va.,  xii,  Presidents  of  under 
1st  Charter  xii,  Action  in  rating  the 
person  of  Sir  Tho.  Gates,  xiv  Mem- 
ber of  xxxiv. 

Councillors,  xxx,  xxxi. 

Counties,  12  in  Va.,  xx. 

Court,  Quarter  held  for  Va.  in  London, 
xvi;  Monthly  held  xxi;  General 
Quarter  xxi,  xxii. 

Declaration,  a  Briefe,  xv. 
Description  of  Va.  mentioned  xx. 

Emigration     from     England,     xviii;     of 

Royalists  to  Va.,  xx. 
Eastern    Shore,    the,    xxi,    xxxii,    Militia 

xxxiii. 


Fort,  Captain  of,  xiv. 

Godby,   Thomas,    killing   of   mentioned, 

xxviii. 
Governmental   Divisions,   xx. 
Governor,    power   of  ministerial   officer, 

xvii;  Deposed  xx;  the  first  xiii. 
Grocer,  a,  xxv. 

Headrights,    classes    included    in,    xxiv; 

transportation  of  xxv. 
Harvard  College,  mentioned  xxv. 
Houses  in  Jamestown,  addition  of  xix. 

Indian,  reference  to  xiv,  xviii,  Chanco, 
the  Christian  xviii;  the  Massacres, 
xix,  xxiv; 

Incorporations,  the  great  xxi. 

Justice,  the  presiding,  xxxi. 

King,  the,  xviii;  Charles  the  1st,  xix, 
execution  of  xix,  Charles  II,  xx, 
James  the  1st  xi. 

Labourer,  a  xxxi. 

Land,  the  Common,  xvi,  xxii,  division 
of  xxi,  xxvi,  the  Company's  xxvi, 
disposal  of  under  control  of  the 
Crown,  xviii,  the  Common  Garden 
xv,    Letters    Patent,    xi,    duplicate    of 


Index  to  Introduction 


575 


xxxiii,  distribution  by  xxiii,  assign- 
ment of  xxiii,  for  support  of  Church 
xxii,  for  College  xvi,  xxii,  300  acs. 
for  the  Governor  xvi,  for  support  of 
Magistrate  xxii.  For  the  University 
to  be  planted  at  Henrico  xvi,  two 
sorts  of  grants  xxii,  allowance  of  xxii, 
Private  Planters  survey  xxiii,  Dif- 
ference of  rent  xxii,  Annual  Rent  of 
corne  xv,  Fee  Rent  xxvi,  Sea  Captains 
active  in  acquiring  xxv,  Rate  of  share 
in  Company  xii,  Tenants  xxvi. 

Legislative  body,  the  first  to  meet  on 
American  soil  xvii. 

London  Company,  xxi,  xxii,  xxv,  xxviii, 
xxxi,  the  xii,  xiv,  xv,  instructions 
of  xvi,  Court  of  xviii,  members  of 
xxviii,  Treasurer  of  xxi. 

Magazin,  the  first,  mentioned  xv. 
Maides,   young  &  unccrrupt   mentioned 

xvii. 
Marriage,  the  first  solemnized  in  English 

America  xxviii. 
Massacre  of  1622  xviii,  the  Indian  xxiv, 

xxvii. 
Merchant,  Cape  xxxiii,  of  London  xxv. 
Michaelmas,   Feast   of    (Sept.   29),   xiv, 

xxii,  pavments  on  xxvi. 
Ministers,  duties  of  xxi. 
Mint,  xxii. 
Muster  of  1624/5,  xxvii. 

Navigation  Act,  the,  referred  to  xx. 
Negroes,  xx,  the  first  in  the  Colony  xvii. 
Northumberland,  Earl  of  xii. 

Parishes,  xxi. 
Parliament  xx. 

Parliamentary  Fleet,  arrival  of  xx. 
Physician-General  xviii,  xix. 
Pinnaces,  two  mentioned  xiii. 
Polanders,  xii. 

Political  Division,  Eight  the  xxi. 
Planters,  xi,  xix,  xxi,  xxii,  xxvi,  Ancient 
xxvi,  xxvii,  xxviii,  Old  xxix,  xxxii. 


Plantations,  xiv,  xx,  xxi,  xxii.  Establish- 
ment of  equal  xxvi,  Against  James 
City  xxxiv,  Capt.  Ward's  xxxiv. 

Population  of  Va.  in  1616,  xv. 

Prebendary,  xi. 

Publique  Works  xv. 

Pocahontas,  xii. 

Puritan,  the — Richard  Bennett,  xx. 

Royalists,  mentioned  xx. 

Salt  Works,  the  xv. 

Sawyer,  a  xxix. 

Secretary  of  State,  xix. 

Servants,  xv,  xx. 

Settlers,  Planting  of  xiii. 

Service,  seven  years  xxvii. 

Shakespeare's  son-in-law  mentioned,  xxv. 

Shires,  the  eight  xxi. 

Slavery,  peneral  referred  to  xxvii. 

Southampton,   Earl   of  xviii. 

Statehouse,  plans  for  erection  of  xix. 

Supply,  the  first  xii,  xxviii,  the  Second 

xii,  xxviii,  the  Third  xiii. 
Surgion,  a  xxxii. 
Surveyor-General,  the  xviii,  xxiii. 

Tobacco,  value  of  xxii. 

"Tragicall  Relacon"  the,  referred  to  xix. 

Treasury,  the  xxii. 

Treasurer,  xviii,  xxii,  the  first  of  the 
Company  xii,  the  new  xviii,  the  late 
xxvi,  petition  for  appointment  of  sub- 
Treasurer,  xxii,  &  Company  of  the 
City  of  London  xii,  Councill  &  Co. 
xxii. 

Truro,   xxxiii. 

Warr,  De  La,  Lord — death  of  xvi. 
Warwick,  Earl  of  xviii. 
Will,  a  noncupative.  mentioned  xxx. 
Women,   transportation  of  at  charge  of 

Company  xvii ;  to  be  paid  by  husbands 

xvii;  a  fit  hundred  of  xvii. 

York,  settlement  of  the  shores  of  xix. 


General  Index 


Abathon,  Geo.  253. 

Abberlyln,  Richd.  42. 

Abbeys,  Wm.  82,  275. 

Abbin,  James  110. 

Abbott,  Anne  258;  Bryan  137;  Christo. 
28,  140,  161,  168,  358,  361,  416; 
Elinor  388,  477;  Geo.  318,  338;  Giles 
362;  James  51;  Jon.  32;  Jno.  349, 
376;  Jone  335;  Kath.  217;  Nicho.  5; 
Saml.  4,  27,  28,  34,  40,  56,  70,  72, 
98,  116,  124,  141,  143,  152,  167,  169, 
177,  197,  201,  202,  226,  235,  243, 
271,  288,  332,  487;  Su.  236;  Symon 
39;  Tho.  342,  479,  492;  Wm.  289. 

Abbs,  Henry,  Mary,  Thos.  189. 

Abby,  Jon.  244;  Wm.  526. 

Abdell,  Wm.  217. 

Abdey,  Nicholas  62. 

Abernath,  Andrew  357. 

Abernathe,  Robt.  544. 

Abert,  Jno.  525. 

Abington,  Lawr.  449. 

Ableck,  Wm.  386. 

Ablesome,  Isabell  84. 

Aboge,  Rich.  61. 

Abraell,  Robt.,  335. 

Abrahall,  Capt.  280;  Robt.  232,  242, 
276,  408,  467,  490,  542. 

Abraham,  Geo.  128;  John  54,  435 
Robt.  370. 

Abrall,  Col.  422;  Lt.  Col.  328;  John  82 
Math.  484,  490;  Robt.  212,  281,  306 
307,  311,  335,  346,  347,  366,  368 
385,  409,  485,  502. 

Abram,  Jon.   24;  Jno.  434;  Wm.   526. 

Abrams,  Jno.  356. 

Abreman,  Cornelius  381. 

Abreshall,  Tho.  338. 

Abbry,  John  194. 

Absalon,  Derman,  311;  Emanuell  516. 

Abshere,  Lewis  58. 

Absolon,  Em.  501. 

Abtercrume,  John  115. 

Abtill,  Wm.  454. 

Accomacke  7,  8,  9,  11,  12,  13,  18,  414, 
549.   (See  Counties). 

Accomack  Court  193. 

Achely,  Ed.  556. 


Achelly  C,hristo.  479. 

Acherson,  Wm.  91. 

Achman,  Xpr.  285. 

Ackdon,  Jno.  559. 

Ackely,  Ed.  556. 

Ackerman,  Roger  32 ;  Tho.  286. 

Ackers,  Eliz.  358. 

Ackew,  John  245. 

Ackey,  Jno.  475,  525. 

Ackland,  Geo.  91;  Mary  91. 

Ackley,  Wm.  446. 

Ackomack  289. 

Ackuson,  John  387. 

Aeon,  Robt.  387. 

Acone,  Tho.  133. 

Acre,  Geo.  282. 

Acreland,  Tho.  177. 

Acties,  Thos.  183. 

Acton,  Fran.  370,  395;  Jon.  140;  Richd. 
564;  Walter  456. 

Adage,  Wm.  384. 

Adam,  John  491 ;  Tho.  528. 

Adams,  Andrew  72;  Eade  98;  Eliz.  29, 
367;  Geo.  84,  229;  Jon.  134;  John 
164,  479,  494,  515;  Mary  428,  558; 
Peter  281,  366,  472,  493,  506;  Rachell 
50;  Rich.  300,  385,  421,  462;  Sarah 
476;  Susan  258;  Tho.  80,  172,  181, 
188,  333,  363,  377,  500,  540,  558, 
566;  Wm.  265,  338. 

Adcockes,  Abigail  367. 

Adcome,  Jno.  359. 

Addams,  Chas.  362;  Geo.  31;  Jno.  383; 
Richd.  144,  381;  Sumer  429;  Tho.  43, 
376,  383,  558. 

Adderly,  Thos.  81. 

Addersy,  A.  568. 

Addington,  Jonathan  108. 

Addis,  John  265. 

Addison,  Alexr.  216,  288,  357,  412, 
455;  Ang.  332;  Aug.  332;  Henry 
527;  Jone  434;  Thos.  56,  78,  82,  85, 
387,  480;  Wm.  403. 

Adea,  Gabriel  78. 

Aden,  Hugh  156,  258;  Luke  72. 

Aderson,  Roger  89. 

Adimore,  Sarah  511. 

Adison,  Eliz.  233. 

Adiston,  John  324. 

Adkeson,  John  389. 


578 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Adkin,  Elder  338. 

Adkins,  Christ.  29;  Elinor  213  ;  Geo.  129, 

150;  Henry  214;  James  404  ;Richd.  131; 

Robt.  186,  296;  Tho.  146;  Wm.  23. 
Adkinson,  Alice  184;  And.  184;  Christo. 

133;  Ja.  183;  Matt.  157;  Robt.  212; 

Tho.  133,  143,  157,  393. 
Adler,  Danll.  548. 
Adleston,  John  214,  232. 
Adlestone,  John  469. 
Adlome,  Jno.  359. 
Adonneway,  Derman  406. 
Adrey,  Hump.  275. 
Adrianson,  Adrian  349. 
Adridge,  Rice  195;  Wm.  200. 
Adriggin,  Wm.  348. 
Adroune,  Owen  356. 
Adsdon,  Jno.  247,  277. 
Adson,  Richd.  208:  Wm.  567. 
Adsworth,  Wm.  286. 
Adventurer  15,  16,  21,  163. 
Adventurer  &  Co.  53. 
Adwell,  Chas.  138;  Kath.  97. 
Adwicke,  Grace  326;  James  326. 
Adwin,  Owen  353. 
Adye,  John  117. 
Agagin,  John  314. 
Agakee,  Wm.  509. 
Agar,  Edw.  36. 
Agard,  Robt.  119. 
Age,  Hugh  172. 
Agg,  Wm.  516. 
Aggor,  John  327,  450. 
Aghurt,  Wm.  538. 
Agnes,  Tho.  392. 
Ahoshew,  James  150. 
Aiden,  Jno.  462. 
Ailce,  Tho.  191. 
Ainsly,  Sara  217. 
Airea,  Geo.  282. 

Aires,   Jno.    303,    399,    463,    501,    518. 
Akeford,  Ann  526. 
Akerhill,  Ann  223. 
Akin,  James  535,  547. 
Akleson,  Robt.  316. 
Alad,  Saml.  260. 
Aladry,  Tho.  433. 
Albee,  John  330. 
Alber,  John  330. 
Albert,  Rich.  359,  390. 
Albester,  James  554. 
Albett,  Richd.  223. 
Alby,  Pope  566. 
Aleak,  Susan  529. 
Alchard,  Edw.  197. 
Alcock,  Jos.  314;  Mary  347;  Richd.  351; 

Saml.  201;  Susan  393;  Wm.  200,  372. 


Alcocke  Basill  378;  James  207;  Susan 
426,  468;  Susanna  444. 

Alcott,  Alice  51. 

Alcox,  Basill  389. 

Alcutt,  Eliza.  61. 

Alden,  Danll.  548;  Wm.  361. 

Alderson,  Ann  197. 

Aldersey,  Grace  165. 

Aldis,  John  265. 

Aldock,  Rice  377. 

Aldred,  Robt.  197. 

Aldridge,  Jane  502;  Math.  455. 

Aldrige,  Margerie  130;  Fr.  37,  63;  Wm. 
531. 

Aldrop,  Michaell  184. 

Aldwin,  Alice  440. 

Ale,  John  475    525,  528. 

Alen,  Geo.  293,  Margaret  327. 

Alerdine,  James  293. 

Alester,  Marke  375. 

Alesworth,  Peter  233. 

Alewood,  John  259. 

Aleworth,  Jno.  551. 

Alexander,  Eliz.  447;  Henry  356,  434; 
Jon.  227;  John  250,  300,  393,  424, 
440,  446,  447,  546;  Marke  467;  Mary 
568;  Patrick  118;  Robt.  137,  446, 
447,  546,  549;  Saml.  388;  Tho.  445, 
540;  Wm.  502. 

Alford,  Antho.  344;  John  440;  Wm. 
545. 

Alfiston,  Wm.  315. 

Alger,  Mathew  546. 

Alice,  Ellen  28,  81 ;  Mary  209. 

Alkenhead,  Tho.  385. 

Alkin,  Sampson  242. 

Allain,  Julian  410,  449. 

Allam,  Julian  410,  449. 

Allan,  Jane  439. 

Allen,  Alexr.  479;  Ant.  232;  Archibald 
454;    Arthur    187;    Chas.    106;    Chr. 
214;  Edw.  28,   153,   335,   391;  Ellen 
197;  Francis  146,  292,  314;  Geo  194 
293,  166;  Hez.  260;  Hugh  102,  106 
161,  164,  174,  182,  239;  Henry  457 
James  146,  162,  216,  239,  266,  289 
368,    371,   373,   382,   395,   396,    398 
Jane  428;  Jeremy  264;  John  39,  87 
89,  117,  150,  217,  261,  274,  309,  336 
350,  381;  Jonathan  463;  Joseph  463 
Jodeth  193;  Kath.  203,  Marma.  365 
Marg.    342;    Mathew    514;    Maudlin 
342;    Mary   41,    179;    Michaell    344 
Miles    381;   Nicho.    252;    Oliver   40 
59;    Patrick    281,    559;    Pope    450 
Richd.  181,  233,  239,  249,  275,  285 
286,   296,   382,   414,  493;  Robt.  94 


General  Index 


579 


280,  390,  349;  Rose  204,  282;  San- 
ders 148;  Simon  425,  468;  Step.  382, 
375;  Teague  314;  Tho.  47,  57,  182, 
211,  262,  276,  313,  328,  338,  389, 
484,  528,  563;  Valentine  193,  362, 
480,  497,  518,  521,  530;  Wm.  89,  92, 
122,  123,  206,  215,  263,  276,  309, 
333,  350,  372,  388;  Xpher.  292. 

Allen's  Quarter  407. 

Allenby,  Wm.  173. 

Allenson,  Xp.  554. 

Allerentia,  Peter  124. 

Allerson,  Ann  22. 

Allerton,  Mr.  409;  Isaack  367,  379,  401, 
403,  492,  534,  536,. 

Allerweck,  Julian  338. 

Alleson,  Wm.  171. 

Alleston,  Allen  255. 

Allett,  James  454. 

Allgatt,  Rich.  453. 

Allin,  Arthur  485;  Giles  566;  James 
216,  453;  Patrick  568;  Rose  366; 
Wm.  29,  103;  Valentine  527. 

Allinge,  Willmott  349. 

Allingsworth,  John  160. 

Allington,  Giles  4,  5,  159;  Henry  265. 

Allinson,  Wm.  205. 

Allinton,  John  248. 

Allis,  Margtt.  568. 

Allison,  Dorothy  215;  John  215;  Sarah 
141;  Wm.  43. 

Alliston,  Wm.  315. 

Allister,  Marke  425,  468. 

Allmond,  Saml.  121. 

Allmons,  Saml.  78. 

Allott,  Peter  322. 

Allum,  Jno.  554. 

Allumby,  Diana  280;  Geo.  280;  Wm. 
82,  280. 

Allvit,  Mary  328. 

Allwood,  Floraine  455. 

Allyson,  Geo.  512;  James  444;  Sarah 
336. 

Almond,  Saml.  79,  121. 

Alpes,  the  140,  301. 

Alport,  Ann  43. 

Alporte,  Jon.  23. 

Alpott,  Janos  203;  Jones  334. 

Alridge,  Tho.  200. 

Alsop,  Alice  344,  Jno.  566;  Wm.  496. 

Alsopp,  Henry  176;  Wm.  393. 

Alstone,  Tho.  382. 

Alsworth,  Jno.  562;  Wm.  267. 

Aludge,  Tho.  200. 

Alwine,  Xtopr.  213. 

Alwood,  Hen.  274. 

Aman,  Wm.  340. 


Amber,  Joseph  204. 

Ambrey,  Ralph  508. 

Ambrose,  Eliza.  164;  Leonard  223. 

Ames,  Edward  31,  84;  Wm.  296. 

Amey,  Jno.  458. 

Amherst,  Ri.  554. 

Amis,  Jovce,  273. 

Amison,  Grace  62. 

Amolachan,  Rog.  326. 

Amore,  Hamurt  160. 

Amsley,  Sarah  454. 

Amy,  Wm.  134. 

Anacosta,  366. 

Anancocke,    261,    264,    285,    296,    307, 

321,    322,    324,   325,    326,    329,    330, 

331,  405,  406,  411,  419,  473. 
Ancell,  Tho.  350. 
Anchile,  Fra.  276. 
Ancient  Planter,  2,  3,  6,  15,  16,  17. 
Ancram,  Chas.  454. 
Andersin,  Mary  366. 
Andersly,  Jno.  355. 
Anderson,  Alexr.  250,  559;  Daccy,  527; 

David    326,    355;    Davy    446;    Fran. 

166,    386;    Garrett    119;    John    110, 

178,   232,  279,  324,   553;  Mary  446. 
Anderson,    Reynard    292;    Richd.    231, 

474;  Robt.  254,  455;  Roger  118,  126; 

Sarah  277;  Tho.  153,  212;  Wm.  201, 

406,  468,  506,  536. 
Anderton,  Daniell  548;  Jno.  219,   391. 
Andrew,  Geo.  288,  405 ;  Joan  294 ;  John 

294;    Richd.    154;    Robt.    148,    323. 
Andrews,  Abram  476 ;  Dorothy  68 ;  Eliz. 

302,  312;  Garrett  129,  152,  164;  Geo. 

277,    468;    Grace    558;    Israeli    140; 

James  261;  Jenkin  197;  Joakin  109; 

Jno.  431,  525;  Jon.  54;  Margt.  261; 

Mary  258,   520;  Mathew  476;  Nich. 

118;  Peter  536;  Phillip  479;  Richd. 

103;    Roeer    148,    351;    Simon    500; 

Susan  101;  Susanna  23;  Thomas  24, 

52,  54,  115,  152;  Wm.  23,  74,  100, 

117,    148,    163,    261,    300,   435,   483, 

509,  513,  532,  534,  539. 
Andrewes,  Edmund  79;  Edw.  120;  Eliza. 

79;    Jenkin    143;    Joane    538;    John 

120,    178,    350,    457;    Margtt.    527; 

Mary  562;  Nich.  381;  Peter  527,  544; 

Richd.    115,    166;    350,   457;   Margtt. 

527;    Mary    562;    Nich.    381;    Peter 

527,     544;    Richd.     115,     166;    468, 

Roger  58;  Susan  46,  261;  Tho.  468; 

Wm.  13,  31,  35,  82,   101,   110,   184, 

371,  401,  410,  533. 
Andry,  Ellinor  239. 
Angeir,  Benj.  454. 


580 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Angel,  John  425. 

Angell,  John  388;  Wm.  223,  359,  390. 

Angle,  Eliz.  273;  James  555;  Wm.  440, 

444. 
Angood,  Wm.  322. 
Annice,  John  93. 
Annis,  Jane  368;  Robt.  39;  Tho.  103; 

Wm.  Ill,  121. 
Annocostin,  371. 
Anno  Domini  1610,  163. 
Annley,  Robt.  115. 
Anssell,  Freeman  199. 
Antherson,  Wm.  42. 
Anthony,  Arthur  113;  Mary  245;  Thos. 

276. 
Anthrop,  Wm.  542. 
Antom,  Robt.  442. 
Antrobors,  Jno.  247. 
Anwell,  Luke  268. 
Ap,  Roger,  Roger  501. 
Ap,  Lewis,  Edw.  501. 
Ap  Thomas,  Tho.  334;  Wm.  175,  Richd. 
Apinall,  John  482. 

Apleby,  Richd.  397,  441;  Walter  192. 
Apleton,    Alice    148;    Geo.    245;    Jno. 

334;  Richd.  54. 
Apliton,  Gregory  253. 
Apostingall,  Antho.  459. 
Appaie,  Ellis  406. 
Appamattocks  139,  333,  382,  509. 
Appamattock  Towne  81. 
Appellton,  Wm.  338. 
Appes,  Edw.  197. 
Appleby,  John  275 ;  Rich.  438. 
Appleford,  John  491. 
Appleton,  John  408,  435,  437,  438,  457, 

542;  Richd.  24. 
Appletree,  Richd.  270. 
Apps,  Edmond  201. 
Appv,  Wm.  419. 
Apreetee,  Robt.  554. 
Aprickett,  Margaret  389. 
Aquintanocco  335. 
Arakico  307. 
Aram,  John  27. 
Arator,  Eliza.  199. 
Arbo,  Peeter  361. 
Arbson,  Derrick  337. 
Arch,  John  315. 
Archellon,  Marga.  44. 
Archer,  Alice  276;  Ann  228;  Geo.  31, 

47,  65,  84,  143,  452,  537;  John  164, 

556;  Rich.  396,  455,  552;  Wm.  139, 

544. 
Archerday,  Tho.  148. 
Archers   Hope,   2,    109,    124,   143,    161, 

168,  178. 


Arden,  Hen.  97;  James  351;  Robt.  135. 

Ardington,  Tho.  335,  442. 

Ardrey,  Wm.  457. 

Ardy,  Jno.  492. 

Arenden,  James  220. 

Arey,  Robt.  165. 

Argoll,  Jno.  536. 

Arguse,  Rich.  80. 

Ariays,  Arryanka  356. 

Aringell,  Jno.  447. 

Aris,  John  221. 

Arkady,  273. 

Arleson,  Derrick  394. 

Armateague,  Mich.  492. 

Armefeild,  470. 

Armes,  Fra.  223;  Henry  189;  Michaell 

448,  "459;  Roger  404;  Susan  543. 
Armesbee,  John  206. 
Armestead,  Ann  45;  Wm.  45,  90,  124, 

165,    218,    227,   229,   298,    375,   416, 

485,  523,  551;  Mr.  244. 
Armestrong,  And.  429;  Ann  516;  Dan. 

351;  Fra.  275;  Geo.  110,  302;  Henry 

341;    John    254,    431;    Richd.    291, 

322;  Robt.  277,  293,  363,  370,  384, 

397,  441. 
Armsby,  John  219,  319,  442. 
Armeson,  Robt.  148,  196. 
Armetrading,  Henry  28. 
Armfeild,  Wm.  373. 
Armhurst,  Richd.  254. 
Armie,  John  23,  27. 
Armiger,  Jno.  552;  Wm.  221. 
Armistead,  Jno.  551. 
Armitage,   Abra.    266;   Eliz.   260;   Joan 

291. 
Armitradeing,  Hen.  414. 
Armond,  Richd.  197. 
Armor,  Francis  459. 
Arms,  Michael  526. 
Armston,  Abra.  222. 
Armwood,  Roger  97. 
Armye,  John  84;  Tho.  106,  297. 
Army,  the  244. 
Arnall,  Joyce  444;  Robt.  28;  Tho.  429; 

Wm.  4. 
Arncell,  Tho.  490. 
Arndall,  Kath.  112. 

Arndell,  458. 

Arnell,  Antho  348;  Eliz.  466. 

Arnee,  Tho.  196. 

Arney,  Edw.  349. 

Amis,  Joyce  273. 

Amman,  Wm.  451. 

Arnold  Alex.  458 ;  Anth.  386,  403,  446, 

457,    542,;    Arth.    355;    Eliz.    351; 

Henry  214;  James  432;  Jesper  528; 


General  Index 


581 


Jno.    569;    Joyce    126;    Margt.    126; 

Mary  375;  Robt.  81,  356;  Wm.  86, 

164,  479. 
Arnoll,    Antho.     565;     Margaret    336; 

Mary  284;  Robt.  92;  Tho.  362,  484; 

Wm.  300. 
Arnwood,  Roger  32,  92. 
Aron,  Rich.  145. 
Arpe,  Peter  118. 
Arrens,  Heilton  186. 
Arris,  Jon.  134;  Martha  453. 
Arrison,  Derrick  394. 
Arro,  John  491. 
Arro  Attocks,  87. 
Arrock,  James  214. 
Arroe,  Jon.  54. 
Arroehattocks,  36. 
Arrorke,  James  203. 
Arrowhattocks,  20. 
Arrundell,    Ed.    363;    John    157,    270; 

Mary  264;  Rich.  334. 
Arrye,  Daniell  93. 
Arryson,  Derrick  337. 
Arseson,  Derrick  390. 
Arshwin,  Jno.  395. 
Arsly,  Alice  397,  441. 
Arteine,  Roger  131. 
Arter,  John  131. 
Arther,  Thomas  374. 
Arthur,   Alexr.    373;    Eliz.    294;    Hugh 

181;  James  140,  162,  237,  450,  509; 

John  181,  467;  Tho.  383. 
Arthurs,  Alice  139;  Christ.  139;  James 

139,  173,  298. 
Arum,  Richard  316. 
Arundell,  James  57;  John   11,   15,   16, 

18,   19;  Peter  6,   7,   16,   404;  Richd. 

203 ;  458. 

Arwin,  Robt.  204. 

Aryson,  Derrick  390. 

Asby,  Wm.  222. 

Ascome,  John  43. 

Ascott,  Patrick  252. 

Ascough,  Richard  29. 

Ascum,  John  68,  374. 

Ash,   John   213;   Rowland   551;   Symon 

448. 
Ashall,  Geo.  125,  192. 
Ashbifoote,  John  160. 
Ashbournham,  Edw.  282. 
Ashbrooke,  Tho.  284. 
•Ashby,  Phillip  375  ;  Roger  219;  Tho.  28. 
Ashcomb,    Ann    200;    John    125,    165, 

385;  Winifrid  165. 
Ashdowne,  Walter  402. 
Ashe,  John  129. 
Asheley,  Peter  16. 


Ashenhurst,  Jno.  455. 

Ashfeild,  James  47. 

Ashford,  Jno.  528. 

Ashington,  Rowland  452. 

Ashley,   Christo.    16,    173;   David    263; 

John    399;    Peter    549;    Richd.    554; 

Wm.  425. 
Ashly,   Christo.   329;  Jacob   525;   John 

288,  350,  366,  399;  Robt.  121,  221; 

Susan     358;     Tho.     28,     525,     528; 

Xtoper.  44. 
Ashpoole,  Lawr.  349. 
Ashton,  Chas.  333,  373,  376,  379,  464; 

Eliza.    211,    455;    Fra.    311;    Henry 

453;   Isabell   278;  James   352;  Joane 

96;  John   166,  446,  483;  Peter  302, 

309,   343,   357,   377,   398,  406,   409, 

434,  461,   531;  Rachell  279;  Richd. 

254;  Tho.   25;  Walter   31,   93,   561; 

Warbowe  93;  Wm.  555. 
Ashwell,    Ann    194;    Geo.    358;    Henry 

120,  204,  339,  364,  471;  James  382; 

Mary    273;    Sarah    382;    Wm.    250, 

382;  314. 

Ashworth,  Rich.  359. 

Asiskewincke,  235. 

Ash,  Tho.  512. 

Askew,  John  245. 

Askin,  Wm.  512. 

Askue,  Ann  182. 

Asley,  Jon.  22. 

Aspinall,  Jno.  524. 

Asse,  Andrew  146. 

Asselbie,  Eliza. 

Assell,  Gilbert  238. 

Assembly,  Grand  the  123,  147. 

Assey,  Francis  108. 

Assine,  Alice  128. 

Assnie,  Alice  128. 

Asson,  Tho.  61. 

Asten,  Robt.  58. 

Aster,  Edw.  450. 

Astin,  Fardinando  543 ;  John  144. 

Aston,  Antho.  194;  Chas.  318;  Issabell 

318;    James    190;    John    144,    318; 

Richd.   299;  Tho.    166;   Walter   148, 

154,   165,   203,   317;  Warbowe   165; 

Mrs.  405;  Mr.  138,  167. 
Astope,  Jno.  555. 
Aswell,  Henry  497;  Mary  181. 
Athanes,  Tho.  201. 
Atherfold,  Law.  208. 
Atherson,  Wm.  91. 
Athester,  Jno.  362. 
Athor,  James  149. 
Atkenson,    Eliza.    455. 
Atkey,  Jno.  525,  528. 


582 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Atkin,  Jno.  157. 

Atkins,    Antho.    149,    172;    Edw.    352; 

Eliz.    235;    Francis    341;    Geo.    302; 

James  293;  John  205,  238,  363,  375, 

425,  566;  Lewis  538;  Margery  410; 

Marmad.    248;    Martha    482;    Mary 

381,  403;  Nathl.  527;  Richard  14, 
84,  274,  351;  Robt.  338,  356,  456, 
507,  531;  Silvester  31,  84;  Tho.  293, 

382,  527,  536;  Wm.  124,  131,  512, 
567,  568. 

Atkinson,  Allis,  184;  And.  184;  Henry 
113;  James  430,  512;  Marg.  151; 
Marmaduke  142 ;  Mathew  65 ;  Miles 
358;  Richd.  16;  Tho.  65,  270,  564 

Atmore,  Thomas  23. 

Attaway,  Ja.  248;  Tho.  450;  Wm.  61, 
459. 

Atten,  Geo.  194. 

Attenborow,  Tho.  372. 

Atterby,  Jno.  452. 

Attera,  Thomas  62. 

Attings worth,  John  160. 

Attkeson,  Eliz.  382. 

Attkins,  Jno.  468;  Tho.  509. 

Attlo,  Dancie  541. 

Attocke,  Nazar.   165. 

Attore,  Edw.  200. 

Attorney,  503,  519,  534,  547. 

Attowell,  Thos.  8,  53,  77,  100. 

Atwack,  Jacob  179. 

Atwell,  Israeli  35;  Nicho.  81;  Symon 
175;  Tho.  212,  400,  560. 

Atwill,  Nicho.  28. 

Atwood,  Ann  23,  66 ;  Edwd.  236,  519; 
Edmond  254;  Hen.  274. 

Aubuff,  Syfra  324. 

Aubry,  Jno.  552. 

Aucoate,  Anne  284. 

Aude,  Saml.  198. 

Audick,  Daniell  78. 

Audley,  Teg.  116. 

Auer,  Tho.  133. 

Audrey,  Wm.  267. 

Audry,  Ellin  136. 

Audrick,  Wm.  324. 

Auerine,  Jon.  86. 

Auger,  Jon.  82. 

Augood,  Wm.  322. 

Augulliott,  Lem.  371. 

Aunley,  Robt.  115,   152. 

Aunt,  Phillip  35. 

Aurllott,  Ann  290. 

Aussell,  Freeman  199. 

Austen,  Tho.  303. 

Austice,  James  225. 

Austin,  Ann  467;  Col.  531;  Fard.  564; 


Ferd.  314,  468;  Fird.  314;  Geo.  144, 
178,  377,  401,  484;  James  208,  333, 
394,  396,  452;  John  303,  359;  Rich. 
27,  103,  303;  Susan,  457;  Tho.  135; 
Wm.  61. 

Austine,  James  259;  Tho.  208,  236,  274, 

Austin's  Desire  142. 

Auston,  Jno.  301;  Richd.  176;  Walter 
165,  555. 

Averie,  Jacob  14,  19;  Marke  232. 

Averine,  Jon.  86. 

Averitt,  Christo.  69;  Phillip  69. 

Avery,  Ann  142;  Eliz.  125;  Geo.  215; 
Hen.  142,  458;  Jacob  15,  101,  103, 
231;  John  141 ;  Marke  143,  560,  563; 
Mr.  15;  Richd.  476;  Susan  462;  Tho. 
214;  Wm.  353. 

Avile,  Eliza.  181. 

Avis,  Geo.  459. 

Avory,  Marke  559. 

Awberry,  Henry  477. 

Awborne,  R.  467;  Rich  542. 

Awbry,  Jno.  454. 

Awly,  Robt.  180. 

Axam,  Rich.  392. 

Axelby,  John  279. 

Axell,  Joyce  447. 

Axoll,  John  369. 

Axolls  John  422. 

Axom,  Richd.  197. 

Axome,  Richd.  319. 

Axon,  Joseph  528. 

Axter,  John  200. 

Axtin,  Peter  567. 

Axtill,  John  276. 

Axton,  John  184,  481,  505. 

Axum,  Wm.  558. 

Ayer,  Jno.  530. 

Ayherst,  Wm.  559. 

Ayhurt,  Wm.  462. 

Ayhurst,  Wm.  525. 

Ayhust,  Wm.  559. 

Aykins,  Jane  250. 

Aylett,  John  314. 

Ayleworth,  Wm.  552. 

Aylife,  Richard  544. 

Ayliffe,  Richd.  512. 

Aylmer,  Justinian  551. 

Aylworth,  Wm.  552. 

Ayres,  Edmond  352,  354;  Edw.  366; 
Francis  351;  Huntington  378;  John 
322,  351,  366,  379,  437,  478,  482, 
521,  523,  530,  532;  Kath.  218;  Mary 
367;  Richd.  352;  Tho.  440,  552; 
Wm.  267,  513. 

Ayton,  John  246. 


General  Index 


583 


B. 


Babb,   Edw.   127;  Tho.    112,   218,   280. 

Babbington,  John  114;  Michael  26. 

Babe,  Tho.  165. 

Babister,  Richd.  150. 

Bach,  Tho.  104. 

Bacheler,  Richd.  564. 

Bachelor,   Mary   286,   386;   Richd.   540. 

Back,  Jno.  397,  441. 

Backen,  Eliza.  184. 

Backer,  Joane  219. 

Backham,  Henry  206. 

Backmaster,  John  225. 

Backster,  Elinor  262;  John  282;  Roger 

245;  Wm.  68. 
Backwell,  John  131. 
Bacock,  Tho.  164. 
Bacon,  Mr.   363,  421;  Eliza.   170,  200, 

218,  392,  394;  Hannah  431;  Joseph 

211,  278;  Mary  271,  482;  Nathl.  275, 

381,   382,   394,  478,   547;  Tho.  218, 

256,  410,  435;  Wm.  234,  354,  355, 

364,  372,  502. 
Badd,  Richd.  463. 
Bade,  Clemt.  125. 
Badden,  John  112. 
Badg,  Mary  506. 
Badge,  John  140. 
Badger,  Ann  115,  178,  279;  Wm.  393, 

426,  444,  467,  468. 
Badham,    Jon.    105;    John    115,    408; 

Margaret  108. 
Bading,  Walter  304. 
Badlam,  Ann  511. 
Badley,  Tho.  140. 
Badnall,  Jon.  141. 
Badworth,  James  107;  Jno.  348. 
Bagby,  James  108;  John  54,  323,  391; 

Peter  470;  Robt.  515. 
Baggs,  James  368. 
Bagle,  Jno.  397. 
Bagley,  Phill.  196. 
Bagly,  Hen.  56;  James  115;  Jon.  137; 

Peter  470;  Tho.  129;  Wm.  422. 
Bagnall,  Geo.  67;  James  145,  241,  245, 

308,   374,  429,  430,  477,   530;  John 

290,  421,  424,  429;  Roger  33,  69; 

Sarah  289. 
Bagnell,  Henry  30;  James  270. 
Bagness,  Tho.  517. 
Bagnoll,  James  168;  Roger  25. 
Bagon,  Mary  202. 
Bagshaw,  Peter  431. 
Bagwell,  Henry  43,   112;  Tho.  87,   89, 

122,  140,  245. 
Bagworth,  John  56,  267. 


Baile,  Mathew  329;  Tho.  369. 

Baileinge,  Eliz.   390. 

Bailie,  Tho.  26. 

Baily,  John  155;  Wm.  388;  Richd.  339. 

Bainard,  Roger  523. 

Bainely,  Jno.  560. 

Bainer,  Dorothy  260. 

Baines,  Geo.  229;  Richd.  263. 

Baineham,  John  1,  3,  4,  48;  Tho.  145. 

Bainton,  Henry  552. 

Baites,  John  206. 

Bake,  Mary  548;  Joseph  500. 

Baker,  Abra.  294;  Alexr.  370;  Alice 
75,  130,  430;  Ann  245,  448,  530, 
56l;Antho.  548;  Chas.  569;  Danl. 
35,  59,  327;  Dorothy  75,  113,  317; 
Edw.  203,  473;  Ellis  36;  Eliza.  144, 
446,  561;  Francis  171;  Geo.  78,  460, 
548;  Hangatt  184;  Henry  558,  569; 
Hugh  75;  James  385,  561;  Joane 
569;  Jon.  24,  31;  John  40,  41,  50, 
54,  59,  60,  61,  75,  84,  85,  88,  93, 
94,  110,  113,  115,  128,  138,  152,  156, 
157,  258,  281,  298,  299,  317,  405, 
454,  469,  491,  505,  508,  523,  561; 
Joseph  399,  437,  558,  561;  Kath. 
359;  Langag.  234;  Lawrence  156,  193, 
280,  350,  422,  561  ;Lewis  106;  Marg. 
190;  Margery  513;  Martin  21,  106, 
144,  164,  335,  339,  360,  471;  Mau- 
rice 212;  Mary  284,  544,  Peter  223; 
Philip  326;  Richd.  39  107,  113,  250, 
426,  456,  534;  Robt.  448;  Saml.  501, 
548;  Silvester  150,  351,  358,  569; 
Tho.  242,  280,  314,  531;  Timothy 
446;  Walter  208;  Wm.  34,  58,  60, 
74,  99,  319,  500;  Mr.  364,  389,  424, 
492. 

Bakone,  Eliz.  339. 

Balch,  Robt.  450. 

Baldin,  Rich.  432. 

Baldine,  Mary  567. 

Balding,  Frances  140. 

Baldock,  Dasey  95. 

Baldrige,  James  211. 

Baldridge,  James  380;  Lorida  211; 
Major  236,  380;  Mary  211;  Tho.  207, 
211,  380;  Wm.  211. 

Baldwin,  Chas.  171,  Edw.  196,  John  40, 
57,  179,  183,  258,  295;  Tho.  475; 
Wm.  31,  197,  478,  513. 

Baldrop,  Wm.  546. 

Badwyn,  John  40. 

Baleor,  Margtt.  395. 

Bales,  John  395,  402;  Tho.  44,  337. 

Baley,  James  411;  Temperance  226, 
Wm.   248. 


584 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Balfe,  Oliver  149,  172. 
Balfin,  Richd.  182. 

Balhash,  Eliz.  87,  111. 

Balis,  Robt.  508. 

Balistocke,  Rich.   140. 

Ball,  Alphoso  357,  455,  516;  Eliz. 

568,  Geo.  109,  388;  Isaak  403,  J 

301,  Joane  154,  John  277,  294, 

343,  394;  Kath.  475,  Richd.   11 

217,  348;  Tho.  232,  461;  Wm. 

348,  502,  491;  Mr.  526. 
Balance,  Wm.  329. 
Ballard,  An  236;  Henry  137,  James 

Judith    340,    Richd.    335;    Tho. 

354,   379,   380,  496,   518;  Wm. 
Balldershell,  Wm.  205. 
Balleroe,  James  207. 
Ballhash,  Edw.  432,  Eliz.  54. 
Ballingall,  Wm.  340,  395. 
Ballington,  Nicho.  54. 
Ballis,  Robt.  508. 
Ballister,  Tho.  336. 
Ballware,  James  472. 
Baltemore,  Kat.  515,  Row.  515. 
Baltrop,  Wm.  446,  471. 
Balver,  Beves  140. 
Baly,  Eliz.  444,  Richd.  41. 
Bambridge,  Christo.   117,   118. 
Bambas,  Edw.  251. 
Bamfeild,  John  178. 
Bamforth,  John  133. 
Banborne,  James  499. 
Banbury,  Edw.  393,  Steph.  367. 
Bancks,  James  564,  John  73,  105. 
Banckes,  Jon.  31,  Christo.  94,  Richd. 
Bancroft,  Wm.  122,  341. 
Band,  Wm.  290. 
Bandes,  Wm.  263. 
Bandon,  Jane  401,  530,  Peter  302. 
Bandleson,  Ja.  196. 
Bandwick,  John  178. 
Bane,  Dave  299,  James  454,  Wm. 
Banen,  Rich.  32. 
Banier,  Sam.  378. 
Banin,  Mary  244. 
Banington,  Walter  533. 
Banister,  Henry  249,  John  53,  244, 

Steph.   27,  Tho.   117,  Wm.  94, 

192. 
Baniton,  Henry  552. 
Banks,    Ann    64,    Henry    535,    Ja. 

John  275,  279,  Richd.  35,  45,  69, 
Bankes,    Dorothy   429,    Eliz.    204, 

James  468,  Wm.  410. 
Bann,  Wm.  292. 
Bannister,  John  416,  Nicho.  130, 

369,  Wm.  47,  65,  94,  425. 


216, 
ames 
325, 
,  90, 

244, 


521, 
309, 
373. 


501. 


183. 


260; 
158, 


200, 
535. 
360, 


Tho. 


Banns,  James  403. 

Bansby,  Eliz.  406. 

Banson,  Peter  172. 

Banton,  Carrington  136,  Coningham  209, 
288,  Geo.  543,  Jone  233,  Samll.  455, 
Tho.  22,  Wm.  80,  205. 

Baords,  Tho.  259. 

Baragan,  Richd.  251. 

Baramus,  Tho.  149. 

Barbage,  Tho.  166,  180. 

Barbar,  Benedick  208,  Fra.  172,  John 
217,  Roger  397,  Wm.  214. 

Barbeard,  Wm.  170. 

Barber,  An  400,  Benedict  296,  Fra.  248, 
Edw.  195,  Geo.  89,  Jacob  517,  James 
282,  John  278,  329,  347,  352,  372, 
468,  483,  Jedeth  400,  Nic.  231,  Rich. 
525,  Robt.  82,  Roger  441,  Wm.  70, 
121,  178,  214,  318,  401,  442,  443, 
480,  545. 

Barbery,  Wm.  506. 

Barboe,  Roman  548. 

Barby,  Jone  336,  Wm.  404. 

Barchard,  John  366. 

Barckurst,  Antho.  185. 

Barcrefe,  Chas.  288. 

Barcroft,  Chas.  80,  137,  166,  191,  201, 
405,  Ehz.  166,  Jane  82,  Jon.  82. 

Bard,  James  426,  John  216,  Robt.  32. 

Bardell,  Henry  566,  Jno.  546,  565. 

Barden,  Ann  249. 

Barditt,  Kath.  367. 

Bardly,  Henry  84. 

Bardon,  John  298,  348,  359,  409,  531. 

Bardwell,  Joan  312. 

Bare,  Xpofer.  153. 

Barefeild,  Ester  513,  Jon.  244,  John 
479,  504,  Tho.  150. 

Barefoot,  Tho.  193,  481. 

Barefott,  Wm.  344. 

Barell,  Mary  455. 

Barfoote,  Ann  54. 

Bargine,  Symon  208. 

Bargrave,  Robt.  55,  Capt.  226. 

Barham,  Chas.  562,  John  223. 

Barington,  Fra.  172. 

Barke,  Henry  164. 

Barker,  Abill  456,  Cath.  225,  Christo. 
119,  176,  Eliz.  190,  195,  Geo.  47, 
107,  113,495,  541,  Henry  273,  Hester 
324,  Hugh  111,  James  51,  65,  Jane 
335,  Jerimiah  101,  John  7,  38,  61, 
112,  178,  180,  187,  230,  246,  298, 
353,  415,  427,  541,  Mary  196,  373, 
Nathan  187,  Nathl.  479,  Nicho.  127, 
Philip  451,  Richd.  Ill,  544,  Silvester 
101,  Susan  248,  Tho.  272,  367,  381, 


General  Index 


585 


497,  Wm.  20,  35,  70,  79,  100,  103, 
108,  110,  121,  301,  338,  531,  Mr.  335. 

Barkeley,  Ann  196,  Jane  121,  Mary  166. 

Barkly,  Capt.  323. 

Barkington,  Mary  351. 

Barksdall,  Wm.  468. 

Barkwith,  Robt.  34. 

Barkeworth,  Jonn  290,  300. 

Barland,  Mr.  135. 

Bar  lee,  Francis  148. 

Barlo,  John  177. 

Barloe,     Francis     196,     Jonathan     453, 

Tymoth.  34. 

Barlow,  Ann  506,  Henry  274,  308,  Jon. 
l42John  269,  444,  Roger  404,  Sarah 
502,  Stafford  130,  Sus.  232,  Tho.  274, 
Wm.  236,  471. 

Barlowe,  Ralph  159,  185. 

Barly,  Antho.  336,  Roger  146,  Henry 
195. 

Barmodue  Hundred  130. 

Barnaby,  James  123,  216,  294,  357,  412, 
Luke  108,  Sarah  123,  216. 

Barnard,  Ann  449,  Eliza.  196,  Jon.  22; 
Richd.  477,  545,  Stephen  71,  Tho. 
67,  72,  81,  Wm.  131,  137,  Col.  365, 
Capt.   166. 

Barne,  Eliz.  298. 

Barned,  Edw.  444. 

Barnell,  Francis  336,  Henry  336. 

Barner,  Dorothy  260. 

Barnes,  Agnes  285,  287,  482,  Ann  165, 
Barbary  51,  Barnaby  62,  Bar.  131, 
Chas.  236,  Dorothy  286,  Edw.  117, 
208,  223,  296,  303,  Fr.  219,  Geo. 
208,  Henry  114,  186,  214,  249,  284, 
James  67,  126,  209,  459,  Joan  236, 
John  136,  148,  198,  216,  558,  Martin 
142,  Mary  390.  533,  Lancelott  16,  19, 
71,  Law.  260,  Ri.  555,  Ro.  350,  Sarah 
501,  Step.  203,  Wm.  206,  Capt.  392. 

Barnett,  Anne  278,  284,  Corderoy  211, 
278,  Dorothy  83,  Edw.  359,  390,  440, 
Eliz.  211,  278,  286,  519,  James  110, 
Jno.  248,  440,  Joseph  142,  Nich.  32, 
91,  103,  Richd.  211,  278,  Robt.  252, 
Stephen  47,  56,  Mrs.  517. 

Barnham,  Mary  345,  Robt.  455. 

Barnhouse,  Francis  430,  Law.  283,  Richd. 
231,  281,  283,  320,  328,  339,  347, 
385,  386. 

Barnhowse,  Richd.  103. 

Barnehouse,  Richd.  229,  241,  276,  338, 
430,  458,  470,  475,  485,  499,  520, 
Tho.  392,  Capt.  242,  Mr.  229,  236, 
307,  451,  496. 

Barnwell,  Jno.  426. 


Barr,  Roger  329. 

Barreb,  Abra.  309. 

Barrens,  the  502,  564. 

Barres,  Hugh  245. 

Barret,  Capt.  324,  Margt.  513,  Wm. 
175,  177. 

Barrett,  Ann  250,  383,  Edw.  428,  Eliz. 
519,  Francis  56,  96,  97,  138,  336, 
366,  James  559,  John  289,  Jno.  431, 
560,  Henry  259,  Margt.  289,  306, 
378,  Richd.  248,  Sara  193,  Tho.  306, 
Wm.  344,  383,  Mrs.  517,  Capt.  306. 

Barretts,  Tho.  264. 

Barricole,  Phil.  264. 

Barrington,  Isaack  553,  Richd.  28,  Robt. 
15,  Wm.  153. 

Barrit,  Tho.  261. 

Barrom,  John  276. 

Barron,  John  274,  523,  Roger  435. 

Barrow,  Ann  526,  Henry  278,  John  140, 
286,  293,  335,  350,  390,  393,  394, 
420,  424,  431,  495,  516,  526,  562, 
Mich.  257,  Symon  299,  502,  Tho.  302. 

Barrwell,  Anth.  349. 

Barry,  Garratt  220,  Vincent  456. 

Barsbie,  Jno.  515. 

Barsby,  John  422,  464. 

Barshall,  Jon.  141. 

Barston,  Christ.  93. 

Bart,  Geo.  386. 

Barten,  Henry  355,  John  232. 

Barter,  James  308. 

Bartin,  Tho.  80. 

Bartlet,  Henry  215. 

Bartlett,  Alex.  255,  Ann  251,  293, 
Christo.  114,  Eliz.  381,  Jane  180,  221, 
Mary  336,  Michael  102,  Richd.  160, 
528,  Ro.  377,  Robt.  475,  Wm.  347. 

Bartley,  Jno.  371. 

Barton,  Elias  138,  John  82,  274,  424, 
501,  Marg.  290,  Robt.  75,  Tho.  82, 
429,  Wm.  52,  109. 

Bartholomew,  Hen.  150. 

Barthram,  Jonathan  270. 

Bartran,  Mary  291. 

Bartwright,  Jon.  237. 

Barwick,  Anth.  351,  Tho.  468,  Wm. 
108,   146. 

Barwood,  Robt.  128. 

Basbie,  John  494. 

Basby,  John  363. 

Basbye,  Jno.  339. 

Base,  John  366. 

Basely,  Sarah  453,  Wm.  546. 

Bashaw,  Andrew  112,  242,  Ann  217, 
Giles  171,  Jane  242,  Mary  242,  Peter 
431,  Wm.  242. 


586 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Bashes,  Tho.  385. 

Bashfeild,  Eliz.  189. 

Bashpoole,  Gregory  272. 

Bashwell,  Eliz.  355. 

Baskevill,  Richd.  114. 

Baskerville,  Robt.  136. 

Baskett,  Francis  148,  Wm.  208. 

Baskfeild,  Ann  201. 

Baskin,  Richard   108. 

Baskirrel,  Richard  108. 

Basnett,   Fra.  476,   Wm.   51,   355,    362, 

380,  434. 
Bass,  Gregory  132,  John  56,  Nathl.  125. 
Basse,    Capt.     115,     142,    Margt.    483, 

Nathl.  10,  Wm.  427. 
Basses  Choice  166. 
Bassett,    Capt.    533,   Geo.    69,    Iszabella 

107,  Math.   77,   101,  Tho.   160,   315, 

551,  Wm.  107,  472,  548. 
Bassill,  Ralph  324. 
Bassnett,  Jon.  73,  Willi.  61. 
Bassay,  Margt.  429. 
Bassye,  Eliza.   192. 
Bastard,  Henry  356,  Wm.  356. 
Bastian,  Tannika  356,  435. 
Basticks,  Constant  250. 
Bastill,  Ralph  324. 
Baston,  Francis  554,  Hen.  225. 
Bastwicke  Edw.  68. 
Basty,  James  108. 
Batch,  Robert  450. 
Batcheller,  Bridget  444. 
Batcheller's  Bancke  78,  364. 
Batchelor,    Mary    315,    324,    353,    356, 

Richd.  377,  540,  Wm.  178. 
Batchelor's  Hope,  82,  Plantation  104. 
Batchells,  Mary  265. 
Bateman,   Anto.   455,   Jane  435,   James 

222,  John  370,  375,  395,  484,  Mary 

370,  395,  404,  Pershiphall  164,  Richd. 

257,    430,    Robt.    62,    143,    Tho.    25, 

Wm.  375,  425,  467,  468,  479. 
Bater,  Chas.  132. 
Batersby,  Miles  531. 
Bates,  Joane  221,  John  301,   316,   544, 

Joseph   281,   Mary   509,   550,   Nicho. 

76,  Rich.  314,  Tho.  196. 
Bath,  Thos.  83,  104. 
Batherp,  Fra.  180. 
Batho,  John  133. 
Bathropp,  Jon.  144. 
Batle,  Mathew  563. 
Batley,  Christo.  268. 
Batman,  Lawrance  436,  Roger  404,  Tho. 

61. 
Batmason,  Tho.  238. 


Batrewhole,  84,  a  place  called. 

Batrum,  Lawr.  143. 

Batt,  Bartho.  342,  Dorothy  151,  Henry 

98,  Jno.   151,  360,   382,  Michael  97, 

145,  275,  Tho.  430,  Wm.   115,   146, 

147,  149,  179. 
Batts,   Capt.   281,   505,   Dan.   251,   436, 

Henry  115,  152,  John  107,  122,  123, 

291,  310,  435,  Joseph  108,  Mary  198, 

Mathew    376,    Michael    378,    Nathl. 

543,   Wm.    152,    175,    197,   436,   Mr. 

127. 
Battam,  Abra.  513. 
Battell,  John  280. 
Batten,    Ashwell    231,    256,    302,    304, 

307,    317,    346,    347,   495,    502,    508, 

Wm.  293,  549. 
Battemore,  Kat.  515,  Row.  515. 
Batters,  Fra.  180. 
Battersby,  Miles  189. 
Battery,  Wm.  513. 
Battin,  Ashwell  210,  216,  238,  399,  401, 

James  351. 
Battinge,  Nicholas  359. 
Battle,  Eliz.  280,  John  280,  426,  Mathew 

170,  Tho.  273. 
Batton,  Ashwell  280,  386. 
Batty,  Wm.  351. 
Baty,  Barbery  454. 
Baucomble,  Peter  562. 
Bauford,  Jno.  562. 
Baugh,  John  64,  87,  88,  110,  111,  137, 

157,  192,  352,  516,  Wm.  549. 
Baughan,  James  366. 
Bauldin,  Chas.  516,  Tho.  476,  Wm.  545. 
Bauldry,  Robt.  259. 
Bauldwin,    Eliza.    282,    Jno.    338,    Tho. 

282,  468,  Wm.  263,  264. 
Baulf,  Oliver  319. 
Baulk,  Wm.  116,  125. 
Baulke,  Thos.  137. 
Bauston,  Jane  405. 
Bausworth,  Mary  251. 
Baven,  Richd.  194,  286. 
Bavin,  Mary  244. 
Bawcocke,  Tho.  135. 
Bawd,  Mary  457,  458,  Tho.  476,  Wm. 

457. 
Bawd  on,  Jno.  528. 
Baxter,  Elianor  139,  Francis  228,  Hen. 

298,    367,    Jane   39,    87,   James    300, 

John    214,    Martin    431,    Mary    384, 

Nathl.    567,    Richd.    99,    Thos.    311, 

Wm.  40,  180. 
Baxton,  Peter  465,  483,  Tho.  428. 
Bay,  John  129. 


General  Index 


587 


BAYS: 

(Note:   Space  does  not  permit  giving 
variations  of  spelling.) 

Appomattock    157,    192;   Ashleys   72. 

Bicknes  19;  Breckneck  197;  Browne's 
86,  131,  166,  172,  279,  337,  345, 
417,  560. 

Chechqeroes  89;  Chesepeiacke  7,  10, 
11,  12,  13,  14,  37,  131,  141,  202, 
261,  327,  417,  419,  456,  503,  524. 

Chesopean  22,  48,  71,  88,  96,  112, 
127,  464. 

Clifts  408,  437. 

Conn ow oman  219,  252. 

Corotoman  200. 

Fleete's  194,  213,  223,  238,  259,  263, 
289,  297,  343,  355,  357,  382,  436, 
437,  441,  505. 

Lower  126,  148. 

Magaty  35,  43,  55,  68,  134,  331,  374. 

Milford  Haven  141,  417. 

Mockjack-Mobjack  126,  131,  132,  135, 
136,  141,  142,  146,  147,  148,  150, 
159,  178,  182,  184,  193,  195,  200, 
203,  204,  208,  212,  213,  214,  216, 
217,  218,  219,  222,  223,  227,  229, 
232,  233,  234,  238,  243,  247,  250, 
251,  253,  258,  261,  262,  263,  265, 
267,  268,  272,  273,  274,  277,  278, 
279,  283,  289,  290,  292,  301,  306, 
328,  331,  337,  339,  343,  345,  356, 
365,  386,  391,  398,  402,  416,  417, 
421,  462,  485,  486,  490,  499,  527, 
532,  534,  536,  548,  550,  551,  553. 

Mounts  105. 

Mount  Lawson  151,  154,  156. 

Nanzemund  26. 

Nomany  189,  198,  219,  319,  375, 
397,  442,  520,  523,  546. 

Pagan    166,    Pagan    Point    62,    150, 

Pagan  Shoare  121. 

Peankatanck   132,    135. 

Phillips  256,  457. 

Pinye  113. 

Pipscoes   104. 

Purton  545. 

Pyanck  266,   281. 

Rappahannock  141. 

Sandy  50. 

Smiths  268,  464. 

)Stengray-Stingraye  24,   141,  417. 

Swann  45,  86,  159,  171,  195,  211, 
216,  277,  354. 

Tompson,  51. 

Warrasquiake  147. 
Bayant,  John  29. 


Bayard,  Susan  184. 

Baycock,  Wm.  181. 

Bayer,  Andrew  463. 

Bayford,  Hanna  116. 

Bayle,  Edw.  273,  Thos.  93. 

Bayles,  James  264,  John  144,  178,  360, 
Tho.  376,  421. 

Bayley,  Eliz.  95,  Jane  278,  John  154, 
298,  Mary  143,  Pall  372,  Paul  373, 
Richd.  217,  249,  386,  Robt.  286, 
Temp.  266,  Tho.  127,  160,  269,  273, 
Wm.  250,  456. 

Baylie,  John  131,  Tho.  26. 

Bayly,  Ann  543,  Arthur  78,  79,  86,  97, 
121,  447,  471,  Clemt.  513,  Eliz.  180, 
Ester  455,  Geo.  499,  507,  Henry  208, 
566,  James  108,  430,  Joane  44,  John 
131,  143,  144,  364,  488,  Jone  117, 
Joseph  460,  Lewis  10,  Luke  375, 
Margt.  120,  Mary  12,  109,  427,  488, 
Paul  433,  Peter  23,  66,  Phillip  367, 
Rebecca  74,  150,  Richd.  94,  102,  147, 
150,  184,  208,  223,  339,  414,  Robt. 
179,  330,  338,  397,  414,  433,  464, 
477,  506,  Tho.  175,  241,  305,  324, 
342,  426,  462,  Wm.  25,  32,  305,  306. 

Baylye,  Henry  55,  John  88,  197,  Mary 
194,  197,  Richd.  99,  Tho.  61,  197. 

Baymond,  Rob.  352. 

Baymun,  Geo.  467. 

Bayne,  Walter,  62. 

Baynebridge,  Tho.  201. 

Bayneham,  John  72. 

Baynham,  Alex.  501,  Jno.  401,  Mary 
149,  Robt.  489. 

Baynom,  John   149. 

Baytes,  John  206,  Peter  136. 

Baywell,  Tho.  32. 

Bayworth,  John  267. 

Bea,   Christo.    115. 

Beach,  Ann  313,  Judeth  447,  Roger  443, 
Stephen  116,  Wm.  297,  531,  546. 

Beacham,  Robt.  238. 

Beachamp,  John  432,  513,  Mary  373. 

Beachill,  Geo.  279. 

Beachly,  Geo.  272. 

Bead,  Wm.  440,  461. 

Beadell,  John  54,  Mary  259. 

Beadle,  Jon.  54,  Phillip  253,  257,  Rich. 
474,  Rob.  338,  Tho.  491,  Wm.  204. 

Beadly,  Henry  171. 

Beadman,  Eliz.  204. 

Beagles,  Tho.  355. 

Beale,  Mr.  232,  469,  Edw.  538,  Eliza. 
205,  John  135,  446,  Humph.  538. 
Lyonell  208,  Mathew  484,  Susan  81, 
Tho.  351,  375,  355,  555,  Wm.  253. 


588 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Beall,  Robt.  501. 

Beaman,  Rowland  443. 

Beamast,  James  272. 

Beamond,  Row.  275,  Wm.  479. 

Beamont,  John  259,  Wm.  311. 

Beams,  Arnold  455. 

Bean,  Theodus  451. 

Beane,  Danl.  306,  Stephen  103,  123. 

Beaner,  Mathew  91. 

Beanstead,  Mary  63,  Tho.  63. 

Beansteed,  Tho.  50. 

Beard,  Joane  28,  83,  Jon.  80,  John  290, 

300,  446,  468    530,  Mary  171,  Robt. 

199,  200,  Wm.  28,   78,  82,  83,   108, 

116. 
Beardsby,  Hen.  538. 
Beardsly,  Hen.  538. 
Beardsty,  Eliz.  67. 
Beardwell,  Tho.  334. 
Beare,  Ann  388,  Christ.  65,  James  375, 

John  525    Wm.  171. 
Bearecraft,  Jno.  454. 
Bearin,  Jno.  431. 
Bearls,  Jno.  462. 
Bearley,  Job  309. 
Bearly,  Job  318. 
Bearne,  Dermock,  325,  Jon.  68. 
Beartine,  Wm.  265. 
Bearts,  Jno.  462. 
Beasly,  Geo.  276,  Wm.  367. 
Beast,  Mary  Richd.,  Thos.  47. 
Beatall,  Robert  77. 
Beate,  Wm.  204. 
Beates,  Wm.  55. 
Beauford,  John  438. 
Beaumond,  Peter  200. 
Beaushampe,  Mary  259. 
Beaver,  Mathew  91. 
Beavis,  Mathew  563. 
Beaw,  Danl.  310,  Robt.  106. 
Beawmon,  Rowland  315. 
Bebee,  John  106. 
Bebey,    Edmond    286,   John    238,    265, 

302,  320,  324,  397, 
Bech,  Jos.  27. 

Becham,  Jno.  363,  Wm.  127. 
Bechington,  Abram.  560. 
Beck,  Edw.  250,  James  218,  Richd.  114, 

Wm.  547.  _ 
Becker,  Martin  174. 
Beckett,  John  290,  Tytus  279- 
Beckweth,  Jarret  51. 
Beckwith,  Lewis  348. 
Beddins,  Edw.  219. 
Beddus,  Tho.  208. 
Bedell,  Gertrude  142. 
Bedford,  Jane  110,  Robt.  552. 


Bedham,  Wm.  267,  333. 

Bedicant,  Jane  341. 

Bedlam,  Wm.  198,  246,  285,  364. 

Bedwell,  Eliz.  475,  Robt.  503,  506. 

Bee,  James  218. 

Beech,  John  200. 

Beeches,  Wm.  334. 

Beede,  Tho.   138. 

Beedham,  Rich.   102. 

Beedle,  Ailce  201,  Edw.  300,  Tho.  144. 

Beedman,  Robt.   199. 

Beeke,  Thomas  102. 

Beffen,  Tho.  119. 

Baffin,  Tho.  427. 

Begg,  John  564. 

Beggars  Bush  68,  93. 

Beggon,  Tho.  327. 

Behanon,  Quinton  481. 

Behethland,  Dorothy  95. 

Beife,  John  192. 

Beiford,  Ann  559. 

Bein,  Sara  451. 

Belcher,  Tho.  69,  444,  Walt.  158,  223, 
Wm.  307. 

Beldam,  Jon.  79. 

Belfe,  Joyce  562. 

Bell,  Alexr.  302,  Andrew  401,  Antho. 
380,  Christian  193,  Edm.  538,  Fra. 
517,  Geo.  86,  191,  Gervas  392,  Henry 
536,  Hump.  49,  518,  Isaak  403,  Jane 
348,  Javis,  154,  John  91,  95,  100, 
114,  117,  141,  172,  179,  187,  199, 
216,  254,  278,  302,  308,  313,  373, 
506,  Margt.  351,  Mary  394,  Nath.  475, 
Peeter  278,  Richd.  29,  58,  99,  103,  116, 
117,  123,  141,  146,  151,  173,  176, 
201,  212,  215,  243,  415,  Roger  351, 
493,  Susan  201,  530,  Tho.  82,  198, 
210,  211,  231,  232,  272,  296,  315, 
317,  337,  338,  347,  348,  353,  356, 
357,  369,  386,  397,  399,  401,  412, 
413,  441,  454,  508,  520,  555,  Wm. 
25,   129,   196. 

Bellimer,  Ann  446. 

Bellowes,  Tho.  26. 

Belly,  James  23. 

Bellamy,  Henry  359. 

Bellarke,  Andrew  388. 

Bellew,  Wm.  221,   302,  559,  Col.  275. 

Bellfinn,  Robt.  377. 

Belling,  Henry  223. 

Belloe,  Mary  256. 

Belmon,  Robt.  220. 

Belois,  Thomas  554. 

Belsome,  Ann  58. 

Belson,  John  245,  307,  Mary  427. 

Belt,  Humph.  274,  289,  507,  302,  544. 


General  Index 


589 


Belthar,  An  558. 

Belver,  Bevis  149. 

Bemberry,  John  164. 

Bembow,  Eliz.  566. 

Bembricke,  John  111.  , 

Bembridge,  Eliz.  138,  501,  Hen.  138, 
John  4,  Tho.  78,  Wm.  95. 

Bemon,  Michaell  209. 

Bemrose,  Tho.  216,  270. 

Benaden,  Wm.  397. 

Benbow,  Ann  259,  349. 

Benbridge,  Stephen  467. 

Bence,  Jno.  247,  291. 

Benchamp,  Mary  198. 

Bendall,  Jeremiah  293. 

Benett,  Tymothy  432. 

Benfor,  Mary  358. 

Benford,  Antho.  565,  Sam.  199. 

Benge,  Wm.  285. 

Bengoe,  Wm.  517. 

Benhowe,  Ann  338. 

Benigham,  Cunny  546. 

Benington,  Jon.  134. 

Benison,  Ellis  335. 

Benjamin,  Wm.  441,  459. 

Benjon,  John  204. 

Benley,  Wm.  223. 

Benleye,  Tho.  286. 

Benn,  Stephen  62. 

Benne,  Richd.  265. 

Bennell,  Eliza.  277. 

Bennes,  Ann  294,  Geo.  223. 

Bennet,  Bennet  259,  Eliz.  228,  John 
182,  228,  483,  Mary  181,  Mathy.  327, 
Peter  440,  Phil.  167,  177,  232,  241, 
Richd.  167,  168,  Robt.  162,  177,  230, 
243,  Mr.  378. 

Bennett,  Alice  140,  Ambrose  23,  66,  82, 
98,  125,  143,  365,  Christo.  282,  David 
207,  Edw.  291,  444,  459,  Eliz.  28,  76, 
204,  442,  Francis  450,  Gilbert  43, 
Gov'r.  313,  Hannah  116,  Henry  208, 
386,  Hester  450,  543,  Joane  39,  Jon. 
29,  John  76,  79,  121,  211,  220,  221, 
245,  272,  277,  301,  315,  337,  361, 
366,  367,  379,  380,  387,  401,  429, 
441,  457,  460,  474,  487,  520,  536, 
560,  Jone  367,  Joseph  348,  449, 
Marie  23,  Mary  302,  399,  523, 
Maselin  192,  Maudlin  134,  Morris 
82,  Nich.  34,  Phillip  150,  162,  Rich- 
ard 23,  37,  45,  48,  56,  66,  88,  104, 
108,  109,  128,  131,  135,  136,  139, 
141,  145,  150,  191,  196,  247,  256, 
306,  372,  385,  476,  Robt.  21,  23,  36, 
66,  80,  85,  101,  304,  400,  561,  Saml. 
19,  32,  34,  38,  57,  79,  92,  116,  193, 


Sarah  140,  Susan  357,  434,  Thomas 
45,  66,  Widow  130,  134,  155,  Wm. 
23,  433. 

Bennison,  Eliza.  172. 

Bennitt,  Mathew  454. 

Benns,  Hen.  428. 

Benny,  Joseph  206. 

Bensly,  Christian  363. 

Benson,  Cutbert  308,  Edmond  358,  Eliz. 
199,  Ellis  335,  Henry  381,  490,  John 
204,  Stephen  267,  Thomas  355,  Wm. 
375,  406. 

Benstead,  Math.  208. 

Bensteed,  Mary  51,  Thomas  50. 

Bent,  Wm.  455. 

Bentall,  Robert  53,  Jos.  538. 

Bentleg,  Wm.  112. 

Bentley,  Eliz.  310,  Henry  202,  Wm.  5, 
112,  159,  420. 

Bently,  Eliza.  37,  Hen.  93,  Jane  250, 
Richd.  455. 

Benton,  Abigail  137,  Alice  137,  George 
434,  Isabell  137,  Joane  137,  John 
137,  141,  177,  196,  235,  288,  332, 
362,  446,  Tho.  30,  199. 

Benum,  Alex.  432,  447. 

Beoan,  David  294. 

Bereman,  Edw.  156. 

Berford,  Ann  559. 

Beringe,  John  275. 

Berkeley,  Francis  373,  Henry  206,  Wil- 
liam 27,  54,  115,  119,  128,  155,  156, 
160,  165,  177,  215,  229,  230,  231, 
243,  246,  338,  340,  353,  364,  377, 
389,  390,  391,  392,  393,  401,  402, 
403,  404,  410,  414,  415,  419,  465, 
487,  490,  504,  507,  524,. 

Berkeley,  Sir  Wm.,  absence  from  Colony 
504. 

Berker,  Tho.  265. 

Berkert,  James  548. 

Berkin,  Eliz.  524. 

Berkly,  Isaack  449. 

Bernard,  Anna  211,  Ann  304,  417, 
Richd.  211,  Stephen  22,  Thomas  67, 
93,  127,  159,  Wm.  220,  390,  455. 

Bernes,  Richd.   165. 

Berreman,  John  294. 

Berrick,  Wm.  212. 

Berrie,  Wm.  231. 

Berriman,  Jno.  538,  Wm.  30,  171,  217. 

Berryman,  Wm.  43,  101,  112,  152,  170, 
359. 

Berry,  Ailce  202,  Andrew  335,  Ann  370, 
481,  Arthur  520,  Danll.  233,  Edw. 
525,  Eliz.  43,  68,  Eppy  293,  Francis 
148,  Geo.  378,  Henry  196,  325,  341, 


590 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


431,  440,  442,  481,  508,  Hugh  429, 
James  43,  68,  90,  131,  374,  John  140, 
358,  442,  530,  Lydia  178,  Mary  358, 
Mathew  201,  Robt.  129,  452,  492, 
Susan  465,  483,  Tho.  354,  Wm.  49, 
61,  103,  565. 

Berrye,  Nicholas  47. 

Bersey,  Jon.  134. 

Bertholomew,  Hen.  166. 

Berton,  Wm.  164. 

Bertram,  Jno.  208. 

Berwick,  John  433,  Tho.  475,  Wm.  176. 

Besairdier  Peter  124,  Reenee  124. 

Besaker,  Edward  93. 

Besley,  Walter  129. 

Besouth,  James  144,  234,  246,  247, 
Saml.  144. 

Besse,  Edw.  215,  317,  Wm.  273. 

Bessely,  Peter  41. 

Bessen,  Tho.  119. 

Besson,  Tho.  97. 

Bessett,  James  472,  Wm.  95. 

Best,  Christian  181,  Geo.  114,  John  126, 
455,  Mary  126,  530,  Penelope  359, 
Roger  493,  Tho.  126,  173,  271,  297, 
329,  Wm.  146,  208,  Mr.  479. 

Bestland,  506,  a  placed  called. 

Bestwicke,  Attwell  156,  Edward  68. 

Bestye,  Walter  450. 

Betchman,  Tho.  403. 

Bethell,  Wm.  249,  308. 

Bethone,  Jon.  60. 

Betsanger,  100,  a  placed  called. 

Bett,  Humphry  544,  Robt.  242. 

Bettford,  Tho.  502. 

Betts,  Henry  404,  John  300,  Wm.  219, 
309,  398,  461,  463,  531. 

Beuchamp,  Mary  198. 

Beuford,  Sam.  199. 

Beullitably,  Haveha  134. 

Beven,  Nicho.  201. 

Beverly,  Jno.  525,  Robt.  555,  Wm.  552. 

Beverley,  R.  226,  320. 

Bevington,  Jno.  356. 

Bevis,  Eliz.  303. 

Bevlin,  Wm.  370. 

Bew,  Jeffery  251,  262,  302,  367,  417, 
473,  505,  Richd.  312,  Robt.  102,  125. 

Bewly,  Ambrose   140. 

Bibbey,  Edw.  482,  Edmd.  294. 

Biby,  John  194. 

Bibby,  Mary  44,  Wm.  43. 

Bibion,  Hu?h  385. 

Bick,  Fr.  42,  91,  Richd.  91. 

Bicker,  Ficlor,  Garrott,  Katherine,  John 
360. 

Bickford,  Samll.  538. 


Bicking,  Capt.  128. 

Bickley,  Tho.  455. 

Biddo,  Christo.  206. 

Bide,  John  180,  281. 

Biddle,  Jno.  522. 

Bidolph,  Rich.  353. 

Biffeild,  Christo.  127,  Sarah  127. 

Bigg,     Elinor     178,    Johan     247,     275, 

Josuah  311. 
Biggs,  Francis  93,  Henry  189,  218,  224, 

298,   525,   546,   555,   562,  John  311, 

446,    565,   Marg.    312,   485,  Millison 

261,  Rich.  82,  189,  Robt.  349,  Thos. 

202,  273,  432,  434. 
Bigin,  Thomas  364. 
Biggens,  Law.  228. 
Bighill,  John  166. 
Bigly,  Wm.  451,  463. 
Bignall,  Fra.  306,  Rich.  374. 
Bignes,  Tho.  517. 
Bigney,  Ann  449. 
Bikers,  land  called  70,  137. 
Biker,  Ann  584. 
Bilbev,  Jon.  166. 
Bilbie,  Margaret  22. 
Bilbrough,  Wm.  204. 
Bilby,  Wm.  53,  201. 
Bilcliffe,  Richdi.  77. 
Bill,  Henrv  452,  Walter  52,  84,  Winck- 

field  196. 
Billahea,  Neale  135. 
Billan,  Mary  97. 
Billany,  Hen.  390. 
Billbrough,  Wm.  61. 
Billett,  Jno.  464. 
Billin,  Michaell  134. 
Billing,  Eliz.  262. 
Billings,  Eliza.  220,  Jon.  54. 
Billins,  John  122,  242. 
Billinsley,    Eliz.    568,    Tho.    192,    Wm. 

192,  396. 
Billington,  Luke  296,  459,  464. 
Billiott,  Jno.  338,  John  413. 
Billips,  George  320,  368,  377,  421,  473, 

488,  564,  Tho.  500. 
Billops,  Geo.  227,  267,  272,  419. 
Billson,  Stafford  360. 
Billups,  Geo.  251. 
Bilsbrough,  Wm.  232. 
Bilson,  Stacord  282. 
Bincks,  Jno.  324. 
Bind,  Mary  263. 
Bing,  Jon.  37. 
Binge,  Joan  303. 
Bingley,  Mary  388. 
Bingly,  Wm.  359,  390. 
Binias,  John  279. 


General  Index 


591 


Binion,  Chas.  215,  Gabll.  254,  John  318. 

Bining,  Andrew  408. 

Binks,  Jon.  232. 

Binns,  Tho.  231,  340. 

Binniton,  Tho.  195. 

Binsteed,  John  136. 

Bira,  Win,  202. 

Biram,  Thomas  339. 

Birch,  Benj.  505,  Geo.  85,  Jno.  548, 
Mary  403,  466,  Walter  546,  Wm. 
541. 

Bircher,  Geo.  183,  John  259. 

Birchett,  Richard  6. 

Bird,  Alice  276,  Ashwell  141,  Edw.  454, 
Ellinor  504,  Ja.  375,  468,  Jno.  373, 
428,  502,  504,  Rich.  23,  52,  66,  138, 
339,  Robt.  192,  376,  Rose  493,  Susan 
128,  Tho.  345,  Walter  351,  Wm.  32, 
250,  328,  Mr.  200,  559,  560,  563, 

Birdick,  Richard  552. 

Birditt,  Wm.  550. 

Birge,  Jon.  525. 

Birke,  Edw.  433,  John  369. 

Birkenhead,  Wm.  256. 

Birkett,  Jno.  205. 

Birkhead,  Joseph  440. 

Birth,  Roger  307. 

Biscoe,  Mathew  144. 

Bisfeild,  Christo.  127. 

Bish,  Robt.  454. 

Bishell,  Fra.  215. 

Bishop,  Chas.  455,  Cyprian  308,  Doro- 
thy 185,  Eliz.  216,  Ferdinando  148, 
Henry  165,  184,  275,  452,  517,  John 
98,  105,  128,  129,  148,  180,  192, 
216,  218,  220,  231,  281,  353,  367, 
498;  Mary  216,  Oliver  40,  68,  Pru- 
dence 430,  Richd.  543,  Sarah  430, 
Tho.  369,  Wm.  125,  Walter  151, 
Capt.  354,  Mr.  268,  340. 

Bishop,  the  323. 

Bisley,  Frans.  37,  66,  Wm.  143. 

Bisole,  James  171. 

Bissill,  James   171. 

Bitch,  Geo.  481. 

Bittle,  Fra.  228. 

Bivins,  Margt.  l4l. 

Blachard,  John  198. 

Black,  Bridg.  422,  ..aw.  80,  Eliz.  180, 
Francis  120,  448,  John  182,  280,  341, 
Martha  525,  Robt.  217,  428,  Tho. 
386,  Wm.  171,  355. 

Blackborne,   John   244,    326,   Tho.   343. 

Blackbourne,  John  286. 

Blackburne,  Eliz.  367,  Edw.  491,  John 
129. 

Blacker,  Eliza.  83,  187. 


Blackford,  Mary  186,  195,  Wm.  438. 

Blackgrove,  Miles  281. 

Blackhan,  Alex.  256. 

Blackhaws,  Saunders  130. 

Blackey,  Eliza.  169,  Wm.  169,  257,  258, 
310,  342,  359,  387,  409,  410,  422. 

Blackin,  Wm.  258. 

Blackleech,  Sarah  453. 

Blacklock,  Tho.  327. 

Blackly,  Eliz.  37. 

Blackman,  Eliza.  177,  Humphry  97, 
185,  James  460,  Jeremiah  53,  103, 
231,  447,  451,  Jeremy  164,  Mary 
432,  Phillis,  113,  Wm.  243,  493. 

Blackmore,  Charles  361. 

Blackshaw,  John  411. 

Blackston,  Tho.   138. 

Blackstone,  Jon.  28. 

Black  Water  147,   162,   171,   176,   183, 

192,  204,  233,  261,  278,  280,  303,  309, 
334,  386,  433,  457,  478,  485,  493, 
499,  509,  511,  516,  518,  524,  525, 
538,  556,  558,  559. 

Blackwell,  Andrew  104,  Hannah  337, 
Roger  39. 

Blacock,  Patrick  23. 

Blade,  Timothy  304,  Walter  373. 

Blades,  John  267,  Wm.  267,  332. 

Bladwell,  Rich.  388. 

Blagg,  David  315,  John  208,  Ralph  546, 
Tho.  207,  242,  291,  400,  486,  510, 
546,. 

Blagrave,  Fra.  488,  Henry  283,  Jno.  547. 

Blaiton,  Joseph  223. 

Blake,  Anne  286,  Edw.  36,  Eliz.  434, 
George  543,  James  311,  John  253, 
280,  358,  443,  444,  454,  492,  Mary 
271,  Robt.  197,  419,  Tho.  359,  457, 
493,  Walter  66,  290,  Wm.  280,  492. 

Blakin,  Ralph  123. 

Blakinsop,  Henry  254. 

Blanch,  Roger  78,  Tho.  171,  469,  513. 

Blancher,  Tho.  81,  366. 

Blanchernell,   Charles   331. 

Blanchett,  Eliza.  190,  199. 

Blancke,  Tho.  284. 

Blancks,  Thomas  65. 

Bland,  Edw.  42,  91,  160,  171,  175,  277, 
279,  514,  Eliza.  171,  Fran.  296,  Fran- 
cis 556,  Ja.  171,  Jane  277,  John  341, 
342,  421,  Mary  229,  444,  Mr.  283, 
Perregrin  132,  142,  221,  416,  Richd. 
226,  Tho.  444,  547. 

Blandon,  Ann  362,  435,  444. 

Blane,  Edw.   187. 

Blankes,  Georg  117,  Henry  535,  Rich- 
ard 535. 


592 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Blaney,  Edward  10. 

Blany,  Francis  316,  James  292. 

Blare,  Tho.  391,  Wm.  148. 

Blarke,  Andrew  333. 

Blarte,  Andrew  388. 

Blatt,  Tho.  142. 

Blay,  Eliz.  348,  John  291. 

Blaye,  Jno.  405,  Wm.  44. 

Blayes,  Robt.  456. 

Blayton,  Joseph  479. 

Blaze,  Gloys  357,  Wm.  410,  448. 

Bleach,  Ann  426. 

Blear,  Saml.  146. 

Blease,  Wm.  370. 

Blech,  Wm.  427. 

Blend,  John  169. 

Blesse,  James  65. 

Blessinge,  Ralph  378,  389. 

Blete,  Jno.  427. 

Blething,  Peter  501. 

Blettinge,  Ralph  389. 

Bletsoe,  Wm.  115. 

Blettsoe,  \vm.  152. 

Bletstowe,  Mathew  128. 

Blevin,  Winifred  464. 

Blew,  Edw.  136. 

Blewitt,  Bennett  37,  Elizabeth  37,  Mar- 
gery 300. 

Blidenburd,  Augustine  397. 

Blight,  Jacob  74. 

Blinde,  Jane  360. 

Blingston,  Wm.  261. 

Blinkenson,  Robt.  454. 

Blith,  Mary  218. 

Blithe,  James  82. 

Blitheberd,  Augustine  389. 

Blithenberge,  Augustine  389. 

Blithenbird,  Augustine  495. 

Blittle,  Tho.  233. 

Blitto,  John  218. 

Blive,  Mary  218. 

Bloare,  John  23. 

Blockhouse,  the  3,  154. 

Blockhowse  Feild,  the  3. 

Bloie,  Henry  453. 

Bloir,  Henry  453. 

Blome,  Batho.  252. 

Blood,  Anth.  464. 

Bloodstone,  Mary  282. 

Blore,  Eliza.  249,  John  13,  159,  Wm. 
20. 

Blosse,  John  386. 

Blowe,  Georg  101,  508,  John  2,  200. 

Blower,  Geo.  242,  Wm.  53,  73. 

Bloyce,  246,  379,  Plantation 

of,  319,  400. 

Bloys,  Fra.  502,  Gloyd  89. 


Bloyse,  Tho.  44. 

Blucke,  Wm.  501. 

Blucknett,  Thomas  315. 

Blumfield,  Kath.  260. 

Blundell,  Henry  552. 

Blunder,  Mary  349. 

Bluney,  Jane  350. 

Blunt,    Doro.    498,    Edw.    245,    Gilbert 

258,   320,   329,  Jon.  239,  Mary  444, 

Rich.  427,  Tho.  280,  Wm.  292,  Mr. 

277,  312,  396. 
Blunter,  John  99. 

Blyth,  Jone  258,  Mary  212,  Wm.  258. 
Bly,  Mary  237. 
Boane,  Robt.  266,  Tho.  332. 
Boaraham,  Geo.  455. 
Board,  John  149,  Tho.  259. 
Boardman,  Jon.  244,  Osmond  179. 
Boare,  Tho.  281,  332. 
Boarham,  John  244. 
Boarne,  John  49,  Joseph  85. 
Boate,  Georg  52,  97,  Henry  114. 
Boaten,  Marg.  390. 
Boaton,  Thomas  89. 
Bochen,  Tho.  463. 
Bocke,  Jeffery  469,  Wm.  546. 
Boddicutt,  Robert  61. 
Bodella,  Jacminta  452. 
Bodely,  Arthur  137. 
Bodin,  John  22. 
Boddin,  Mary  553. 
Bodman,  Andrew  104. 
Bodney,  Edw.  138. 
Body,  Ann  476,  Mary  476,  Robert  179, 

Thomas  51,  Wm.  393,  475,  476. 
Bodye,  Antho.  129,  Mr.  476. 
Boein,  John  201. 
Boerer,  Ralph  311. 
Bog,  Mary  475. 

Boggis,  John,  Mary,  Robert  338. 
Boggus,  Henry  494,  545. 
Bohonnett,  Patrick  125. 
Boice,  Cheney  329,  Wm.  455. 
Boict,  Saml.  245. 
Boid,  John  150. 
Boke.  Martin,  161,  Robt.  410. 
Bolden,  Thomas  10,  26,  117. 
Bolding,  Thomas  71,  80. 
Boldridge,  James,  Thomas  432. 
Boles,  Euge.  58,  John  280,  Thomas  337. 
Bolewell,  Robt.  189. 
Bolfe,  Oliver  496. 
Bollwell,  Robt.  189. 
Boloe,  Leon.  42. 
Bolt,  Jane  366. 
Bolton,  Francis  16,  Gab.  352,  John  256, 

391,  399,  437,  Jone  35,  69,  Marga. 


General  Index 


593 


260,  Richd.  159,  235,  Wm.  209,  288. 
Boltrop,  Wm.  471. 
Bolware,  Wm.  472. 
Boman,  Grace  211,  Sarah  211. 

Bompas,  393. 

Bonall,    James    11,    18,    20,    John    11, 

Mr.  47. 
Bonam,  Samll.  237,  325,  532,  537. 
Bonas,  John  293. 
Bond,   Capt.    314,   471,    Edw.    69,    200, 

Eliz.  327,  338,  Degery  84,  Henry  220, 

Jacob   517,  Jon.   73,  John   101,    192, 

433,  459,  512,  530,  Nicho.  141,  389, 

Richd.  209,  Sarah  142,  Thomas  318, 

Wm.  403,  520. 
Bonden,  Eliz.  362. 

Bone,  Jane  472,  Thomas  548,  Wm.  143. 
Boner,  James  304. 
Bonering,  John  220. 
Bones,  Xph.  323. 
Boney,  Henry  65. 
Boniday,  Wm.  166, 
Bonison,  Eppy.  289,  297,  436,  437. 
Bonman,  Samll.  421. 
Bonnall,  John  303. 
Bonne,  Eliz.  28. 
Bonner,  And.  194,  James  249,  253,  289, 

319,  461,  497,   515,  John  98,  Henry 

451,  Mary  523,  Richd.   145,  Thomas 

100,  172,  248. 
Bonnes,  Robt.  385. 
Bonney,  Henry  47. 
Bonnison,  Eppy.  355. 
Bonnor,  James  319. 
Bonny,  Andry.  271,  Andrew  358. 
Bony,  Henry  143,  Susanna  57. 
Bonyson,    Abya.    396,    521,    Eppy.    437, 

438. 

Boocock,  Jno.  537. 

Boodes,  John  59. 

Boods,  John  35. 

Booes,  Wm.  250. 

Booker,  Eliz.  378,  Marg.  246,  304,  Mary 

246,  249,  304,  Robt.  566,  Tho.  515. 
Bookwood,  John  276. 
Booles,  Jno.  526. 
Boone,  Geo.  274,  James  552,  Mar.  264, 

Mary    257,    Tho.     506,     Wm.     134, 

iXtopher.  250. 
Boones,  Giles  454. 
Boore,   Christo.   304,   Geo.   274,   Richd. 

153. 
Boorum,  John  416. 
Boory,  Xph.  293. 
Boote,  Joane  277,  Tho.  396. 
Booth,  Eliza.  172,  Humphrey  345,  397, 

408,   481,   John   183,   221,   225,   Jon. 


135,  Mr.  433,  Mary  176,  Robt.  95. 
Boothe,  Mr.  284. 
Boothes,  Abr.  167. 
Bootwright,  John  303. 
Booze,  Christo.  480,  Xpher.  299. 
Boran,  Jon.  35. 
Boras,  Rachell  548. 
Bord,  Robt.  293. 
Borden,  Robt.  276. 
Border,  Robt.  253,  293. 
Bordin,  Geo.  225. 
Bordman,  Jon.  40,  63. 
Bore,  Anne  220,  Hen.  296. 
Boren,  Wm.  563. 
Boreman,  Eliza.  112,  Wm.  213. 
Borer,  Georg  56. 
Borham,  Wm.  563. 
Borke,  Tobias  25, 
Borley,  Antho.  286. 
Borne,   An.   431,   Tho.   178,   377,   Wm. 

134. 
Bornett,  Dorothy  104. 
Boron,  Jno.  519. 
Borroughs,  Mat.  439. 
Borrows,  Thomas  313. 
Borrowes,  Mathew  316. 
Borum,  John  4l6. 
Borwell,  Ann  305. 
Bory,  Robt.  355. 
Bosaker,  Edw.  49. 
Boseman,  Ambrose  433. 
Boshoe,  John  186. 
Bosman,  Symon  184,  Wm.  185. 
Bosse,  Edward  215. 
Bostocke,  Eliz.  238. 
Bostock,  Jonathan  293. 
Boston,  Elizabeth  337,  553,  Henry  200, 

Margt.   349. 
Boswell,  Anne  325,  Eliz.  201,  Edw.  245, 

247,    257,    269,    329,   432,   495,   497, 

Henry  358,  John  247,  277,  538,  Marth 

324,  Samll.  201,  Tho.  171,  247,  324, 

337,    339,    345,    388,   417,   421,    568, 

Mr.  223,  533. 
Bosswell,  Thos.  171. 
Bosworth,  Hen.  362. 
Botcham,  Nicho.  250. 
Botham,  Wm.  325,  360. 
Bott,  Jon.  244,  Robt.  342,  415. 
Bottock,  Ralph  282. 

Bottomly,  Dorothy  218,  224,  John  255. 
Bouce,  James  245. 
Bouch,  Jno.  451,  Rob.  292. 
Boucher,  Andrew  201,  Danl.  303,  322, 

478,  Geo.  287,  Jno.  549,  Sa.  476,  Mr. 

556. 


594 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Bouey,  Henry  65. 

Bough,  Wm.  476. 

Boughton  Tho.  107,  113,  Wm.  390. 

Bouldin,  Mary  6,  Thomas  6. 

Boule,  Symon  207. 

Boules,  John  131. 

Boulin,  Wm.  370. 

Boulding,  Thos.  21,  22,  24,  98,  116, 
126,  151,  155. 

Boult,  Geo.  250. 

Boulton,  Ann  23,  Edmond  562,  Henry 
378,  Richd.  5,  Tho.  197. 

Bound,  Elianor  68. 

Bourn,  Tho.  248. 

Bourne,  Benja.  199,  273,  Edw.  375,  Fr. 
463,  Henry  183,  184,  James  315,  John 
69,  Joseph  88,  323,  Mary  493,  Mr. 
288,  Robt.  167,  324,  347,  381,  Tho. 
101,  178,  187,  211,  214,  248,  254, 
283,  303,  448,  Wm.  388,  477. 

Bourney,  Jno.  547. 

Bournham,  Tho.  184. 

Bournie,  Joseph  323. 

Bouth,Robt.  114,179,270,276,  277,  278. 

Boutracle,  Thomas  414. 

Bouy,  Susanna  57. 

Bow,  Wm.  61. 

Bowden,  Jane  231,  Jno.  538,  Phillip  164. 

Bowdge,  Edw.  484. 

Bowe,  Joseph  269. 

Bowen,  Morris  93,  Phillip  146,  Saml. 
146. 

Bowene,  Robt.  479. 

Bower,  Henry  80. 

Bowers,  Jonas  78,  Robt.  301,  501,  Xph. 
323. 

Bowes,  Christo.  345,  Jno.  554. 

Bowin,  Eliz.  185,  Fran.  567,  568,  Hugh 
393,  Jno.  454,  567,  568,  Mary  567, 
568,  Robt.  567,Rebecca  568. 

Bowinge,  John  338. 

Bowland,  Jno.  196. 

Bowler,  Jno.  546,  Tho.  322,  389,  Wm. 
109. 

Bowles,  Ann  318,  Edw.  121,  209,  288, 
Geo.  43,  James  252,  316,  352,  John 
57,  124,  212,  497,  499,  566,  Ral. 
426,  Tho.  308. 

Bowlewar,  Wm.  523. 

Bowlson,  Robt.  344. 

Bowman,  Edmond  239,  314,  455,  471, 
477,  544,  Garthred  314,  Grace  389, 
James  389,  Margt.  314,  Mathew  531, 
532,  555,  Samll.  421,  Sarah  314, 
Symon  389,  Tho.  268,  391,  Walter 
144. 

Bowyen,  Wm.  369. 


Bowyer,  Chas.  454,  Eliz.  348,  Hen.  248, 

Tho.  388. 
Box,  Antho.  31,  84,  Benj.  78,  John  41, 

60,  Mary  41,  60,   89,   347,  Tho.   50, 

58,  100,  304. 
Boxford,  Tho.  220. 
Boy,  James  434,  Tho.  32. 

Boyce,  Cheyney  145,  Christo.  133,  142, 
146,  156,  157,  159,  210,  235,  281, 
373,  489,  490,  Emelia  534,  Hanah  73, 
563,  566,  524,  555,  Jno.  426,  543, 
Sarah  232,  249,  253,  475,  487,  534, 
Xtopner.  473. 

Boyd,  James  197. 

Boyer,  Andrew  22,  374,  463,  Geo.  374, 
Steph.  272,  Thomas  22,  28,  501, 
Wm.  47. 

Boyes,  Cheney  68,  Francis  206,  Hannan 

59,  John  455,  Luke  59,  Tho.  369. 
Boyle,  Ann  359. 

Boyne,  Rich.  422. 

Boys,  Chene  68,  188. 

Boyse,  Cheney  40,  68,  Christo.  33,  116, 
Hannah  40,  Luke  40,  Wm.  457. 

Boys,  Cheney  68. 

Brace,  Phill.  525,  Robt.  407,  Walter  142. 

Bracle,  Wm.  76. 

Bracewell,  Robt.  424. 

Brack,  Roger  433. 

Bracke,  James  554. 

Brackett,  Wm.   110. 

Bracks,  Roger  441. 

Bracon,  Wm.  247. 

Brad,  Walter  509. 

Bradbury,  James  464,  John  49,  200,  338. 

Bradby,  Wm.  343. 

Bradchater,  Jacob  57. 

Braddie,  Jno.  355. 

Braddy,  John  505. 

Bradfeild,  Cornelius  113. 

Bradford,  Edy  196,  John  10,  264,  530, 
Math.  259,  Nathl.  419,  425,  453, 
Nicho.  173,  Richd.  227,  Sarah  395, 
Susan  148,  Tho.  123. 

Bradfort,  Richd.  250,  Rich.  300. 

Bradie,  John  326,  465. 

Bradin,  Eliz.  100. 

Bradley,  Ann  200,  Bartho.  207,  John 
460,  Henry  118,  131,  134,  150,  160, 
164,  168,  460,  509,  Richd.  146,  Wal- 
ter 550,  Wm.  390. 

Bradlie,  Henry  118. 

Bradly,  Ann  237,  Dorothy  86,  Eliz.  78, 
Frances  84,  Francis  52,  Henry  39,  52, 
89,  461,  509,  566,  Jon.  l4l,  Jno. 
510,  Mary  566,  Robt.  443,  Toby  240, 
Wm.  295,  322. 


General  Index 


595 


Bradlye,  Henry  118. 

Bradman,  Jane  386. 

Bradmeed,  Gabriell  508. 

Bradnadge,  Tho.  263. 

Bradshall,  Hen.  155,  Robt.  495. 

Bradshaw,  Ann  487,  Bernard  193,  Hen. 
58,  490,  John  290,  342,  Richd.  144, 
Robt.  123,  220,  287,  342,  495,  Roger 
554,  Wm.  172. 

Bradshawe,  Henry  377,  Robt.  378. 

Bradshaws,  405. 

Bradshew,  John  332,  Rebecca  336,  Robt. 
351,  352. 

Bradston,  Dorothy  104,  Jon.  22,  John 
104. 

Br  ad  water,  Jacob  57. 

Bradway,  Robt.  450. 

Bradwell,  Arthur  200,  John  56,  57,  222. 

Brady,  John  243,  386,  505. 

Brae,  Walter  509,  Wm.  479. 

Bragg,  Peter  491,  Wm.  185,  204. 

Braine,  Jno.  359- 

Braithwaite,  Geo.  133. 

Brake,  Henry  184,  187. 

Brame,  Jno.  359,  Richd.  286. 

Bramham,  Richd.  531. 

Bramley,  Hugh  126,  Tho.  209. 

Bramly,  Francis  22. 

Brams,  Arnold  455. 

Bramston,  Thomas  86. 

Bran,  Theodus  451. 

Branch,  Antho.  149,  518,  543,  Christo. 
20,  36,  47,  82,  87,  99,  106,  121,  137, 
164,  John  38,  45,  90,  160,  339,  Mary 
339,  Richd.  366,  Thos.  513,  Wm. 
288.  405,  Xtopher.  447,  549. 

BRANCHES: 

Ahorecock,  385,  408. 

Arracaico,  238. 

Araykaco  256. 

Assanamayuscock,  387. 

Batchelors,  307,  Beavor  Dams,  503. 

Black    Water,    484,    Bolemans,    434, 

453. 
Broad,  482. 
Bryry,  498. 
Burchen,  511. 
Buttellers,  407. 
Cabbin,  91,  407. 

Cattail,  399,  401,  406,  452,  476,  523. 
Cedar,  329,  553. 
Chesecake,  456. 
Coales,  484,  520. 
Colemans,  296. 
Colliers,  490. 
Comistanck  566. 


Contrary  406. 

Coplins,  365. 

Cowpen,  534. 

Curratowoman  551. 

Cypruss,  287,  355. 

Davis'  552. 

Deviding,   561. 

Diamond,  407. 

Dogwood  Spring,  306. 

Dolbyes,  434. 

Dun,  353. 

Dunn,  418. 

Dymond,  324. 

Ekeeks,  321,  329,  406. 

Exolls,  541. 

Fishing  Hawke,  251. 

Greane  Glead,  467. 

Green,  267,  363,  472. 

Grimes  Poynt  Spring,  439. 

Hanckes',  314. 

Hubies,  457. 

Hungars,  296. 

Indian,  488. 

Indian  Cabbin,   528. 

Indian  Town,  285. 

Kirdy,  150. 

Kittawan,  535,  566. 

Longborough,  152. 

Longtone,  524. 

Matchemapps,  283. 

Matchepungo,  551. 

Mathomkin,  454. 

Mattawambs,  294. 

Monocke,  333. 

Morakswee,  471. 

Morotsny,  536. 

Morrattaquond,  408. 

Muddy,   564. 

Negroes,  434. 

Newports,  434. 

Old  Wills  Canow,  333. 

Otterdam,  434. 

Papatico,  484. 

Pine  Bridge,  329. 

Poccomoke,  264,  277,  418,  532. 

Popetyke,  256. 

Poplar,  491. 

Poqueto,  495. 

Powetan,  521. 

Raqueto,  495. 

Robins,  406. 

Score,  496. 

Scull  Neck,  260. 

Seward's,  558. 

Skiminoe,  269,  360. 

Snag  Pine,  532. 

Spoon,  307,  326,  407. 


596 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Spring,  439,  444. 
Stoare,  496. 
Stokeleyes,  454. 
Tarr  Pitch,  342,  421. 
Teakins,  502. 
Timber,  466,  506. 
Toorihams,  386. 
Totoske,  503. 
Toweywinch,  408. 
Troublesome,  434. 
Turkey  Buzard,  408. 
Tyascun,  285,  379,  388. 
Tymber,  515. 
Van-Hicks,   528. 
Warreny,  311,  451. 
Wassanasson,  310,  500. 
Weequionedike,  566. 
Wetneck,  270. 
White  Oak,  433. 
Wickars,  395. 
Wolfe,  476. 

Brand,  Hen.  488,  Tho.  264. 

Brandon,  John  509,  Wm.  252. 

Brandon,  332. 

Brane,  Tho.  264. 

Branie,  Richd.  286. 

Brans,  Rich.  392. 

Branson,  Fra.  483,  551,  Jno.  476. 

Brantly,  Edw.  85,  106. 

Branton,  Edward  58. 

Brase,  Wm.  95. 

Brasey,  Foulke  25. 

Brasheare,  Robert  76. 

Brashere,  John  302. 

Brasheire,  Benore  540. 

Brasfiridge,  John  145. 

Brasbridge,  Jno.  493. 

Brass,  Demingo  459. 

Brasset,  Tho.  488. 

Brasseur,  Benj.  257,  Bennet  244,  Flor- 
ence 244,  Kathe.  244,  Mary  244, 
Persie,  244,  Robt.  41,  124,  244. 

Brasseure,  Benj.  329. 

Brassure,  Robt.  103,  111. 

Brathard,  Jno.  296. 

Brathwite,  Jno.  427. 

Bratson,  John  292. 

Bratt,  Isaac  207. 

Braugh,  Edw.  138. 

Braunes,  Blanch  25. 

Braw,  Robt.  174. 

Braxton,  Robt.   113. 

Braxston,  Thomas  52. 

Bray,  Ann  556,  Chas.  558,  Edw.  456, 
Edw.  562,  Ellinor  562,  Alnathan  430, 
Henry    259,    Mar.    240,    Nich.    220, 


Peter    549,    558,    Plomer    527,    Wm. 

559. 
Braybrooke,  Edw.  370. 
Brayne,  Richd.  282. 
Braydon,  Edw.  132. 
Bread,  Jno.  525. 
Breader,  Thomas  554. 
Breakes,  Ann  371. 
Bream,  Bryan  525. 
Breamer,  Thomas  90. 
Breamor,  Tho.  341. 
Breckler,  Edw.  245. 
Bredgar,  Richard  441,  545. 
Breed,  Wm.  199. 
Breeman,  Capt.  331,  Mr.258,  262,  302, 

402,  Tho.  251,  262,   303,   306,  Wm. 

358. 
Breeme,  Bryan  528. 
Bregat,  William  315. 
Breight,  Robt.  212. 

Breman,  Sarah  61,  Tho.  233,  Wm.  203. 
Bremar,  Mr.  473. 
Bremor,  Tho.  341. 
Bremoes  Devident,  37,  60. 
Bremo,  86,  88,  101,  120,  266. 
Bremo,  Thomas  222. 
Brenett,  James  279. 
Brenore,  Rob.  358. 
Brenner,  Jno.  558. 
Brent,   Capt.    236,   267,   282,    312,   315, 

368,    372,   489,    536,   Ed.   420,   Edm. 

421,  Giles,  218,  224,  266,  276,  279, 

293,    298,   299,   302,    304,    315,    319, 

332,  333,  340,  345,  398,  402,  421, 
462,  470,  477,  480,  485,  514,  533, 
565,  Hugh  140,  355,  436,  437,  Jno. 
492,  Kath  420,  421,  483,  547,  Lt. 
Col.  304,  Marg.  267,  291,  313,  399, 
486,  Mary  266,  267,  279,  345,  477, 
Mrs.  303,  Richd.  247,  Wm.  210. 

Brer,  No.,  428. 

Brereton,  Thomas   296,   306,   310,    330, 

333,  334,  356,  360,  375,  383,  407, 
408,  409,  445,  446,  500,  531,  Mr. 
467,  542,  Jane  531. 

Bressie,  Susan,  William  476. 

Breswell,  Robert  378. 

Brethenbird,  Augustine  393. 

Bretherston,  Dennis  80. 

Brett,  Alex.  87,  Chas.  454,  Emma  312, 
Richd.  70,  Tho.  308,  554,  Wm.  548. 

Brew,   Sackfield   275. 

Brewer,  Eliz.  212,  JefTery  33,  John  26, 
507,  Marie  26,  Mary  26,  411,  Paul 
143,  310,  Richd.  124,  Robt.  54, 
Stephen  428,  Tho.  162,  190,  361, 
373,  454,  564,  Wm.  90,  468. 


General  Index 


597 


Brewerton,  Tho.  253. 

Brewster,  Antho.  260,  Henry  81,  John 
218,  Richd.  80,  142,  174,  225,  336, 
Sackford  148,  180,  372. 

Brewton,  Jon.  23. 

Brian,  John  489,  Richd.  282. 

Brice,  Francis  150,  James  253,  272,  283, 
John  208,  248,  253,  Martha  180,  272, 
284,  345,  355,  445,  Mr.  389,  Robt. 
171,  Sarah  161,  Tho.  54,  57,  118, 
134,  148,  161,  168,  171,  184,  189, 
191,  272,  281,  345,  355,  445,  504, 
Wm.  207,  272. 

Brickerton,  Wm.  114,  426. 

Brickes,  Ralph  350. 

Brickett,  Tho.  211. 

Bridewell,  Wm.  358. 

Brick  Kill,  the  68. 

Brickmaker,  68. 

Bridd,  Tho.  271. 

Bride,  Sarah  342. 

Bridge,  Jon.  63,  John  275,  279,  314, 
Kath.  349,  Richd.  284,  Tho.  218,  306, 
358,  518. 

Bridge,  Horse  the  318,  Poetan's  507. 

Bridge,  a  414. 

Bridger,  James  559,  Joseph  433,  559, 
Richd.  441. 

Bridges,  Ann  164,  Antho.  446,  543, 
Eliza.  158,  207,  262,  513,  Hercules 
211,  326,  380,  Herrals  236,  Jerimiah 
94,  John  42,  47,  61,  135,  450,  Margt. 
243,  Mr.  222,  Nath.  426,  Nich.  141, 
268,  312,  Robt.  455,  Sarah  538,  Sam 
564,  Tho.  35,  148,  Wm.  109,  117, 
363,  384. 

Bridgett,  Wm.  443. 

Bridley,  Robert  312. 

Bridgman,  Anthony  432,  Danll.  146, 
Jacob  291,  James  381,  388. 

Bridgnorth,  Mary  425. 

Bridwell,  Tho.  129. 

Brigg,  Geo.  430. 

Brigges,  Jno.  341. 

Briggs,  David  369,  Eliz.  359,  Mercy 
356,  Robt.  514,  Seth  117,  Wm.  103, 
Tho.  411,  Robt.  492,  Robt.  565,  Wm. 
124. 

Bright,  Dorothy  332,  Francis  341,  John 
139,  219,  388,  446,  564,  Leonard 
139,  Robt.  282,  324,  338,  Tho.  483, 
Wm.   460,   523. 

Brightman,  Hen.  57,   178. 

Brighton,  Geo.  516. 

Brignall,  Richd.  122. 

Brignell,  Henry  112. 

Brignoll,  Richd.  283. 


Brigson,  Thomas   110. 

Brigton,  Rachell  282. 

Brill,  Peter  32. 

Brimstone,  Wm.   305. 

Brinckley,  Michaell  27. 

Bring,  An  427. 

Bringley,  Symon  296. 

Brinkley,  Michaell  280,  516. 

Brintwell,  Robt.   149. 

Brine  of  Channell  535. 

Brise,  Tho.  155. 

Brisly,  Ro.  388. 

Brissit,  Charles  324. 

Briste,  Math.  91. 

Bristoe,  Fr.  74,  Laur.  61,  John  77. 

Bristol,  139. 

Bristoll,  John  554,  Jone  314. 

Bristow,  Averilla  536,  Eliz.  290,  Joane 

340,  Robt.  505,  536,  553,  Tho.  160, 

Robt.  340. 
Brite,  James  263. 
Brittaine,  John   100,  Robt.   29,  Thomas 

311. 
Britten,  Lyonell   331,  Richd.   249,   259, 

Lyon  201. 
Brittlin,  Wm.  502. 
Britton,  Edw.  192,  Nich.  343. 
Britts,  Richd.  284. 
Broach,  John   130,   167,   172,   173,   176, 

179,    180,    185,    212,    266,    267,   481, 

511,  Nicho.  480,  Mr.  212. 
Broad,  Ben.  470,  Tho.  37,  65. 
Broade,  Humphrey  24. 
Broaden,  Eliz.   361. 
BroadfeiFd,  Ann  179. 
Broadhurst,  Ann  547,  Gerrard  420,  Ra. 

239,   Thomas   431,   565,  Walter   189, 

199,    219,    252,    373,   402,   420,   470, 

523.  ; 

Broadie,  Georg  109. 
Broadly,  John  280. 
Broadman,  Richd.  199- 
Broadrib,  Joane  268,  Wm.  429,  525. 
Broadue,  Georg  109. 
Broadwater,  Hugh  481. 
Broadway,  John  146,  An  458,  Tho.  296, 

356. 
Broadebank,  Gilb.  341. 
Brocas,  Ellinor  230,  265,  273,  281,  330, 

378,  Eliza.  245,  Georg  136,  John  220, 

336,  Tabith.  245,  Wm.  83,  88,   105, 

112,    136,    159,    160,    190,    193,    245, 

253,   265,  273,  281,  422,  457,  Capt. 

168,  313,  346,  438. 
Broch,  John  71,  Wm.  433,  434. 
Broche,  Barbery  76,  John  76,  92,   114. 
Brock,  James  220,  Wm.  25,  61. 


598 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Brocke,  John  85. 

Brocket,  Jane  325. 

Brockett,  Sir  John  110,  Mary  368. 

Brockham,  Edwd.   338. 

Brockhurst,  John  467,  516. 

Brockland,  491. 

Broder,  Mary  361,  433. 

Broderick,  Nich.  553. 

Brodhurst,  Ann  401,  492,   546,  Walter 

340,  420,  521,  531. 
Brodrick,  Nich.  454. 
Brodwell,  John  69,  107,  113. 
Brodway,  Ino.  338. 
Broker,  Robert  558. 
Brokhurst,  John  467. 
Brome,  Robert  370. 
Bromely,  Danll.  35. 
Bromfeild,  Edward  349,  376,  John  282, 

319,  326,  336,  386,  387,  405,  Marke 

164,  Mary  233,  Ralph  553,  Tho.  306, 

330,  Mr.  326. 
Bromfill,  Tho.  308. 
Bromley,  Alex.  322,  Daniell  100,  Hugh 

213,  Luke  108. 
Bromsall,  Tho.  366. 
Bromstead,  Thomas  436. 
Bromwell,  Wm.  472. 
Brooke,    Chas.    167,    Eliza.    138,    358, 

Eman.   194,  Francis  369,  Georg  110, 

121,  Gilbert  129,  Henry  161,  167, 
193,  211,  224,  446,  449,  Jane  194, 
James  554,  John  120,  129,  172,  248, 
Joseph  388,  Lydia  194,  Michaell  532, 
Nicho.  167,  186,  204,  224,  Rob.  351, 
Tho.  33,  157,  213,  Walter  187,  505, 
Wm.  10,  131,  153,  276,  380,  Dead 
Man's  244. 

Brooker,  Eliza.  220. 

Brookes,  Antho.  388,  Bestney  146,  Cut- 
bert  7,  Dorothy  449,Georg  100,  180, 
221,  Henry  380,  448,  466,  473,  John 
100,  512,  531,  Marg.  218,  Mary  394, 
Michael  349,  Mr.  359,  Nicholas  411, 
Peter 93,  429,  484,  490,Richd.l27,139, 
509,  Thomas  60,  306,  336,  343,  369, 
396,  429,  472,  484,  503,  513,  543,  548, 
Walter  88,  281,  298,  396,  469,  569, 
Widow  446,  Wm.  141,  225,  362,  484. 

Brooker,  Fra.  281. 

Brooks,  Eliz.  238,  Geo.  35,  Giles  299, 
James    232,    John    153,    374,    Nicho. 

122,  Richd.  154,  266,  Sisley  454, 
Tho.  22,  152,  289. 

Brookwood,  Wm.  309. 
Broome,  Robt.  105. 
Bronely,  Symon  325. 
Brogin,  Geo.  235. 


Brothby,  Geo.  454. 

Brotherton,  Dennis  24,  Hen.  81,  366. 

Brotherston,  Hester  43. 

Brotts,  Wm.  439. 

Brouch,  John  121. 

Brough,  Margery  169,  Tho.  37,  66. 

Broughoe,  Nath.  339. 

Broughton,  Edward  90,  Francis  438, 
Henry  144,  Jno.  248,  Mary  539,  Tho. 
171,  172,  199,  212,  214,  309,  311, 
315,  323,  339,  342,  344,  348,  359, 
363,  364,  376,  410,  484,  496,  512, 
539,  Wm.  105,  151,  396,  437. 

Broune,  John  250. 

Brouse,  Robt.  114. 

Brovek,  Wm.  307. 

Brow,  Weston  157,  274. 

Broward,  Robt.   138. 

Brown  (Browne)  Alex.  509,  Alice  176, 

441,  Andrew  216,  315,  Ann  61,  164, 
252,  290,  328,  378,  460,  509,  510, 
523,  548,  Antho.  35,  508,  Art.  427, 
Avis  351,  Christo.  132,  Cleare  315, 
Col.  240,  356,  Darby  288,  David  304, 
Debora  169,  Devorus  291,  Edw.  69, 
453,  477,  562,  Ellen  132,  143,  447, 
Ellis  156,  181,  Eliz.  31,  86,  194,  243, 
294,  300,  506,  562,  Francis  186,  189, 
195,  196,  259,  272,  276,  279,  281, 
362,   366,   381,  411,   431,   438,   439, 

442,  462,  568,  Georg  109,  218,  Grace 
224,  298,  365,  389,  546,  Giles  129, 
Henry  61,  86,  113,  149,  151,  154, 
160,  194,  240,  446,  Hester  192, 
Humph.  51,  Jacob  298,  428,  Ja.  240, 
James  260,  263,  521,  531,  Joane  507, 
Jeffery  60,  Johannah  403,  John  43, 
54,  56,  129,  138,  163,  164,  193,  194, 
199,  221,  250,  267,  283,  296,  302, 
304,  308,  323,  324,  332,  341,  345, 
353,  356,  373,  376,  403,  413,  4l4, 
424,  447,  450,  457,  465,  471,  483, 
491,  497,  505,  518,  519,  538,  546, 
552,  555,  558,  565,  Jo.  375,  Jon.  229, 
231,  240,  Jos.  37,  Joyce  148,  Kath. 
220,  370,  Little  291,  400,  Lodwick 
552,  Margt.  251,  253,  Marice  491, 
Mary  304,  381,  438,  Natha.  209, 
Nathl.  345,  438,  514,  Nicholas  14, 
49,  142,  156,  176,  220,  290,  546, 
Originall  245,  Patience  178,  Peter 
335,  555,  Phillip  355,  Randall  56,  71, 
Rebecca  267,  521,  523,  Rich.  138, 
176,  233,  273,  291,  303,  331,  345, 
358,  392,  400,  447,  472,  Robert  6,  11, 
12,  31,  67,  114,  121,  144,  165,  180, 
182,  221,  283,  403,  472,   513,  Rora- 


General  Index 


599 


man  514,  Rose  565,  Sarah  112,  290, 
Seth  459,  Stephen  61,  Susan  372, 
Tho.  30,  47,  59,  68,  78,  96,  97,  121, 
123,  127,  166,  170,  208,  209,  255, 
263,  265,  266,  273,  280,  286,  328, 
412,  437,  447,  449,  552,  560,  Ursula 

163,  Wm.  29,  129,  130,  133,  143, 
169,  206,  207,  216,  257,  263,  265, 
292,    304,    314,    345,    351,    361,    377, 

430,  471  ,475,  476,  482,  553,  Xp.  452. 
Browing,  Geo.  31,  192,  465,  James  208, 

Jon.   29,   John   105,    168,    524,   Kath. 

327,  Math.  252,  Mary  399,  Nicholas 

446,  Tho.  477,  478,  Wm.  168,  207, 

Xpher.  384. 
Brownelofe,  John  99. 
Brownridge,  Math.  60. 
Brownser,  Tho.  25. 
Brownson,  Geo.  144. 
Broyer,  Geo.  441. 
Bruce,    James    404,    Phill.    525,    Richd. 

194,  Robt.  561. 
Bruch,  John  428. 
Bruer,  Jno.  525,  Wat.  525. 
Bruerton,  John  520. 
Bruham,  Wm.  281. 
Brumfeild,    Edw.    349,    Jno.    521,    528, 

Kath.  286,  Mr.  472,  525,  Ralph  454. 
Brumly,  David  183,  Fra.  276,  Isaak  403, 

Jno.  523. 
Brumwell,  Wm.  523. 
Bruneall,  Wm.  203. 
Brunstell,  Jno.  436. 
Bruntell,  John  477. 
Bruse,    Francis    552,    James    163,    164, 

418,  Richd.  86. 
Brush,  John  428,  Mr.  357. 
Bruster,  Antho.  164.  Richd.  550. 
Brute,  Walter  76. 
Bruton,  Edward  58,  Fra.  499,  Jane  520, 

Jon.  24,  John  150,  446,  Judeth  517. 
Bryan,  Abra.   280,  Ann  383,   385,   456, 

Donaugho    358,    Edw.    4,    103,    115, 

164,  260,  Garret  151,  444,  Henry 
112,  194,  Jon.  237,  243,  John  262, 
464,  473,  480,  518,  Mary  232,  485, 
Morgan  135,  Richd.  284,  304,  Robert 
65,  358,  496,  Teague  182,  Tho.  176, 
271,  313,  Wm.  304,  476,  Xtopr.  171. 

Bryar,  George  442,  527,  542,  Tho.  459, 

566. 
Bryant,  Ann  485,  Arthur  451,  Chas.  389, 

431,  476,  Edmund  307,  Ellinor  565, 
John  281,  332,  565,  Michaell  47, 
Thomas  440. 

Bryatt,  Jude  386. 

Bryce,  James  291,  Wm.  293. 


Bryer,  George  191,  362,  441,  467,  472, 

477,  478,  489,  Rob.  328. 
Bubith,  Jona.  303. 

Bucher,  Richard  102,  Wm.  28,  378. 
Buck,  Agnes  476,   Geo.   345,   Gersham 

83,    John    131,    Old    200,    Peleg    83, 

299,  Peter  27,  65,  Richd.  32,  83,  109, 

299,  Tho.   114,  123,  493,  Wm.  505. 
Buckcocke,  Richd.  267. 
Buckerin,  John  189. 
Buckett,  Ann  366. 

Buckham,  Richard  185,  286,  Thos.  185. 
Buckingham,  Edw.  203,  334. 
Buckland  78,  120,  128. 
Buckland,  Jon.  78,  Richd.  164. 
Buckler,  Robert  355. 
Buckley,  Arth.  166,  Humph.  120,  462, 

Richd.  139. 
Buckly,  Rowd.  51,  Rowland  61. 
Buckmanreyne,  John  196. 
Buckmaster,  John  3,  85,  153,  Tho.  311. 
Bucknell,  Jno.  502. 
Buckner,  Mr.  450. 
Buckocke,  John  471. 
Buckrell,  Rich.  47. 
Buck  Roe  6,   7,    11,   12,   18,   146,    154, 

157,  165,  378. 
Buckster,  Elinor  262. 
Buckworth,  John  86. 
Budd,  Giles  121,  Richd.  207,  234,  251, 

252,    280,    308,    339,    343,    379,   423, 

516,  Capt.  391,  422,  471. 
Budder,  Hugh  311. 
Buderhill,  Edw.   176. 
Budford,  James  270. 
Budge,  John  123,  149. 
Budick,  Richard  552. 
Budle,  Alexr.  215. 
Budman,  Mary  434. 
Budnye,  Richd.  113. 
Budway,  John  208. 
Budworth,  Rich.  348. 
Bue,  Robert  21. 
Buffeild,  Tho.  327. 
Buffett,  Wm.  373,  449. 
Buffin,  John  28. 
Buffkin,  Henry  200. 
Buffolke,  Moses  431. 
Bufort,  Rich.  77. 
Bugbye,  Jon.  24. 

Bugg,  Joan  302,  John  307,  Tho.  476. 
Bughby,  Peter  216. 
Bulker,  Oneale  331. 
Bull,  Georg  109,  John  155,  203,   382, 

516,  Tho.  302,  Tobias  552. 
Bullard,  Henry  39,  156,  Jon.  132,  Jno. 

543,  Tho.  80. 


600 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Buller,  Richard  428,  Tho.  150. 

Bullerd,  Rich.  298,  Tho.  298. 

Bullett,  Rich.  431,  Geo.  304,  Henry  513. 

Bullifant,  Rebecca  340. 

Bulliford,  Ro.  214. 

Bulling,  Tho.  254. 

Bullington,   Geo.   466,   Luke  433.   464, 

477,  481,  506. 
Bullock,  Geo.  29,  76,   304,  Grace  558, 

Henry  513,  Hugh  20,  Joane  50,   86, 

Richd.     129,     313,     393,     426,     468, 

Sebilla  552,  Tho.  277,  296,  Wm.  102, 

319,    339,    346,   433,   471,   Mr.   267, 

302,  339,  346,  500. 
Bulmer,  Benis  33,  87,  Tho.  40,  63. 
Bum,  Jno.  536. 

Bumbridge,  Christo.  109,  Tho.  348. 
Bumpass,  Rich.  42,  106. 
Bumstone,  Ab.  559. 
Bumwell,  Jno.  536. 
Bunbridge,  Tho.  397. 
Bunbury,  Tho.  441. 
Bunch,  Jno.  343,  470,  Wm.  546. 
Bundick,  Richd.  195,  296,  524. 
Bundock,  Rich.  455,  551. 
Bunduch,  Richd.  305. 
Bundock,  Richd.  412,  414,  524. 
Bundy,  Eliz.  531. 
Bunkley,  John  374. 
Bunnell,  John  444,  Mary  444. 
Bunney,  Audery  218. 
Bunny,  Sarah  397. 
Buny,  Adrian  244. 
Bunzey,  Jno.  476. 
Burbadge,  Tho.  228,  315,  340. 
Burbage,  Col.  257,  316,  356,  410,  550, 

Eliz.  358,  Mrs.  372,  Tho.  31,  48,  85, 

91,  98,  110,  116,  136,  138,  298,  385, 

550,  Wm.  110. 
Burbanck,  Mary  192. 
Burby,  Jno.  548,  Wm.  547. 
Burch,  Jon.  62. 

Burchell,  And.  325,  352,  Hen.  139. 
Burcher,   Abraham   99,   Ann   67,   Georg 

67,    147,    181,    282,    286,    323,    493, 

496,  Humph.  54,  120,  Joane  67,  Tho. 

83. 
Burchett,  Andrew  352  . 
Burcorck,  Rolph  374. 
Burd,  Giles  528,  John  187,  Mary  397, 

Nath.  500. 
Burden,  John  50,  Edw.  78,  John  56,  58, 

63,  78,  100. 
Burdett,  Chastene  172,  Roger  375,  Tho. 

344,  Wrm  111,  119,  121,  129,  353,  414. 
Burditt,  Ann  481,  Jerem.   348,  Thomas 

363,  Wm.  20,  346,  363,  419. 


Burdix,  Jno.  197. 
Burdock,  Richard  425. 

Burdropp,  127. 

Burdyken,  Mary  278. 

Burfe,  James  31. 

Burfoote,  Ann  120,  Saml.  61. 

Burford,  Emedlen  315,  Georg  146,  147, 

Modlin  228,  N.  459,  Wm.  78,   315, 

554. 
Burfur,  Wm.  112. 
Burgh,  Wm.  433,  559. 
Burgen,  Evan  154. 
Burges,  Ja.  464,  John  36,  80,  110,  152, 

Richd.  85,  Roger  39,  Wm.  62,  196. 
Burgess,    Ann    239,    Joseph    261,    Robt. 

273. 
Burgeyny,  Rich.  134. 
Burgis,  Edw.  458,  John  120,  175,  215, 

390,    Mary    205,    Richd.    123,    Samll. 

548. 
Burgisse,  Wm.  222. 
Burham,  Susan  358. 
Burk,  Anna  171,  Penelope  434. 
Burke,  John  255. 

Burkett,  Ellins  49,  281. 

Burland,  Dorothy  114,  John  79,  82,  114. 

Burle,  Eliz.  281. 

Burleigh,  Abell  266. 

Burley,  Robt.  395. 

Burlier,  Jon.  229,  Lewis  229. 

Burlock,  Jonathan  562. 

Burly,  Edwd.  351,  Francis  85. 

Burman,  Jno.  499. 

Burnam,  Rowland  97,  Row.  114. 

Burne,  Randall  366. 

Burnell,  Mr.  310,  422,  465,  Arth.  501, 

Francis  319,  336,  349,  359,  390,  404, 

408,  409,  484,  485,  Henry  336,  John 

444,  Mary  444,  Moses  455. 
Burnett,    Eliz.    361,    Francis    56,    Hen. 

223,  James  110,  John  58,  440,  Nich. 

42,  Robt.  126,  148,  Samll.  153. 
Burnham,  Mr.  242,  291,  334,  Alice  219, 

John    148,    Katherin    185,    Rowland 

144,    185,   215,   219,    334,   391,   450, 

Sus.  219,  Tho.  234. 
Burnstone,  Ab.  559. 
Burny,  Ann  396. 
Burpott,  Rich.  33. 
Burr,  Edw.  25,  69,  Jeremiah  78. 
Burrage,  Henry  264. 
Burras,  Mathew  132. 
Burrell,  Eliz.  155,  Lewis  335,  421,  Robt. 

215,   295,  475,  544,  Tho.   118,  Wm. 

155. 
Burrett,  Jno.  431. 
Burrill,  Lewis  335. 


General  Index 


601 


Burris,  Kath.  322. 

Burriston,  Edw.  481. 

Burroughs,    269,    415,    Ann    38, 

Christo.  38,  104,  221,  Roger  170, 
Wm.  23,  38. 

Burrowes,  Anthony  11,  Christo.  180, 
Eliz.  237,  John  10,  Kath.  389,  Mathew 
25,  112,  336,  Thomas  313,  Old 
Plantation  180. 

Burser,  Patrick  388. 

Burshall,  John  268. 

Burslitt,  Ann  459. 

Burston,  Christo.  49. 

Burt,  Edw.  28,  Geo.  386,  Jane  514, 
Richard  188,  Wm.  3,  291. 

Burtcher,  Ann  25,  Georg  24,  Jane  25. 

Burtenwood,  Wm.  172. 

Burtes,  Richd.  135. 

Burthen,  Rich.  29. 

Burther,  Tho.  83. 

Burtlett,  Thomas  59. 

Burtock,  Jonathan  562. 

Burton,  Ann  190,  199,  278,  362,  Bryan 
160,  Danll.  444,  Ellinor,  500,  Geo. 
351,  John  308,  343,  355,  377,  424, 
475,  547,  Ralph  276,  Richd.  247,  290, 
297,  521,  Robt.  222,  Sam.  375,  425, 
467,  468,  Tho.  347,  500,  Wm.  150, 
284,  430,  464,  546. 

Burwell,  Mr.  509,  Eliz.  172,  Francis 
184,  508,  509,  Geo.  172,  Lewis  171, 
172,  184,  199,  208,  213,  214,  215, 
219,  246,  266,  297,  304,  346,  390, 
392,  393,  496,  506,  534,  Lucy  266, 
Robt.  266,  312,  315,  343,  544,  Wm. 
172,  344. 

Bury,  Susan  350. 

Burry,  Garret,  332,  Geo.  456. 

Busbie,  John  494,  Thomas  335,  549. 

Busbury,  Robt.  536. 

Busby,  Ann  23,  Eliz.  267,  Tho.  78,  335, 
340,  Walter  223. 

Busfeild,  Tho.  327. 

Bush,  Abra.  458,  Eliz.  5,  Ellen  540, 
Fran.  229,  James  523,  John  5,  516, 
Mr.  540,  Margt.  562,  Mary  5,  Nicho. 
112,  241,  306,  393,  562,  Tho.  73,  85, 
92,  95,  231,  453,  Wm.  565. 

Bushe,  Roger  290. 

Bushell,  Nich.  25,  69,  133. 

Busher,  Mable  36. 

Bushop,  Cyprian  476,  Jon.  31. 

Bushrod  Richd.  404,  405,  442. 

Bushrode,  Mary  353. 

Busse,  Geo.  141,  238,  Lydia  141. 

Bussen,  John  289. 

Bussey,  Ann  66,  Georg  23,  66. 


Busshell,  Benf.  566,  Jno.  524. 

Bussie,  Eliz.  183. 

Bussy,  Eliz.  23. 

Butcher,  Anney  201,  Edwd.  144,  Geo. 
327,  John  184,  200,  234,  250,  352, 
377,  Robt.  208,  Tho.  144,  365,  Wm. 
140,  150,  378. 

Bute,  Robt.  552. 

Butler,  Amey  539,  Christo.  537,  Doro- 
thy 449,  Edw.  85,  Eliz.  146,  254, 
Fran.  336,  Hen.  80,  Joane  25,  95, 
348,  John  50,  58,  97,  100,  140,  145, 
146,  175,  207,  245,  271,  308,  314, 
360,  373,  449,  494,  538,  Jone  366, 
Joseph  519,  Lewis  297,  Mary  91,  146, 
388,  Nath.  207,  Nicho.  260,  Robt. 
35,  443,  Saml.  127,  Symon  387,  Tho- 
mas 26,  59,  89,  91,  140,  207,  373, 
432,  447,  536,  Wm.  36,  87,  146,  207, 
209,  212,  337,  348,  351,  447,  Xtopr. 
207. 

Butlinge,  Tho.  39. 

Butlocke,  Richard  444. 

Butress,  Rich.  81. 

Buttresse,  Eliz.  374,  Nich.  374. 

Butt,  James  196,  John  384,  Robt.  445, 
446. 

Butten,  Thomas  561. 

Butter,  Robt.  36,  55,  119,  443. 

Butterfeild,  Robt.  208. 

Butterum,  John  64. 

Buttey,  Margt.  309. 

Butterworth,  Edw.  114. 

Butting,  Tho.  240. 

Buttler,  And.  298,  Christo.  483,  484, 
Henry  205,  John  185,  415,  482,  483, 
484,  Lewis  441,  Lidda  514,  Major 
503,  Tho.  471,  Wm.  182,  183. 

Button,  Eliz.  133,  Richd.  369,  Tho.  282, 
345,  363,  371,  561,  Capt.  95. 

Butts,  Robt.   541,   564,   565. 

Buxton,  Jon.  60,  Robt.  160. 

Byard,  Ann  269,  Edward  366. 

Bydolph,  Elizabeth  425. 

Byer,  Wm.  253. 

Byfeild,  Antho.  248. 

Byham,  Ger.  323. 

Byle,  Symon  182. 

Byler,  Wm.  334. 

Bynam,  Robt.  306. 

Byram,  John  425,  Nicholas  73. 

Byran,  Abram  516. 

Byrd,  Robt.  168,  Wm.  254,  Xtopr.  219. 

Byrom,  John  318. 

Byrum,  Abra.  292. 

Bysant,  Michael  56. 

Byte,  Muddy  the  557. 


602 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Cabbidge,  John  187. 

Cabboe,  John  194. 

Cable,  Geo.  251,  419,  John  194,  251, 
436,  Tho.  215,  535,  542. 

Cabowne,  Jno.  477. 

Cacamount,  307. 

Cacott,  Leonard  374. 

Cadagon,  Wm.  315. 

Cadbaty,  Danl.  302. 

Cadby,  Tho.  94. 

Cade,  Florence  307,  James  304,  Peter 
248,  263,  Robt.  222,  264,  267,  Sarah 
195,  Tho.  175,  Wm.  126. 

Cadin,  Jno.  190. 

Cadly,  Tho.  94. 

Cadmill,  James  459. 

Cadwallader,  Humph.  127. 

Cadwell,  Wm.  195. 

Caffeway,  Nicho.  268. 

Cage,  Edw.  18,  71,  92. 

Cagen,  Fr.  250. 

Cager,  Robert  181,  Tho.  143. 

Cagg,  Tho.  513. 

Cahowne,  John  388. 

Cain,  Chas.  231. 

Caine,  Abraham  106. 

Cainhoe,  Richd.  217,  Wm.  114,  214, 
277,  318,  505. 

Cainn,  Jno.  387. 

Cakebread,  Jon.  150,  Tho.  179. 

Calcup,  Bridget  166. 

Caldecock,  Jno.  336. 

Caldwell,  Robt.  164,  Wm.  200. 

Cale,  Wm.  46. 

Calfe,  Joseph  221,  Wm.  78. 

Calgey,  Toby  331. 

Callamy,  Jno.  481. 

Callaway,  Edmund  108,  Mary  434,  Tho- 
mas 543. 

Callay,  Peter  185. 

Called,  Saml.  266. 

Calledge,  Geo.  81. 

Callender,  Wm.  201,  214. 

Callihan,  Perilla  524. 

Callingson,  Christ.  204. 

Callis,  Wm.  496. 

Callop,  Tho.  486. 

Calloway,  Mary  357,  Tho.  559. 

Callowe,  Steph.  274. 

Callum,  Derminuff  338. 

Calton,  Tho.  169. 

Calvary  John  271. 

Calver,  Tho.  399. 

Calvin,  Fra.  291. 

Callway,  Rich.  525. 


Calwell,  Jno.  513. 

Cally,  Wm.  491. 

Calthorpe,  Christo.  12,  26,  34,  39,  44. 

Calvert,   Chas.   407,   Christo.    322,    330, 

407,  413,  414,  Dr.   135,   154,  Edwd. 

234,  Geo.   146,   157,  John  146,   157, 

Mary  407,  470. 
Cambell,  Thos.  508. 
Camber,  Fr.  104. 
Cambert,  Hum.   205. 
Camblett,  Randall  214,  Robt.  171. 
Camdin,  James  486. 
Camell,  Alex.  195,  Chas.  568,  Edmund 

55,  Jno.  249. 
Camellin,  Edmond  88. 
Camer,  James  277. 
Camfeild,  Francis  493. 
Camlett,  Francis  439. 
Cammell,  Alexr.  190. 
Cammock,  Symon  137. 
Camnell,  Geo.  280. 
Camock,  Mary  137. 
Camp,  Wm.  427. 
Campeere,  Robert  66. 
Campion,  Mary  65,  Percivall  65,  Wm. 

385. 
Campton,  Humphry  56. 
Canada,   10. 
Canada,  Gowen,  344. 
Canadia,  Cornel.  266. 
Canadie,  Jno.  344. 
Canady,  John  264. 
Canby,  Abra.  385. 
Cance,  Walter  435. 
Candeale,  Robt.  307. 
Candell,  rnillip  55. 
Cander,  James  500. 
Cane,  John  91,  455,  468,  Margarett  145, 

220,  Patrick   128,  Robert  36,  Walter 

435. 
Canes,  Edw.  264,  Maudelin  34,  86,  93. 
Canedy,  Cornelius  198. 
Canfeild,  Jno.  376,  Wm.  421. 
Canfill,  Wm.   336,   341,  342. 
Canho,  Mr.  295. 
Canhooe,  Wm.  114. 
Canida,    Bryan    315,    Corn    513,    James 

451,  Jno.  508. 
Canill,  Alexr.  386. 
Cann,  Tho.  148. 

Cannaday,  Clement  137,  John  142. 
Cannanna,  Arthur  194. 
Canneck,  Arthur  325,  George  551. 
Cannedy,  Jno.  406. 
Canhhoe,  Wm.  136. 
Cannida,  John  435. 
Canninge,  John  274. 


General  Index 


603 


Cannon,   Ann   169,  Dorothy  479,   Edw. 

169,  276,  433,  Joan  181,  273,  John 

566,  567. 
Canny,  Richd.  128. 
Canody,  Gwin  516. 
Canoes  land,  480. 
Canon,  Stephen  438. 
Canow,  Stephen  438. 
Cans,  Tho.  199. 
Cant,   Augustine  457,  David   354,   368, 

385,  411,  457,  496,  506,  James  385, 

Major    544,    Mary   426,    Merlin    558, 

Susan  558,  Tho.  510. 
Canter,  Jno.  399,  Tho.  498. 
Cantrel,  Phil.  290. 
Cantrell,  Henry  564,  Mr.  203. 
Cantrey,  Wm.  253. 
Cantry,  Wm.  245. 
Cantwell,  Edmd.  393. 
Cany,  James  301. 
Cape,  Robert  90. 
Capell,  Jno.  333,  392,  Wm.  514,  Peter 

273,  Wm.  121. 
Capes,  Robt.  401. 

Caple,  Henry  396,  John  302,  Wm.  468. 
Capp,  Willia,  70,  109,  427. 
Cappell,  Wm.  134. 
Capps,  Mary  494,  Robt.  164,  236,  387, 

494,  540,  Wm.  6,  21,  80,   186,  287, 

330,  355,  401,  519,  539. 
Captain  of  the  Fort,  122. 
Car,  Wm.  130. 
Caraway,  John  302. 
Carbill,  Clement  402,  429. 
Carby,  Denny  330,  Titus  543. 
Card,   Edw.   492,   Jno.   513,   Mary   280, 

Richd.  425,  468,  Robt.  135. 
Cardwell,  Grace  432,  Wm.  432. 
Cardy,  Richard  364. 
Carelesse,  Andrew   182,  213,   251,  416, 

Joan  227,  251,  416,  James  521. 
Careleys,  Henry  30. 
Caresy,  Robt.  300,  Tho.  300. 
Carey, ,  286,  Brid.  298,  Edwd.  298, 

481,    Ellinor   468,    Henry    328,    John 

286,  426,  428,  Miles  294,   301,   326, 

353,  371,  374,  410,  481,  Richd.  229, 

416,   417,    Sampson   300,   Tho.    235, 

475,  Wm.  229. 
Carew,   Allen   454,   Edward   525,   Jacob 

426,  Mannes  281,  Tho.  399,  427,  431, 

457,  472,  512,  514. 
Carier,  Tho.  513. 
Carisbrook,  Mary  544. 
Carkawdy,  Marga.  218. 
Carl,  Tho.  440. 
Carles,  Joane  416. 


Carleton,  Hen.  139. 

Carliere,  John  182. 

Carlington,  Joane  308. 

Carloe,  Wm.  430. 

Carlow,  Owen  453. 

Carly,  Titus  543. 

Carman,  Edw.  440,  Henry  90,  Wm.  468. 

Carmew,  Lodwick  220. 

Carnal,  Rothal  244,  Tho.  244,  Angel 
244. 

Carne,  Tho.  552,  Wm.  428. 

Carner,  James  277,  John  180. 

Carney,  Wm.  208. 

Carolina,  425,  426. 

Caros,  Thomas  425. 

Carpenters,  3,  4,  16,  17,  18,  175,  221, 
228,  309,  374,  395,  484. 

Carpenter,  Alice  307,  451,  An  453, 
Antho.  261,  305,  Arthur  277,  330, 
Francis  134,  195,  361,  376,  423,  440, 
502,  Hen.  384,  James  553,  John  50, 
78,  358,  432,  Mary  197,  Phillip  364, 
365,  519,  Richard  64,  79,  453,  Roger 
148,  Sy.  291,  Symon  375,  395,  Tho. 
364,  480,  510,  Walter  58,  100,  Wm. 
430,  451,  558. 

Carplights,  Pole  39- 

Carr,  Anth.  l4l,  280,  Eliz.  74,  Fran. 
216,  254,  267,  Jaco.  440,  John  297, 
351,  Ma.  427,  Ralph  542,  Robt.  453, 
Tho.  42,  403,  436,  Wm.  389. 

Carrack,  Math.  384. 

Carragon,  Kath.  542. 

Carrall,  Benj.  41. 

Carrar,  Hester  192. 

Carrawaie,  John  354,  504. 

Carraway,  Joane  127,  155,  Jon.  142, 
Jno.  507. 

Carre,  Wm.  264. 

Carrell,  David  281,  Eliz.  433,  Jno.  433, 
Mary  433. 

Carrick,  Rich.  194. 

Carrill,  Benj.  64,  88,  94,  Eliz.  88, 
Henry  88. 

Carrington,  Edw.  355,  Jno.  569,  Michael 
271,  Saml.  262. 

Carroll,  Benj.  410,  449,  555. 

Carron,  Hugh  110. 

Carrott,  Rich.  342. 

Carrow,  Jon.  144. 

Carry,  Suusan  556. 

Carse,  Moses  148. 

Cart,  Wm.  300. 

Cartar,  Francis  184,  John  184,  437,  Mr. 
200,  Mary  208,  Maudlin  194.  Robt. 
180,  Wm.  167,   187,   188. 

Cartbolde,  Silvester  431. 


604 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Carte,  John  128. 

Cartell,  Tho.  290. 

Carter,  Barb.  179,  286,  Chas.  145,  David 

459,  Edw.  387,  445,  453,  480,  536, 
Eliz.  536,  555,  Erasmus  26,  Francis 
91,  206,  225,  391,  484,  492,  Georg 
386,  Giles  276,  Henry  7,  113,  300, 
Hester  125,  Jane  402,  James  387, 
Joane  479,  Jon.  47,  John  132,  150, 
151,  156,  225,  233,  256,  257,  295, 
326,   379,  414,  431,  436,   445,  452, 

460,  504,  518,  531,  536,  Major  349, 
Marg.  275,  Mary  324,  426,  481,  486, 
Nath.  85,  Phillis  26,  Rich.  75,  133, 
145,  458,  Robt.  377,  404,  463,  Samll. 
448,  Susan  400,  555,  Tho.  82,  93, 
106,  197,  350,  374,  387,  458,  480, 
485,  493,  510,  Wm.  42,  46,  48,  64, 
91,  100,  124,  139,  165,  171,  307, 
312,  365,  384,  403,  453. 

Cartright,  Jon.  134. 

Carts,  David  297. 

Cart  way,  the  428. 

Cartwell,  Nich.  438. 

Carty,  Hugh  350,  John  391,  Mahan  308, 

Titus  543. 
Cartwright,  John  471,   540,  Mary  528, 

Mr.    200,    Paul    349,    Ri.    485,    Robt. 

485,  Rolph  388,  Tho.  121,  190,  274, 

300,   399,  466,   507,   514,   518,   544, 

564. 
Carus,  Tho.  455. 
Carver,  Eliza.  146,  John  187,  Lawr.  146, 

Oliver  279,  Tho.  428,  Wm.  477,  478. 
Carvile,  Thomas  528. 
Carvill,  Margt.  455,  Will.  556. 
Carwar,  Rich.  525. 
Cary,  Col.  508,  Henry  554,  Hugh  191, 

Jacob  468,   John  412,   481,   Meacom 

193,  Miles  353,  463,  474,  533,  550, 

551,  555,Richd.  126,  213,  290,  Samll. 

491,  Tho.  463,  465,  484,  Walter  553. 
Carye,  John  264. 
Cascill,  John  141. 
Case,   Eliz.   285,   286,  Jno.   375,  Richd. 

189,  261,  Robt.  301. 
Casewell,  Jno.  566,  Wm.  566. 
Caslife,  Tho.  141. 
Casher,  John  425,  Robt.  425,  447. 
Cashley,  Wm.  542. 
Casley,  Henrv  78. 
Cason,  John  248,  554. 
Casons,  466. 
Casse,  Tho.  431. 
Cassell,   Henry  548,   Humph.  41,  Wm. 

374. 
Cassen,  Tho.  149. 


Cassens,  John  270. 

Cassey,  John  165,  Nath.  165. 

Cassick,  John  425. 

Casson,  Ann   147,  Eliz.    124,   Tho.   25, 

124. 
Cassy,  Jane  483. 
Casteele,  Wm.  150. 
Castell,  Henry  109. 
Castle,  Dorothy  115,  152,  Geo.  76,  95, 

Henry  280,   Humph.   147,   Jane   532, 

John    385,    Joseph    389,    Mary    556, 

Robt.  175,  327,  491,  Tho.  268,  Wm. 

222,  556. 
Castleford,  Richd.  221. 
Castleton,  Geo.  259,  Jno.  453,  Mathew 

452,  Ralph  425,  Robt.  219,  351. 
Castome,  Mathew  444. 
Castons,  Robert  59. 
Castor,  Saml.  450. 
Castro,  Wm.  403. 
Casvert,  Dr.  154. 
Catchmaid,  Henry  428,  Geo.  501. 
CatcHman,  Tho.  27,  307. 
Catchmee,  Deborah  455. 
Catchnett,  Thos.  256. 
Catelyn,  Henry  73,  101. 
Cater,  Geo.   139,  James  446,  Tho.  222, 

316. 
Caterer,  Char.  172. 
Catesby,  Jane  44,  341,  Robt.  300. 
Catfeild,  Robt.  430. 
Catleton,  Geo.  422. 
Catlett,  John  193,  215,  262,   312,   315, 

365,    419,    528,    557,    558,    Nicholas 

193. 
Caton,  John  248. 
Catt,  Joseph  312. 
Cattalowmen,   184. 
Cattan,  Nehemiah  314,  Saml.   176. 
Catten,  Jno.  491. 
Catterell,  Edward  69. 
Catton,  Hanah  267. 
Cattlett,  John  254,  261,  419,  420,  481, 

487,  528,  557. 
Catts,  Susanna  400. 
Catylin,  Henry  73. 
Caudell,  Antho.  334,  Phillipp  55. 
Caufill,  Wm.  336. 
Caully,  Robert  65. 
Caus,  Tho.  199. 
Causby,  Tho.  47. 
Causey,  David  342,  Jane  123,  John  3U, 

Mr.  134,  Nathaniell  93,  165,  Tho.  21, 

37,  61,  94,  116,  122,   123,  128,  139, 

483. 
Causey's  Care,  154. 
Causey's  Clear e  81,  154,  165. 


General  Index 


605 


Causey's  Feild,   94. 

Causington,  Walter  270. 

Causon,  Nehemiah  144. 

Causon's  Feild,  75. 

Cavalier,  Isaac  200. 

Cave,  John  91,  484,  Patrick  128,  Robt. 
36. 

Cavelery,  John  377. 

Caveley,  Jno.  378. 

Caves,  Edw.  264,  Maudelin  86,  Man- 
delin  93. 

Caves,  two,  470. 

Caves,  called  Machezan  402. 

Cawch,  Lyon  265. 

Cawcott,  Georg   113. 

Cawker,  John  33,  60. 

Cawlins,  Tho.  369. 

Cawly,  Edw.  209,  Wm.  458. 

Cawsey,  John  165,  Tho.  226,  393. 

Cawson,  Jno.  544. 

Caynhoo,  Wm.  539. 

Cecill,  Alegerwell  554. 

Ceely,  Francis  178,  214,  Geo.  509,  Mar- 
gery 126,  Mr.  416,  Tho.  426,  493, 
506,  568,  Tobias  506,  Wm.  268. 

Ceety,  Thomas  553. 

Cely,  Tho.  175. 

Celly,  John  483,  551. 

Cerye,  Jon.  94. 

Cesar,  Mary  232,  Paul  347. 

Cess,  John  308. 

Chadd,  Joseph  88. 

Chaddworth,  Tho.  150. 

Chadwell,  Ann  210,  Dan.  285,  Jno.  481, 
Mich.  499,  Nich.  481. 

Chadwick,  Jno.  352. 

Chadwin,  George,  546. 

Chaire,  Faith  548. 

Chalke,  Fra.  428. 

Challace,  James  312. 

Challenge,  Margery  291,  Sam.  291. 

Challes,  Edw.   154,  Robt.  525. 

Challice,  James  255. 

Challis,  Edw.  112,  154. 

Chaloys,  Sisly  306,  308. 

Cham,  504. 

Chambeech,  Cha.  267. 

Chamber,  Margery  277,  Robt.  116. 

Chamberlaine,  Leon.  56,  238,  256,  302, 
304,  307,  338. 

Chamberlane,  Jon.  143. 

Chamberlin,  Christ.  144,  Wm.  259. 

Chamberline,  Jno.  526,  Leon.  346,  495, 
502,  506,  Capt.  347,  464. 

Chambers,  Danl.  295,  Francis  83,  141, 
336,  James  168,  Jon.  61,  115,  134, 
231,    235,    259,    365,   493,    503,    519, 


531,Marg.  202,  Nath.  242,  Rich.  528, 
Robt.  306,  427,  Rowland  26,  Tho. 
144. 

Chamlett,  Randall  296. 

Chambly,  Ann  216,  Randall  398. 

Chamby,  Ann  216. 

Chamell,  John  61. 

Chamleech,  Cha.  267,  Randall  334,  Ran- 
dolph 383,  411. 

Chamley,  Randall  385,  Rich.  384. 

Chamly,  Randall  234. 

Chamnis,  John  258. 

Chamockin,  359. 

ChamokTns,  472. 

Champin,  Edw.  32. 

Champins,  Francis  63. 

Champion,  Edw.  103,  John  23,  147,  514, 
Mary  83,  Percivall  25,  65,  96,  113, 
119,  Pascoe  274. 

Chandiler,  Tho.  264. 

Chandler,  Ann  190,  Arth.  203,  334, 
Benj.  349,  Danl.  275,  Eliz.  44,  Job. 
220,  332,  John  15,  16,  44,  156,  273, 
341,  382,  385,  Mr.  382,  460,  Nicho. 
257,  Richd.  220,  Robt.  524,  Sarah 
275,  Susan  128,  Tho.  22,  Wm.  97,  128. 

Chandley,  Wm.  97. 

Chandy,  Thomas  553. 

Chanelor,  John  182. 

Channell,  Brine  of  535. 

Channon,  Geo.  89. 

Chant,  Andrew  22,  39. 

Chanter,  Job.  179. 

Chantry,  Richd.  204,  318. 

Chaple,  Thomas  535. 

Chapleman,  Marv  196. 

Chaplin,  John  128,  168,  212,  273,  494, 
Sarah  115. 

Chaplins,  100. 

Chaplin's  Choice  20. 

Chaplin's  Land,  93,  129. 

Chaplyn,  Robt.  79. 

Chapman,  Adam  307,  Alexr.  82,  Barbary 
41,  96,  136,  Francis  10,  Geo.  229, 
236,  271,  318,  348,  349,  369,  370, 
387,  409,  Humph.  119,  427,  Jeffry 
435,  Jon.  54,  John  120,  135,  213, 
329,  375,  377,  416,  523,  Mathew  133, 
Mr.  409,  Nich.  324,  Pascoe  157, 
Phill.  78,  Richd.  157,  274,  Robt.  213, 
Roger  120,  Simon  538,  Thomas  62, 
208,  217,  225,  265,  268,  Wm.  82, 
112,  133,  160,  339,  Winter  189,  190. 

Chapman's  devident  70. 

Chappawansick,  319,  461. 

Chappell,  Jon.  97,  John  185,  Robt.  122, 
133,  443,  Tho.  198,  Samuel  443. 


606 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Chappie,  Thomas  535,  542. 

Charle,  Edmd.  242,  Jno.  452. 

Charles,  Ja.  240,  James  525,  Joane  432, 
Jon.  74,  John  197,  219,  443,  562, 
Phillip  211,  323,  326,  327,  373,  387, 
512,  565,  Tho.  275,  Wm.  97,  146. 

Charlett,  Hanafitts  281. 

Charleton,  Bridgett  157,  Henry  101,  Mr. 
131,  174,  Stephen  129,  Xtopher.  566, 
Norton  559,  Stephen  79,  82,  200,  201, 
294,   412,   517,  Wm.   382,  411,   524. 

Charlwood,  Rich.   386. 

Charly,  Wm.  299. 

Charnis,  John  258. 

Charnock,  An  538,  John  147. 

Charnold,  Tho.  282. 

Charratt,  Jane  476. 

Chart,  Jno.  528. 

Charter,  Jon.  107. 

Charter  of  Orders  1,  321. 

Chartry,  Wm.  390. 

Charywell,  Saml.  107. 

Chase,  Huldy  274,  479,  Wm.  261,  551. 

Chashey,  Nicholas  393. 

Chasley,  Nicholas  393. 

Chassey,  Mr.  217. 

Chaters,  Fra.  235. 

Chatton,  Wm.  390. 

Chawke,  John  36. 

Cheaning,  Robt.   182. 

Chechly,  Lady  507. 

Checkly,  Sir  Henry  444. 

Checkroes  Neck  43. 

Cheely  Tho.  290. 

Cheemockin,  249. 

Cheeseman,  Edward  377,  John  35,  37, 
39,  65,  74,  122,  232,  263,  Lt.  32. 

Cheesly,  Garrett  438. 

Cheesman,  Capt.  113,  190,  Edw.  69,  74, 
464,  Edmond  122,  202,  John  7,  53, 
69,  88,  127,  128,  262,  419,  469. 

Cheesecake,  243. 

Cheesome,  Richd.  146. 

Cheetwood,  John  216. 

Chesley,  Phillip  253,  262. 

Cheffield,  Anne  264. 

Cheines,  Margt.  307,  Martin  294. 

Cheldnedee,  Wm.  203. 

Cheley,  Mr.  250. 

Chely,  Thomas  539. 

Chelmedge,  William  10,  334. 

Chemokins  Devident,  480. 

Chenell,  Tho.  189. 

Chenerell,  Tho.  189,  214. 

Cheney,  Jno.  526. 

Chenner,  Nich.  240. 

Chenny,  Jno.  526. 


Cheny,  Mary  548,  Tho.  476,  548. 

Cher,  Stephen  554. 

Cherid,  Samll.  459- 

Cherrey,  Abigail  371. 

Cherrick,  Domine  247. 

Cherriston,  401. 

Cherry,    Franc.    150,    John    73,    Richd. 

313,  358. 
Cherrystones  77,  147. 
Chescake  178. 
Cheseman,  Hen.  493. 
Chesheire,  Jno.  371,  Robt.  28. 
Cheskiake,  121. 

Chesley,  Phillip  192,  196,  Wm.  382. 
Cheslie,  Phillipp  377. 
Chesly,    Henry    198,    Phillip    231,    215, 

288,  291,  310,  311,  474,  517,  524. 
Chessee,  Holliday  270. 
Chester,   An    518,   Jno.    552,   Katherine 

359,   364,  Phillip  335,   518,  Thomas 

359,  Wm.  426,  538. 
Cheston,  Ri.  562. 
Chetanck  208. 
Chetank  Towne  208. 
Cheton,  Marke  138. 
Chetwood,    Tho.    399,    414,    436,    441, 

442,  459,  460,  463,  499,  514,  531. 
Chettwood,  Tho.  384,  435. 
Chevell,  Tho.  189. 
Cheverel,  Barth.  242,  Tho.  214. 
Chew,  Ann  558,  John  2,  3,  44,  62,  100, 

101,  113,  223. 
Chewing,  Geo.  189. 
Chewning,  Geo.  177,  189. 
Cheyney,  Benj.  82,  Jno.  411,  526,  Robt. 

120. 
Cheyny,  Robt.  54. 
Chichester,  Wm.  269. 
Chichley,  Sir  Henry  253,  291,  334,  380, 

384,   397,  422,  458,   524,  Lady  253, 

273,  281,  313. 
Chick,  Hugh  176. 

Chickahominy  123,  126,  173,  364,  528. 
Chickahominy  Gate  492. 
Chickacone  375,  397,  462,  491. 
Chickett,  Jno.  341. 
Chickyake  220,  King  of  220. 
Chiffton,  Paule  190. 
Chigain,  Wm.  127. 
Chilcott,  Tho.  28. 
Chilcurne,  Wm.  287. 
Child,  Ann  290,  300,  John  287,  Richd. 

24,  Tho.  97,  138,  266. 
Childers,  Margtt.  555. 
Childes,  Mr.  468,  Susanna  400,  Walter 

451. 
Childman,  Jacob  517. 


General  Index 


607 


Childs,  Richd.  79,  121,  Walter  116. 
Chiles,  Eliz.   104,  Geo.  216,  Law.  195, 

Mr.    231,    313,    317,    399,    409,    503, 

Sarah    239,    Susan    239,    Walter    87, 

103,  104,  140,  186,  189,  Wm.  104. 
Chilman,  Nicho.  165. 
Chilton,  Edw.  226,  Stephen  201. 
Chilturne,  Wm.  405. 
Chinn,  John  436,  475. 
Chingomuxon,  358. 
Chinkahun,  486. 

Chinley,  John  178,  410,  441,  Peter  431. 
Chipnell,  Joseph  201. 
Chippoakes,    94,    112,    146,    153,    158, 

165,  211,  215. 
Chirurgion,  55,  78,  81,  92,  299,  350. 
Chiskeiake,    75,    79,    82,    84,    91,    114, 

117,    120,    125,    132,    180;    King    of 

239,  New  278,  Old  264,  Towne  79- 
Chissenessecks,  328. 
Chiter,  Anne  260. 
Chitley,  David  483. 
Chittwood,  Henry  509,  Wm.  54. 
Chiverfall,  Hum.  312. 
Chizell,  Joseph  350. 
Choetanck,  496. 
Chomocken,  297. 
Chore,  Stephen  554. 
Chotanke,  242,  470. 
Chote,  Tho.  32. 

Chouninee,  Jno.  563,  Robt.  242,  498. 
Chovell,  James  222. 
Chown,  Henry  452. 
Chowning,  Fra.  470,  Geo.  44,  134,  148, 

Robt.  433,  494,  496,  497,  502. 
Chowninge,   Geo.   154,   237,  Robt.  237, 

357,  361,  365,  384,  502. 
Chresty,  Garrett  438. 
Chrightoane,  Tho.  386. 
Chrisppe,  Jno.  157. 
Christer,  Jon.  44. 
Christi,  Garat  546. 
Christian,     Anne     388,     Christian     371, 

Richd.   144,  Thomas   364,   420,  Wm. 

275. 
Christmas,   Dictoris   8,    12,    18,   24,    35, 

88,   117,   136,    175,   182,   331,   Isabell 

35,   117,  136,  Rich.  61,  land  of  152. 
Chroshaw,    Cuthbert    361,    Judith    351, 

Major  336,  Joseph  361. 
Chubb,  Mary  216. 
Chuchett,  Eliz.  221. 
Chudworth,  Bridget  250. 
Chumbly,  Randall  398. 
Chunahan,  Morkum   307. 
Chuning,  Robt.  412. 
Churme,  Wm.  375. 


Chumer,  Cuthbert  220. 

Church,  Adam  348,  An  403,  Eliz.  331, 
Hannah  361,  Henrv  195,  Martin  113, 
Nicho.  200,  Samuell  49,  Tho.  164, 
Wm.  252,  284. 

Church,  tne  8,  76,  106,  118,  149,  159, 
169,  292,  Yeocomoco  491,  Yard  154, 
439,  560. 

Churchyard,  Barbary  566. 

Churchill,  Doro.  454. 

Churchwell,  Saml.  219. 

Churle,  Jno.  452. 

Chutterbuck,  Henry  480. 

Chycott,  Phil.  272. 

Chyles,  Mr.  270. 

Chymahocans,  336. 

Cicann,  Dennis   131. 

Cicks,  James  154. 

Cicell,   Thomas   439. 

Cisburne,  James  493. 

Cisell,  Wm.  431. 

Cittinge,  Jno.  249. 

City,  Charles:  60,  165,  226;  Elizabeth 
4,  8,  9,  10,  12,  13,  14,  18,  19,  21,  27, 
175;  James  1,  2,  3,  4,  8,  10,  13,  14, 
18,  19,  31,  85,  86,  96,  105,  113,  115, 
117,  121,  123,  126,  129,  145,  154, 
160,  169,  177,  187,  201,  224,  226, 
313,  314,  321,  340,  353,  388,  409, 
451,  488,  491,  540,  556,  560. 

Civill,  Tho.  136,  266. 

Clacie,  John  323. 

Clack,  Rich.  441. 

Clacke,  Francis  555. 

Clackett,  Leonard  91. 

Cladwin,  Geo.  444. 

Cladwite,  Geo.  438. 

Claiborne,  Capt.  366,  490,  Col.  362,  382, 
Eliz.  165,  Jane  359,  409,  Wm.  154, 
162,  165,  178,  247,  302,  339,  353, 
358,  359,  376,  398,  406,  409,  422, 
423,  467,  490,  506,  (See  Clayborne). 

Claie,  Mr.  351. 

Clakford,  Jacob  454. 

Clanck,  Robt.  460. 

Clansey,  James  106. 

Clanterne,  Edwd.  329. 

Clanton,  Marma.  352. 

Clap,  Eliz.  184. 

Clapham,  Geo.  271,  Margery  309,  Wm. 
33,  105,  196,  256,  278,  295,  322,  349, 
360,  374,  379,  384,  495,  504,  530. 

Clapham's  Slash  458. 

Clapp,  Eliza.  184,  Thorn.  218. 

Clare,  Ambrose  397,  441,  444,  459, 
John  188,  222,  357,  Mary  372,  Richd. 
500,  538,  Walter  309. 


608 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Clarford,  Jno.  204. 

Clarill,  Blanch  543. 

Clarke,  Alex.  118,  551,  Andrew  516, 
Ann  177,  Brian  287,  405,  Charles  90, 
Daniell  215,  268,  485,  486,  508,  537, 
David  99,  Dorothy  86,  117,  181,  202, 

556,  Douglas  74,  Edmond  250,  Ed- 
ward 49,  78,  90,  94,  144,  185,  551, 
Eliz.  79,  102,  161,  Ester  340,  Fra. 
203,  555,  Georg  22,  50,  285,  460, 
461,  471,  488,  Hannah  542,  Henry 
223,  228,  Hump.  192,  278,  478,  504, 
James  187,  189,  216,  277,  561,  563, 
Jon.  27,  John  59,  85,  125,  155,  169, 
174,  179,  201,  214,  262,  276,  294, 
344,  374,  377,  433,  457,  480,  491, 
497,  537,  564,  Jura.  196,  Mary  102, 

248,  513,  Michael  128,  217,  Nathl. 
49,  69,  Nicholas  31,  91,  99,  182,  206, 
Patrick  196,  Phillip  102,  103,  129, 
192,  Randall  140,  Richd.  24,  54,  143, 
160,  199,  517,  Robt.  69,  173,  492, 
Sampson  524,  Samll.  192,  277,  Tho- 
mas 77,  92,  115,  203,  258,  354,  Tim. 

557,  Uriah  41,  Ursula  382,  Wm.  24, 
34,  49,  59,  67,  69,  77,  78,  86,  100, 
117,  132,  228,  236,  239,  244,  253, 
254,  293,  385,  393,  426,  440,  556. 

Clarkey,  Jno.  390. 

Clarkson,   Ann   89,   Jane   89,   John   73, 

89,  96,  102,  108,  185. 
Clarton,  Stephen  201. 
Clartry  Wm.  390. 
Clary,  Marke  559,  Tho.  140,  250. 
Clasey,  John  249. 
Clason,  Jon.  75. 
Claton,  Peter  280,  Sam.  358. 
Clatworth,  Roger  297. 
Clauce,  Peter  307. 
Claughton,   James   378,   487,   489,   495, 

Tho.  397. 
Claus,  Tho.  176. 

Clause,  Peter  455,  Phettiplace  10,  11. 
Clausey,  James  106. 
Clauson,  Jenings  389. 
Clavator,  Wm.  465,  483. 
Clave,  Phillip  176. 
Clavery,  Andrew  203. 
Clavill,  Henry  359. 
Claw,  Wm.  544. 
Clay,  Ann  353,  403,  Edw.  207,  Francis 

249,  266,  308,  341,  360,  506,  522, 
Henry  341,  459,  John  27,  52,  59,  141, 
145,  152,  299,  305,  306,  370,  Lan- 
celot 101,  Samll.  399,  Tho.  169,  502, 
Wm.  306,  542. 

Clay  Banke  43,  58,  69,  88,  126,  295. 


Clayborn,  Capt.  219,  Col.  300,  461,  486, 
Wm.  531. 

Clayborne,  Edw.  49,  Jane  531,  Tho.  393, 
541,  Wm.  2,  3,  4,  6,  18,  48,  70,  72, 
149,  186,  223,  244,  252,  290,  292, 
395,  475,  476,  565. 

Clayden,  Ellianor  93. 

Clayre,  Wm.  282. 

Clayson,  James  528. 

Clayton,  Ann  461,  James  449,  495,  510, 
519,  Richd.  51,  65,  Roger  375,  Tho. 
28,  81,  Wm.  212,  456. 

Cleake,  Tho.  207. 

Cleaner,  Tho.  249. 

Clearke,  George  322. 

Clear kson,  Jno.  468. 

Cleash,  Pa.  325. 

Cleaton,  Rich.  385. 

Cleaver,  Phillip  63,  Tho.  249. 

Cleavor,  Robt.  468. 

Cleborne,  Hen.  373. 

Clemence,  Wm.  358. 

Clemens,  Dan.  506,  Eliz.  391,  John  197. 

Clement,  Ezekiel  153,  Jeremiah  28,  153, 
John  28,  Margarett  34,  Rich.  123, 
Robert  98,  Tho.  428. 

Clements,  Amey  153,  Cornelius  145, 
Edey  28,  Eliz.  16,  Ezechiell  16,  Jere- 
miah 16,  39,  40,  45,  56,  73,  90,  94, 
111,  283,  549,  Mary  195,  Nicholas 
16,  Rich.  45,  216,  Robt.  116,  Wm. 
363,  532. 

Clemson,  Leo.  430. 

Clenes,  Jno.  249. 

Clerepian,  297. 

Clere,  James  325,  Tobias  455. 

Clerifull,  Edward  362. 

Clerke,  Ann  347,  359,  449,  Annis  331, 
Antho.  301,  Dorothy  239,  Eliz.  319, 
Fra.  286,  436,  Geo.  308,  Hannah  271, 
Henry  381,  433,  526,  527,  Humph. 
303,  309,  James  289,  311,  313,  370, 
389,  Jon.  227,  241,  John  250,  265, 
266,  272,  289,  296,  347,  349,  358, 
382,  433,  455,  516,  Margt.  449,  Mary 
233,  275,  312,  359,  433,  463,  Rebecca 
347,  Rich.  160,  312,  Robt.  192,  235, 
302,  351,  366,  Tho.  298,  345,  433, 
Wm.  41,  252,  267,  312,  316,  327, 
350,  352. 

Clerkson,  John  232. 

Clerkton,  Jno.  469. 

Clesty,  Garrest  444. 

Cletter,  Tho.  485. 

Cleveden,  Wm.  133. 

Clever,  Mary  250,  Tho.  308. 

Clevere,  Marke  102. 


General  Index 


609 


Cleves,  Jno.  249. 

Clewedge,  Francis  262. 

Clewly,  Eliz.  150. 

Clewmore,  Symon  208. 

Cley,  Ann  356,  John  112,  Mr.  351. 

Cleyborne,  Capt.  186,  Wm.  71. 

Cleyton,  James  449,  Roger  425. 

Cliff,  Robt.  230. 

Cliffe,  Mary  567,  Nich.  93,  Robt.  567. 

Clifford,  Hen.  491,  Martin  299,  Oliver 

126. 
Cliford,  John  385. 
Clift,  Robt.  488. 
Clifton,  Ann  453,  Cornelius  430,  Francis 

528,  Jno.  431,  Lady   172,   Paul   199, 

Richd.  139,  567,  Robt.  528,  Tho.  101, 

,217,  530. 
Clinker,  Thomas  542. 
Clinn,  Gillina  328. 
Clint,  John  299. 
Clinton,  Cornelius   337,  390,  Mary  47, 

65,  261. 
Clipwell,  Thomas  99. 
Clisse,  Eliz.  291. 
Clobe,  David  266. 
Clocke,  Thomas  144. 
Clooke,  Tho.  39. 
Cloomer,  Ann  386. 
Clones,  John  290. 
Closby,  Eliz.  199. 
Closse,  Patrick  127. 
Clother,  Jno.  559. 
Clothier,  Richd.  251. 
Cloud,  Robt.  148. 
Cloughton,  James   205,   319,   351,   352, 

355,  361,  John  333. 
Clover,  Mary  250. 
Clowd,  Tho.  397. 
Clowderson,  Fred.  528. 
Clowdley,  Wm.  208. 
Clowen,  Jno.  348. 
Clower,  Jno.  397. 
Clowman,  Edmd.  275. 
Cloyd,  Henry  178. 
Cloyden,  Sarah  89,  150. 
Cloyes,  Jon.  32. 

Cloys,  Phettiplace  102,  Wm.  102. 
Cloyse,  Phett.  34,  38. 
Clubb,  Eliza.  192. 
Clue,  Mary  513. 
Cluly,  Nicho.  173. 
Clutterbrook,  Ann  446. 
Clynton,  Cornelius  394. 
Coach,  Chas.  567,  Fra.  238. 
Coard,  David  366,  Wm.  322. 
Coale,  Adam  354,  Edw.  326,  395,  457, 

461,  473,   565,   Fra.   249,   Geo.  444, 


James  467,  John  249,  323,  328,  455, 
475,  499,  568,  Martin  235,  248,  256, 
283,  292,  332,  362,  421,  506,  Richd. 
326,  446,  Timothy  565,  Tho.  227, 
Walter  443,  475,  Wm.  281. 

Coaleman,  Nich.  351. 

Coales,  Ann  283,  Edw.  287,  475. 

Coalson,  Jane  405. 

Coalter,  Mary  386. 

Coane,  Jno.  437. 

Coate,  Abraham  137,  Adam  354,  Thomas 
436. 

Coates,  Anthony  540,  Edw.  525,  Hanah 
555,  Hugh  383,  John  203,  375,  455, 
Susan  555,  562,  Thomas  368,  Wm.  525. 

Cobb,  Andrew  180,  Ann  457,  Benj.  77, 
Eliz.  77,  Hen.  411,  Jane  512,  John 
203,  291,  364,  410,  Joseph  77,  116, 
117,  124,  146,  Mary  327,  512,  Nicho- 
las 372,  512,  522,  Susan  512,  Tho. 
166,  215,  277,  456. 

Cobbett,  Jno.  502. 

Cobbs,  Ambrose  111,  Ann  111,  Mar- 
garet 111,  Robt.  111. 

Cobin,  Xph.  324. 

Cobley,  Barna.  209. 

Coblier,  Daniell  68. 

Cobson,  Elias  514. 

Cocer,  Jno.  476. 

Cocham,  Geo.  458. 

Cock,  Ann  131,  Edw.  178,  Lewis  96, 
Maurice  411,  Nicholas  411,  Richd. 
58,  137,  513,  Robt.  338,  Sarah  449, 
Vincent  366,  Wm.  156,  458,  459. 

Cocka  Coeske,  Queen  533. 

Cockaram,  William  336. 

Cockdale,  James  185. 

Cocke,  Faith  491,  Ja.  426,  Lewis  25,  26, 
58,  Mary  444,  Murice  439,  Nicho. 
439,  Richard  54,  86,  120,  121,  266, 
441,  513,  Tho.  463,  Vincent  351,  366, 
487,  Wm.  331,  360,  Mr.  429,  432. 

Cocken,  Wethers  353. 

Cocker,  John  464,  515,  Lancett  279, 
Wm.  56. 

Cockeram,  Wm.  341,  342. 

Cockerham,  Jno.  562,  Mary  562,  Wm. 
562. 

Cockerell,  Robt.  447,  Tho.  366. 

Cockerin,  Andrew  340. 

Cockerum,  Wm.  114. 

Cockery,  John  268. 

Cockes,  Hugh  31,  Rich.  385. 

Cocket,  Arthur,  Henry,  James  316. 

Cocket,  Henry  200,  252,  352,  James  160, 
192,  196,  524,  John  150,  Robt.  35, 
69,  Samll.  110. 


610 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Cockham,  Geo.  283. 

Cockhead,  Edward  390. 

Cockin,  Samll.  531. 

Cockman,  Wm.  249. 

Cockner,  Robt.  493. 

Cockney,  John  539,  Stephen  185. 

Cockram,  Wm.  421. 

Cockroft,  Geo.  128. 

Cockrum,  James  314. 

Cocks,  Edw.  216,  Vincent  366. 

Cockshead,  Edw.  372,  494. 

Cockshott,  Edw.  29. 

Cocquett,  James  524. 

Co cs en,  James  73. 

Cod,  Jno.  549. 

Codall,  John  433. 

Codd,  Geo.  225,  Thomas  57. 

Codier,  Jno.  388. 

Codin,  Mary  349. 

Codne,  Mary  139. 

Codner,  Mary  476. 

Codring,  Peter  560. 

Codsford,   Richd.   290,    293,    304,    312, 

332,  345,  365,  376,  495. 
Cody,  Tho.  214. 
Coe,    Rachaell    525,    Sarah    326,    337, 

Susanna  326,  Timothy  267,  407,  551, 

553. 
Coeman,  Hugh  347. 
Coffall,  Abr.  235. 

Cofeild,  Eliz.  523,  Gresham  53,  543. 
Coffeild,  Gresham  95,  123. 
Coffer,  James  399,  John  449,  Wm.  185. 
Coffin,  Francis  29,  John  77,  Tho.  524. 
Coffine,  Anne  202. 
Cogam,  Charles  484. 
Cogan,  Jno.  534. 
Coge,  Peter  181. 
Coggan,  Jno.  534. 
Coggen,  Tho.  295. 
Coggin,    Nath.    382,   Sarah    100,   Thos. 

140,  385. 
Cogginton,  Jo.  430. 
Coghill,  James  523,  527,  Saml.  476. 
Coheane,  John  251. 
Cohild,  Wm.  452. 
Cohoke,  359. 
Coiby,  Alice  198. 
Coke,  Tob.  261. 
Coker,  John  47,  64. 
Colbeck,  Joshua  441. 
Colborne,  Wm.  242,  407. 
Colburne,  Nich.  468. 
Co%,  Ann  311,  Robt.  524. 
Colchester,  Ann  145,  370,  Jone  74, 

434.. 
Colclough,    Geo.    210,    214,    230,    260, 


359,  360,  396,  402,  522,  532,  John 
543. 

Colcott,  Thomas  439. 

Coldclough,  Geo.  234,  John  544,  Tho- 
mas 445. 

Coldham,  Wm.  314. 

Coldrin,  John  385. 

Coldron,  Symon  130. 

Cole,  Ann  130,  Anthony  82,  125,  Da- 
niell  382,  Dennis  278,  Dorothy  85, 
190,   Edw.    128,   212,  233,   259,   309, 

314,  396,  463,  559,  Erasmus  181, 
Francis  199,  256,  342,  Henry  209, 
547,  James  275,  408,  541,  Jane  387, 
554,  Jon.  25,  40,  68,  86,  John  62,  89, 
115,  160,  194,  307,  385,  396,  476, 
498,  527,  528,  544,  James  328,  Joane 
338,  Marian  344,  Martha  197,  Martin 
290,  359,  409,  522,  531,  Mary  525, 
527,  544,  Millicent  152,  Peter  287, 
405,  Phill.  447,  Rebecca  359,  Rich. 
27,  232,  237,  313,  403,  560,  Robt. 
33,  60,  519,  546,  Saml.  374,  Sarah  87, 
104,  Thos.  26,  28,  123,  155,  314, 
Timothy  402,  562,  Walter  559,  Wm. 
6,  28,  31,  82,  150,  442,  463,  549. 

Colebourne,  John  304,  Wm.  485. 

Coleby,  Thomas  554. 

Coleman,  Ann  260,  547,  Anthony  145, 
177,  240,  313,  Edward  71,  Henry  11, 
19,  27,  42,  136,  137,  320,  James  557, 
568,  John  182,  225,  279,  298,  375, 
472,  Kath.  42,  Mary  438,  Mr.  232, 
Morris  99,  Rice  441,  Richd.  213,  240, 
265,    268,   279,   291,    293,    303,    310, 

315,  316,  341,  345,  368,  371,  384, 
390,  423,  487,  500,  557,  Robt.  60, 
103,  115,  152,  500,  508,  535,  554, 
559,  Saml.  291,  Sibill  311,  Stephen 
403,  568,  Tho.  367,  434,  497,  Wm. 
42,    313,    329,    378,   489,   475, 

Coleman's  land  465,  Marsh  304,  Thickett 

384,  419,  431. 
Colert,  Chri.  44. 
Coles,   Edw.    266,   332,    372,    373,   424, 

Richd.  72,  Tho.  425,  450,  Wm.  466. 
Colewell,  Elias  166. 
Colewright,  Jona.  431. 
Colmer,  Tho.   143. 
Colkbrand,  Tho.  150. 
Colkett,  Chas.  449. 

Coll,  Abiah  538,  Edw.  427,  Wm.  350. 
Collar,  Tho.  265. 
Collclough,  Geo.  289. 
Collect,  Geo.  39. 

Colledge,  the  190,  Land  128,  129,  192. 
Coller,  Jno.  437,  Tho.  286. 


General  Index 


611 


Colles,  Edw.  138,  561,  James  346, 
Richd.   156. 

Collesford,  Richd.  276. 

Collet,  Ann  233,  Eliz.  74,  James  290, 
300,  Jer.  233,  John  130,  232,  233, 
Margt.  123,  Richd.  141,  252,  Sam. 
233. 

Collier,  Daniell  40,  68,  Henry  178,  347, 
James  517,  Marg.  517,  Mary  276, 
Robt.  559,  Sarah  559,  Tho.  254,  322, 
517. 

Collin,  Steph.  259. 

Colline,  Crane  387. 

Collingworth,  Robt.  527. 

Collinge,  Eliz.  296. 

Collins,  Ann  306,  383,  528,  559,  Arth. 
275,  Chr.  180,  Elias  93,  Eliz.  49,  180, 
187,  274,  303,  479,  492,  Ellinor  357, 
Frizyth  431,  Geo.  283,  528,  Giles  34, 
166,  181,  518,  Hen.  31,  James  387, 
457,  552,  Jon.  31,  82,  195,  324,  476, 
M.  404,  Mary  383,  Math.  504, 
Rachaell  432,  Rebecca  383,  Richd. 
126,  164,  255,  397,  438,  Robt.  382, 
383,  385,  Roger  377,  Susan  228,  315, 
Tabitha  372,  Timothy  527,  Tho.  31, 
335,  339,  360,  471,  499,  517,  560, 
Wm.  119,  Walter  3,  87,  Wm.  99, 
291,  353. 

Collings,  Chas.  391,  Gyles  151,  Jno. 
517,  Richd.  441,  Tho.  517,  Walter 
441,  Wm.  352. 

Collingwood,  Roger  560. 

Collis,  John  218,  Thos.  481. 

Collison,  Eliza.  201,  Miles  108. 

Colloway,  Mary  492. 

Collowes,  Step.  157. 

Collman,  Wm.  378. 

Collum,  Wm.  353,  356. 

Collup,  Wm.  245. 

Colly,  Margaret  499,  Tho.  51,  526,  Xtor. 
431. 

Collybancke,   Sarah   100. 

Collybant,  Sarah  35. 

Collynes,  Edw.   138. 

Colona,  Owen  454. 

Colson,  Jane  291,  Susan  22. 

Colston,  Francis  255,  Joseph  249,  Robt. 
486. 

Colt,  Elinor  218,  224,  Geo.  293,  Susan 
448,  Rich.  334,  Thomas  459. 

Coltclough,  Geo.  309,  322,  331,  362, 
365,  369,  Mr.  331,  347,  Ursula  362. 

Colto,  Presilla  535. 

Colton,  Ann  294,  Nicho.  148,  Robt.  546. 

Coltrey,   Phillip    198. 

Coltrop,  John  554. 


Coly,  Alice  497. 

Comandres,  John  178. 

Comball,  Patrick  357. 

Combay,  Will.  285. 

Combes  Rich.  35. 

Combey,  Ann  30. 

Combs,  Richard  554. 

Come,  Deborah  295. 

Comeings,  Nicho.  117. 

Comer,  Tho.  260. 

Comes,  Ann  197. 

Comfrey,  Robt.  267. 

Cominers,  86. 

Comings,  John  355,  Mary  375,  Nicho. 
117. 

Commings,  Symon  374. 

Commick,  Nicholas  511,  515. 

Commissioners  159- 

Comoron,  Arghil  222. 

Company,  land  of  the  8,  9,  12,  165,  170. 

Compeere,  Ralph  23. 

Compton,  Francis  180,  219,  Jeffry  430, 
John  147,  Mary  186,  Robt.  442. 

Comquest,  Lewis   181. 

Conack,  Phillip  266. 

Conah,  Donagh  564. 

Conapsacke,  Tho.  276. 

Conaway,  Dennis  493,  Edwin  291,  343, 
365,  430,  Eliz.  324,  Freeman  402, 
Henry  260,  Tho.  155,  Wm.  397. 

Conden,  John  135. 

Condry,  Gri.  184. 

Condy,  Jeffery  202. 

Cone,  David  125,  James  523,  John  399. 

Conecock  Brooke,  243,  247. 

Conell,  Nicho.  184,  Tho.  458. 

Conerke,  Dunkin  512. 

Coney,  Fra.  351,  Henry  17. 

Coney  Borough,  17,  18. 

Congden,  John  96,  99. 

Congdon,  96,  196. 

Congdell,  land  of  229. 

Conglin,  363. 

Congly,  John  61. 

Conibay,  Will.  285. 

Coniers,  Dennis  230,  247,  269,  329,  330, 
378,  432,  438,  497,  Francis  528, 
Henry  349,  376,  John  464,  509,  545, 
Tho.  173,  188,  289,  304,  343,  349, 
357,  391,  434. 

Coningham,  Dan.  319. 

Conjurer's  Feild,   32,  87,   137. 

Conley,  John  298. 

Conn,  Edward  373. 

Connagen,  Jno.  432. 

Connagrave,  Wm.  28. 

Connawaie,  Freeman  376. 


612 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Connaway,  Dennis  492,  Edwin  157,  257, 
271,  284,  347,  359,  374,  441,  Freeman 
251,  258,  Jarman  142,  Jon.  86,  194, 
Martha  271,  Nico.  214,  Tho.  461. 

Connawin,  David  356. 

Conne,  Deborah  343. 

Connell,  Wm.  295. 

Conner,  Phillip  110,  Wm.  19. 

Conngdon,  John  132. 

Conniers,  Dennis  245,  257,  272,  277, 
422,  Rich.  291,  Tho.  278. 

Connoland,  John  365. 

Conners,  Gillien  336. 

Conny,  Edward  364. 

Connydon,  John  132. 

Conon,  Wm.  536. 

Conquest,  Richd.  183,  270. 

Conserves,  Emll.  441. 

Consider,  John  389. 

Constable,  Mr.  120,  Sarah  336,  Wm. 
390. 

Constantine,  Jon.  57. 

Consues,  Emanuell  397. 

Contancean,  Jacob  382. 

Come,  Alex.  390,  Ralph  201. 

Conton,  Wm.  557. 

Convirs,  Tho.  159. 

Conway,  Aron  133,  Dennis  459,  544, 
Mary  512. 

Cony,  Ralph  93. 

Conydell,  417. 

Conyer,  Tho.  265. 

Coock,  Edw.  536,  Wm.  538. 

Coocke,  Jno.  387,  Wm.  449. 

Cooes,  Eliz.  216. 

Coogney,  John  239. 

Cook-Cooke,  Adam  138,  Alice  140,  Amey 

99,  Ann  26,  58,  255,  357,  Barth.  41, 
Christ.  148,  Edw.  139,  313,  347,  363, 
394,  403,  466,  474,  476,  301,  Eliz.  276, 
359,  455,  Fra.  362,  476,  Geo.  17, 
159,  Gerrard   100,  Giles   345,  Henry 

100,  220,  382,  Hump.  453,  Isaac  446, 
James  62,  172,  309,  381,  465,  483, 
Jane  77,  388,  Jerem.  229,  Joane  210, 
John  29,  54,  58,  86,  93,  120,  148, 
207,  211,  214,  223,  249,  267,  276, 
290,  300,  447,  478,  501,  569,  Jone  388, 
Kath.  198,  Leonard  548,  Maria  559, 
Mary  383,  Miles  121,  Mordecay  116, 
142,  200,  223,  308,  316,  331,  349, 
381,  550,  Mr.  200,  532,  Rich.  42,  54, 
91,  121,  150,  198,  Robt.  83,  509, 
Sarah  449,  559,  562,  563,  Susan  559, 
Symon  355,  Tho.  24,  28,  31,  32,  62, 
63,  83,  104,  124,  198,  350,  390,  396, 
514,  Tobias  225,  Willi.  45,  Wm.  47, 


64,  65,  128,  143,  197,  245,  254,  276, 
309,  397,  404,  436,  450,  494,  499, 
500,  524. 

Cookely,  Ralph  313. 

Cookeley,  John  263. 

Cookeney,  Hen.   31,   86,   John  87,   88. 

Cookesey,  Wm.  12. 

Cookman,  Rice  397. 

Cookney,  Henry  121. 

Cooks,  Wm.  278. 

Cooksey,  Geo.  268,  394,  Wm.  11. 

Cooly,  Tho.  391,  426,  427. 

Coomes,  Cha.  324. 

Coops  landing,  463. 

Coop,  Gilbert  362,  Robt.  245. 

Coope,  Eliz.  213,  John  202. 

Cooper,  Alex.  309,  373,  Ann  142,  195, 
252,  279,  342,  451,  Antho.  480,  Ben- 
nett 192,  Dan.  325,  350,  Edw.  106, 
207,  351,  403,  565,  Eliza.  274,  Fr. 
252,  450,  Geo.  208,  Gilbert  484, 
Hen.  29,  Jacob  526,  James  309,  381, 
431,  John  6,  31,  40,  62,  86,  94,  121, 
122,  178,  194,  289,  391,  480,  536, 
Justinian  47,  64,  112,  114,  116,  128, 
142,  147,  158,  Kath.  498,  Lewis  146, 
Mary  243,  369,  401,  Mr.  131,  140, 
166,  Peeter  150,  Richd.  109,  126, 
136,  178,  341,  Robt.  279,  365,  385, 
Symon  255,  Tho.  50,  86,  134,  142, 
166,  168,  197,  301,  401,  442,  535, 
539,  563,  566,  568,  Walter  109,  147, 
151,  269,  307,  507,  Wm.  79,  218, 
240,   313,   367,  440,   534,   535,   563. 

Coopers,  20,  161,  246,  283,  300,  331, 
339,  346,  355,  363,  371,  379,  381, 
435,  447. 

Cooperson,  Tho.  190. 

Coot,  Jerem.  229. 

Coote,  Adam  120,  Alexr.  339,  394, 
Francis  190,  Jeffery  393,  Tho.  348, 
Wm.  189. 

Cootes,  John  176. 

Coox,  Gabriell  278. 

Cope,  Guiles  300,  Jno.  491,  Margery 
491,  Tho.  322,  456. 

Copeland,  Christo.  39,  149,  171,  Hen. 
81,  366,  John  217,  Mary  200,  Nich. 

523,  Wm.  200,   238,   363,  90, 

334. 

Copelin,  Wm.  567. 

Coper,  Tho.  440. 

Copes,  Wm.  566. 

Copinn,  Tho.  390. 

Copley,  Hen.  341. 

Coplestone,  Annanias  28,  81. 

Coplyn,  Henry  447. 


General  Index 


613 


Coppedge,  Edw.  251,  495. 

Coppin,  Wm.  526. 

Copping,    James    452,    Jno.    514,    Tho. 

349. 
Copsas,  Walter  216. 
Copton,  Joseph  523. 
Coram,  Eliz.  166. 
Corassue,  Jno.  180. 
Coratoman,  436. 
Coratock,  260. 
Corbell,  Angell   395,  Ann  395,   Clemt. 

350,    Dennis    397,    Henry    250,    306, 

473,  Jno.  350,  Samll.  475,  Wm.  484. 
Corben,  Tho.  511. 
Corbet,  Mary  467. 
Corbett,  An  217,  Cha.  485,  Mary  358, 

467. 
Corbin,  Henry  369,  392,  409,  430,  432, 

567,  Hum.  165. 
Corbitt,  Ann  454,  Garrett  175. 
Corbone,  Baptiscoe  198. 
Corbyn,  Alice  372,  Henry  358,  369,  372, 

388,  432,  469. 
Corcott,  Mich.  200. 
Corde,  John  139. 
Cordecur,  Mary  294. 
Cordell,  James  300. 
Corderoy,   Edw.  474,   Elinor  211,   278, 

Wm.   302,   367,  442,  450,  474,  477. 
Cordery,  Edw.  211,  Wm.  211,  417. 
Cordes,  Kath.  267. 
Cordevar,  Eliz.  208. 
Cordey,  Nathaniell  57. 
Cordin,  Edw.  461. 
Cordon,  Grigory  209. 
Cordroy,  Edw.  278,  Wm.  278. 
Cordwallett,  Hump.  205. 
Cordwell,  Ann  51,  Margaret  432,  Wm. 

432. 
Cordy,  John  184. 
Core,  Mary   512,    546,   547,   557,   Peter 

554,  Richd.  375,  Susan  546,  Tho.  403. 
Coree,  Step.  292. 

Corestam,  Aron  104,  Derrick  104. 
Corewell,  James  183. 
Corey,  John  426,  Wm.  351. 
Corham,  Geo.  458. 
Corhoon,  Cor.  158. 
Coringe,  Eliz.  258. 
Coriott,  Mich.  200. 
Corke,    David    405,    Ja.    426,    Jane   77, 

Wm.  123. 
Corkeley,  John  208. 
Corken,  Tho.  528. 
Corker,    Capt.    465,    Henry    200,    554, 

John    81,    103,    124,    139,    152,    176, 

185,  374. 


Corker,  Moses  268,  Nich.  545,  Susanna 

275,  Wm.  341. 
Corlis,  Jno.  366. 
Cormack,  Daniell  145,  429. 
Cormake,  Dan.  299. 
Corman,  Nich.  431,  Wm.  370,  388. 
Corne,  John  151. 
Corneck,  Symon  531. 
Cornel,  Cornel  261. 
Cornelia,  Carona  307,  Marga.  326. 
Cornelis,  Jno.  341. 
Cornelison,  Comely  305. 
Cornelius,  John   349,   Kath.   426,   Mary 

349,  Robert  374,  Rowland  545. 
Corneliuson,  John  349,  539. 
Cornehill,  Peter  557. 
Cornen,  Gillien  336. 
Corner,  Hen.  294,  Robt.  428. 
Cornewall,  Peirce  272. 
Corney,  Wm.  78. 
Cornhill,  Peter  401. 
Cornwall,  Pastrow  294. 
Cornwell,  Peter  523,  527. 
Cornish,    John     181,    264,    Mary    266, 

Robert  70,  Wm.  207,  339. 
Cornishby,  John  208. 
Cornix,    Jno.    486,    Jone    363,    Martha 

363,  Samll.  426,  458,  468,  506,  510, 

Tho.  363,  Wm.  355,  363,  415,  426, 

Xtian.   568. 
Coronell,  Vincent  72. 
Corotoman,  347,  358,  383. 
Corotomen,  Indians,  343. 
Corowoman,  cliffs  of  311,  323. 
Corporation  of,  Charles  City:  15,  18,  19, 

Elizabeth  City:  2,  5,  6,  7,  13,  16,  19, 

71,  165,  Henrico  19,  James  City:   3, 

8,  10,  15,  16,  18,  28. 
Corraway,  Joane  155. 
Correld,  Jno.  386. 
Correll,  Tho.  142. 
Cort,  Arthur  556,  Joseph  403,  Thomas 

545,  548. 
Cortanecan,  Jacob  460. 
Cortes,  John  77. 
Cortlet,  Sam.  514. 
Cortlough,  Geo.  256. 
Cortsenstam,  Arent  98,  Derrick  98. 
Corvent,  John  278. 
Corver.  Robt.  428. 
Corwell,  Phillip  547. 
Cory,  Francis  538,  Jon.   243. 
Cosby,  John  292,   335,   520,  Mary  348. 
Cosham,  Henry  276. 
Cosheir,  Jno.  447. 
Cosens,  place  called  466. 
Cosons,  Nich.  83,  104. 


614 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Cosey,  Rich.  47,  64. 

Coss,  John  121. 

Coss  Coss,  500. 

Cossen,  Henry  144  . 

Cossens,    Francis    397,   John    381,    383, 

384,  400,  404,  462,  Margt.  183. 
Cossick,  Jno.  447. 

Cossin,  James  205,  Nicholas  91,  206. 
Cossum,  Arthur  566,  Henry  398,  483. 
Costeance,  Derrick  455. 
Costelford,  Richard  180. 
Costen,  Anne  286,  Eliz.  244,  Geo.  35, 

Georg  69,  Steph.  286. 
Coster,  Andrew  279- 
Costerdine,  Franc.  24. 
Costine,  Walter  379- 
Costons,  Mathew  218. 
Costring,  James  484. 
Cotler,  Jno.  399. 
Cotnam,  Henry  85. 
Cotswell,  Jno.  553. 
Cottell,  Tho.  387. 
Cotteen,  Jacob  432. 
Cotten,  Fra.  506. 
Cotterell,  Edwd.  35,  Mary  189. 
Cottin,  Wm.  197. 
Cottington,  Georg  46. 
Cottle,  Jno.  430,  Peter  430,  Ralph  430, 

Thomas  22. 
Cotto,  Presilla  535,  563. 
Cotton,    Cicely    83,    James    552,    Joane 

528,    John    285,    404,    Margt.     118, 

Peter,   554,  Rowland  74,   Susan  541, 

Thomas  554,  Wm.  59,  94,  101,  115, 

135,  444. 
Cottrell,  Ambro.  193,  Jere  341. 
Couch,  Alexr.  296,  Ambrose  446,  Chas. 

567. 
Couchman,  James  545. 
Coudell,  Geo.  184. 
Cough,  Chas.  567. 
Cougly,  John  61. 
Coule,  John  298. 
Couling,   Gilb.   344. 
Coulson,  Thomas  554. 
Coulter,  Mary  386. 
Coulston,  Francis  334. 
Coulton,   An   387. 
Councill,  Member  of  160. 
Councell   of  State  324,   480,   533,   536. 
Councell  Table,  162. 
Counter,  Abigail  558. 

COUNTIES: 

Accomac:  20,  23,  30,  31,  35,  43,  46, 
52,  53,  54,  55,  68,  72,  73,  74,  75, 
77,  79,  80,  82,  84,  90,  91,  96,  101, 


103,  106,  108,  110,  111,  112,  114, 
115,  117,  119,  121,  123,  129,  130, 
131,  134,  139,  152,  169,  259,  296, 
346,  360,  419,  425,  429,  430,  434, 
435,  452,  453,  454,  455,  456,  463, 
465,  481,  482,  483,  507,  515,  516, 
517,  524,  536,  549,  551,  552,  553, 
554,  555. 

Chickahominy:   408. 

Charles:  145,  354,  465,  485. 

Charles  City:   21,  25,  26,  27,  31,  32, 

34,  35,  40,  45,  50,  52,  53,  59,  60, 
61,  68,  69,  70,  72,  74,  75,  78,  79, 
84,  85,  86,  87,  88,  89,  93,  98,  100, 
103,  105,  108,  116,  118,  120,  127, 
128,  129,  130,  137,  139,  140,  145, 
147,  150,  152,  154,  158,  159,  165, 
167,  175,  181,  183,  186,  189,  198, 
199,  201,  202,  203,  209,  216,  226, 
228,  230,  231,  250,  254,  255,  268, 
273,  281,  282,  298,  303,  305,  314, 
316,  317,  323,  329,  347,  354,  405, 
411,  456,  458,  465,  468,  469,  472, 
475,  485,  490,  491,  492,  493,  494, 
498,  502,  503,  504,  505,  511,  534, 
535,  537,  542,  543,  544,  545,  550, 
561,  564,  566. 

Charles  River:  35,  38,  39,  41,  42,  45, 
49,  52,  57,  58,  62,  63,  64,  65,  67, 
69,  70,  71,  72,  73,  74,  75,  76,  77, 
79,  80,  81,  85,  88,  89,  90,  91,  92, 
93,  95,  99,  100,  102,  106,  107,  108, 
112,  113,  114,  116,  117,  120,  121, 
122,  123,  124,  127,  130,  132,  135, 
138,  142,  144,  147,  156,  166,  176, 
177,  180,  190,  220,  238,  243,  270, 
271,  272,  401,  468,  493,  511. 

Denby— Denbigh:  25,  29,  35,  370, 
491. 

Elizabeth  City:  20,  24,  26,  29,  32,  34 

35,  36,  37,  38,  41,  42,  45,  47,  48, 
49,  50,  52,  57,  62,  63,  70,  76,  77, 
79,  80,  85,  88,  90,  96,  98,  102,  106, 
110,  112,  115,  116,  117,  122,  124, 
126,  127,  128,  131,  135,  136,  137, 
145,  151,  154,  156,  157,  158,  159, 
162,  164,  168,  170,  171,  173,  175, 
186,  205,  209,  224,  239,  275,  320, 
331,  333,  380,  485,  493,  510,  511, 
527,  540. 

Gloucester — Gloster:  215,  216,  219, 
220,  221,  222,  224,  229,  230,  231, 
232,  233,  235,  238,  239,  241,  242, 
243,  247,  249,  250,  256,  258,  260, 
262,  265,  271,  272,  276,  277,  278, 
279,  280,  281,  282,  283,  284,  295, 
298,  302,  303,  304,  306,  307,  309, 


General  Index 


615 


312,  314,  315,  322,  323,  328,  329, 
330,  335,  336,  337,  341,  343,  347, 
348,  354,  358,  361,  363,  365,  368, 
375,  377,  380,  391,  393,  396,  398, 
402,  407,  416,  417,  423,  424,  448, 
450,  456,  462,  464,  470,  473,  474, 
477,  488,  493,  494,  495,  496,  502, 
505,  508,  509,  514,  515,  518,  519, 
520,  523,  527,  528,  532,  533,  536, 
544,  545,  548,  550,  551,  553,  555, 
564,  565,  568. 

Henrico:  20,  33,  36,  40,  45,  47,  49, 
50,  52,  54,  59,  60,  61,  64,  65,  73, 
74,  78,  79,  80,  84,  86,  87,  88,  90, 
99,  101,  106,  109,  110,  111,  112, 
117,  120,  121,  127,  134,  137,  138, 
140,  151,  157,  164,  192,  202,  221, 
233,  238,  243,  247,  262,  266,  268, 
273,  301,  323,  333,  334,  347,  352, 
425,  429,  432,  439,  447,  450,  451, 
452,  458,  464,  466,  471,  492,  504, 
513,  516,  535,  537,  538,  539,  547, 
549,  556. 

Isle  of  Wight:  55,  58,  59,  64,  67,  69, 

73,  74,  75,  76,  77,  80,  82,  85,  89, 
95,  98,  104,  105,  106,  113,  114, 
115,  116,  117,  118,  119,  121,  123, 
124,  125,  126,  128,  130,  131,  134, 
137,  139,  140,  142,  143,  145,  146, 
147,  148,  149,  150,  153,  155,  158, 
162,  163,  166,  167,  168,  169,  171, 

173,  176,  197,  229,  233,  243,  255, 
261,  273,  274,  275,  278,  280,  290, 
301,  303,  310,  316,  318,  322,  329, 
346,  363,  365,  367,  372,  386,  391, 
393,  411,  420,  421,  424,  433,  439, 
444,  457,  458,  462,  466,  470,  475, 
476,  478,  480,  484,  487,  488,  492, 
493,  499,  509,  511,  512,  513,  516, 
517,  518,  522,  524,  525,  538,  556, 
558,  559,  561,  562,  569. 

James  City:  20,  24,  25,  26,  29,  30, 
31,  32,  33,  36,  37,  39,  40,  42,  43, 
45,  46,  48,  50,  51,  54,  56,  58,  61, 
63,  64,  66,  61,  68,  69,  70,  72,  73, 

74,  75,  76,  80,  82,  83,  84,  85,  86, 
87,  88,  89,  90,  91,  92,  94,  95,  96, 
97,  98,  99,  100,  101,  102,  103,  104, 
105,  106,  107,  108,  109,  HO,  111, 
112,  113,  114,  115,  116,  117,  121, 
123,  124,  125,  126,  127,  128,  130, 
133,  134,  137,  138,  139,  142,  143, 
144,  145,  146,  147,  148,  149,  151, 
152,  153,  154,  156,  159,  160,  161, 
162,  163,  165,  168,  169,  170,  173, 

174,  175,  176,  177,  178,  179,  180, 
181,  182,  185,  186,  187,  189,  192, 


193,  194,  196,  197,  198,  201,  202, 
203,  204,  206,  211,  212,  215,  217, 
219,  222,  224,  225,  229,  230,  231, 
232,  234,  240,  241,  242,  243,  246, 
249,  256,  261,  262,  268,  269,  275, 
277,  282,  283,  288,  289,  294,  295, 
298,  299,  303,  304,  305,  306,  311, 
313,  317,  319,  322,  323,  326,  327, 
328,  330,  335,  336,  337,  338,  339, 
340,  341,  342,  348,  361,  364,  367, 
373,  377,  378,  385,  386,  387,  388, 
389,  390,  393,  394,  396,  399,  400, 
401,  403,  405,  406,  408,  409,  410, 
411,  414,  415,  420,  428,  430,  443, 
444,  451,  458,  464,  465,  469,  471, 
472,  473,  474,  475,  484,  485,  486, 
487,  491,  492,  495,  498,  499,  502, 
505,  506,  507,  510,  512,  513,  515, 
521,  524,  527,  540,  541,  548,  550, 
555,  563,  564,  565. 

Lancaster:  220,  221,  227,  228,  229, 
230,  234,  235,  236,  237,  238,  239, 
242,  245,  246,  247,  248,  249,  253, 
254,  255,  256,  257,  259,  260,  262, 
263,  264,  265,  270,  272,  273,  275, 
276,  277,  278,  279,  281,  282,  283, 
284,  288,  289,  291,  293,  295,  296, 
297,  299,  300,  302,  303,  304,  305, 
306,  309,  310,  311,  312,  313,  315, 
316,  317,  318,  319,  324,  325,  329, 
333,  334,  340,  341,  343,  344,  345, 
347,  349,  350,  354,  355,  356,  357, 
358,  359,  360,  365,  370,  371,  374, 
378,  380,  383,  384,  385,  390,  391, 
392,  396,  397,  398,  399,  400,  402, 
408,  410,  411,  412,  414,  422,  429, 
432,  433,  435,  436,  437,  438,  439, 
440,  441,  442,  443,  445,  447,  448, 
451,  457,  458,  459,  460,  461,  462, 
465,  466,  461,  469,  472,  474,  477, 
478,  487,  488,  494,  495,  496,  497, 
498,  499,  502,  503,  504,  505,  506, 
507,  510,  514,  515,  519,  521,  526, 
530,  531,  537,  539,  541,  542,  555, 
557,  561,  567,  569. 

Nansemond:  162,  163,  166,  167,  169, 
171,  172,  173,  174,  177,  180,  184, 
189,  197,  201,  205,  221,  230,  236, 
237,  240,  241,  244,  282,  290,  298, 
301,  318,  324,  327,  329,  338,  356, 
385,  387,  388,  396,  399,  444,  450, 
451,  457,  463,  479,  480,  488,  492, 
509,  516,  539,  543,  559,  560,  568. 

New  Kent:  300,  308,  309,  310,  311, 
312,  317,  322,  325,  335,  337,  338, 
339,  342,  346,  347,  348,  349,  350, 
357,  359,  360,  361,  363,  364,  366, 


616 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


367,  368,  369,  370,  371,  376,  377, 
379,  380,  381,  383,  385,  386,  387, 
388,  389,  390,  392,  393,  394,  396, 
397,  399,  401,  403,  404,  408,  409, 
410,  417,  421,  422,  424,  433,  440, 
451  457,  458,  464,  466,  461,  469, 
470,  471,  472,  474,  475,  476,  478, 
480,  490,  493,  494,  496,  500,  502, 
504,  505,  506,  507,  508,  509,  510, 
511,  514,  515,  516,  517,  520,  522, 
530,  533,  538,  541,  542,  547,  555, 
559,  563,  565,  566. 

Norfolk:  172,  179,  247,  284,  469. 

New  Norfolk:  65,  99,  118,  128,  130, 
168. 

Lower  New  Norfolk:  57,  59,  61,  62, 
64,  71,  72,  79,  80,  81,  82,  84,  86, 
89,  90,  92,  93,  98,  99,  104,  106, 
107,  110,  111,  116,  120,  123,  129, 
141,  143,  145,  147,  148,  149,  150, 

151,  155,  156,  157,  160,  162,  166, 
168,  169,  170,  172,  173,  174,  179, 
180,  181,  182,  186,  187,  188,  193, 
210,  218,  220,  221,  222,  229,  234, 
237,  238,  239,  240,  241,  242,  243, 
247,  248,  249,  256,  260,  262,  268, 
269,  270,  273,  274,  275,  276,  283, 

285,  286,  287,  288,  289,  297,  298, 
299,  302,  306,  311,  327,  328,  330, 
331,  332,  338,  342,  343,  344,  354, 
355,  358,  362,  371,  379,  380,  387, 
401,  415,  423,  433,  434,  445,  446, 
470,  473,  475,  477,  478,  479,  489, 
492,  493,  499,  502,  503,  504,  507, 
508,  513,  514,  518,  519,  527,  528, 
539,  540,  544,  549,  553,  560,  564, 
565. 

Upper  New  Norfolk:  55,  56,  57,  58, 
63,  65,  66,  61,  69,  70,  73,  76,  77, 
78,  81,  83,  84,  85,  89,  91,  92,  94, 
95,  96,  98,  99,  100,  101,  102,  103, 
105,  106,  108,  111,  113,  115,  116, 
118,  119,  122,  124,  125,  127,  128, 
129,  131,  134,  135,  137,  141,  143, 
145,  148,  150,  151,  153,  154,  155, 
156,  158,  160,  162,  163,  165,  167, 
168,  174,  175,  177,  180,  189,  197, 
226,  232,  408,  464,   473. 

Northampton:  135,  139,  147,  150, 

152,  155,  157,  158,  159,  163,  164, 
167,  170,  171,  173,  174,  179,  181, 
183,  184,  185,  193,  194,  199,  200, 
203,  204,  213,  215,  216,  217,  224, 
225,  230,  233,  242,  259,  260,  261, 
264,  265,  267,  272,  276,  277,  285, 

286,  287,  289,  294,  295,  300,  305, 
306,  307,  308,  321,  322,  324,  325, 


326,  327,  329,  330,  331,  337 
339,  344,  350,  353,  357,  361 
374,  380,  393,  400,  401,  405 

407,  408,  410,  411,  412,  413 
417,  419,  423,  434,  435,  443 
456,  472,  482,  483,  485,  513 

520,  524,  525,  532,  533,  534 
539,  540,  549,  550,  553,  554. 

Northumberland:  178,  185,  186 
192,  193,  194,  198,  199,  201 
206,  207,  208,  210,  211,  212 
214,  215,  216,  218,  219,  220 
223,  224,  227,  228,  229,  232 
235,  236,  237,  239,  241,  242 
248,  249,  250,  251,  252,  253 
256,  257,  258,  259,  260,  262 
265,  266,  267,  269,  272,  273 
276,  280,  281,  283,  284,  287 
289,  290,  292,  295,  297,  302 
304,  308,  309,  314,  316,  317 
324,  325,  330,  331,  332,  333 
337,  339,  341,  343,  344,  346 
348,  349,  354,  355,  356,  357 
360,  361,  362,  363,  364,  365 
368,  369,  371,  372,  373,  375 
377,  378,  379,  381,  382,  383 

390,  394,  395,  396,  397,  398 
402,  403,  408,  409,  419,  420 
422,  423,  424,  429,  430,  432 
441,  442,  448,  449,  450,  456 
460,  461,  462,  463,  464,  467 
470,  473,  474,  475,  477,  484 
487,  488,  489,  491,  492,  493 
495,  499,  500,  502,  503,  506 
510,  512,  516,  518,  519,  522 
531,  532,  534,  537,  538,  539 
544,  545,  556,  558,  560,  565 

Rappahannock:  251,  342,  345, 
350,  353,  361,  362,  366,  368 
370,  375,  381,  384,  387,  388 

391,  392,  394,  396,  397,  399 

408,  419,  429,  430,  431,  432 
435,  438,  441,  442,  443,  444 
459,  466,  461,  468,  469,  471 
475,  476,  477,  478,  481,  484 
491,  497,  500,  502,  503,  505 
508,  510,  511,  514,  516,  517 

521,  523,  524,  526,  527,  528 
531,  532,  537,  545,  548,  557, 
561,  566,  567,  568. 

Stafford:  403,  424,  432,  446, 
543,  544,  546,  547,  559,  563 

SufTolke:   100. 

Surry:  231,  238,  240,  244,  267, 
281,  283,  286,  287,  312,  326, 
335,  336,  340,  341,  342,  344, 
354,  355,  356,  365,  374,  386, 


534, 


276, 
334, 
353, 
415, 


General  Index 


617 


421,  423,  457,  465,  485,  487,  492 
493,  496,  497,  503,  505,  508,  511 
549,  561,  562,  563,  564,  566. 

Warrasquioake:  23,  24,  25,  26,  32 
33,  34,  37,  39,  41,  42,  45,  47,  48 
51,  52,  53. 

Warwick:  38,  39,  133,  137,  149,  155 
156,  158,  159,  209,  225,  242,  274 

302,  326,  339,  366,  374,  396,  408 
440,  443,  465,  471,  476,  477,  490 
500,  508,  518,  533,  539,  542. 

Warwick  River:  48,  49,  53,  67,  72 
77,  81,  88,  89,  101,  125,  126,  127 
146,  149,  151,  258. 

Westmoreland:  290,  291,  292,  293 
294,  297,  298,  299,  300,  301,  302 

303,  304,  311,  312,  315,  316,  319 
322,  325,  326,  331,  332,  333,  335 
337,  339,  340,  344,  345,  351,  352 
353,  355,  357,  358,  360,  361,  362 
363,  365,  366,  367,  368,  371,  372 
373,  375,  376,  377,  378,  379,  380 
382,  383,  385,  389,  392,  398,  399 
400,  401,  402,  403,  404,  406,  412 
420,  421,  423,  432,  435,  442,  446 
447,  448,  449,  464,  466,  468,  469 
470,  471,  473,  474,  480,  481,  482 
483,  484,  485,  486,  487,  488,  489 
490,  492,  495,  496,  505,  509,  512 
516,  517,  520,  531,  532,  534,  535 
536,  537,  538,  540,  546,  547,  549 
560,  563,  565. 

Yorke:  132,  133,  136,  140,  142,  144 
155,  156,  158,  161,  164,  166,  167 
169,  172,  174,  178,  179,  180,  185 
186,  187,  188,  189,  190,  204,  206 
208,  210,  211,  213,  214,  216,  218 
224,  227,  228,  229,  232,  237,  239 
242,  243,  244,  246,  249,  250,  251 
253,  254,  257,  258,  259,  263,  264 
267,  268,  270,  276,  277,  278,  288 
297,  298,  303,  311,  313,  314,  318 
324,  325,  330,  344,  355,  370,  377, 
381,  383,  399,  401,  402,  405,  410 
420,  421,  422,  439,  467,  468,  473 
474,  479,  480,  489,  496,  497,  503 
505,  508,  510,  511,  517,  518,  519 
521,  537,  538,  539,  568. 

Course,  Henry  433. 

Courser,  Margt.  286. 

Coursie,  Richd.  143. 

Court,  Edw.  454,  Geo.  228,  276,  Grace 

293,  Richd.  56,  Sam.  487,  Tho.  466, 

Wm.  231,  449,  528. 
Court,  General  the  399,  Rappahannock 

397,  Henrico  113,  James  City  8. 


Court  House  land,  526. 

Courtanceon,  John  486,  Jacob  486. 

Courtier,  de  Lewis,  341. 

Courtier,  Wm.   78. 

Courtman,  Francis  430,  Tho.  309,  500. 

Courtney,  James  28,  John  425,  447. 

Courts,  Wm.  432. 

Coury,  Tho.  347. 

Cousens,  James  80. 

Coute,  Alex.  390. 

Covell,  George  376,  Gresham  62,  Henry 

277,  John  72,  129,  351,  Tho.  458. 
Covenant,  Wm.  392. 
Coventon,  Arthur  348,  John  267,  Joke 

352,  Nehemiah  170,  183. 
Cover,  James  263. 
Covert,  Wm.  454. 
Covide,  John  262. 
Covington,  Tho.  485. 
Covy,  Ralph  93. 
Cow,  Jno.  552. 
Cow  Pen,  the  70,  160. 
Coward,  Margt.  195,  Nicholas  454. 
Cowden,  Eman.  209. 
Cowdery,  Wm.  335,  369. 
Cowdwell,  Henry  264. 
Cowe,  Coner  386. 
Cowell,  Eliz.  157. 
Cowen,  Edw.  286,  Tho.  286. 
Cowes,  John  23. 
Cowgell,  Stephen  507. 
Cowhead,  Rich.  316. 
Cowins,  Edw.  265. 
Cowken,  Tho.  244. 
Cowles,  Edmond  565,  Sarah  291. 
Cowley,    Sara    199,   Tobyas    199,   Wm. 

164. 
Cowling,  Jos.  195,  Tho.  237. 
Cowon,  Step.  327. 
Cowslan,  Ann  236. 
Cox,  Arthur  431,  Eliza.  192,  James  263, 

551,  Henry  195,  Hugh  31,  Jon.  75, 

78,  137,  138,  John  192,  196,  227, 
252,  265,  300,  303,  310,  368,  391, 
400,  443,  447,  537,  547,  Joseph  113, 
Julyan  196,  Martha  388,  Mary  147, 
Phillip  443,  Richard  44,  217,  356, 
375,  548,  566,  Robt.  426,  Sam.  467, 
Simon  171,  450,  Timothy  407,  Tho. 

79,  260,  300,  304,  377,  427,  451,  455, 
538,  Vincent  400,  464,  468,  Wm.  12, 
52,  59,  74,  75,  84,  138,  147,  229, 
236,  257,  334,  342,  348,  349,  350, 
387,  409,  446,  Xper.  305,  338. 

Coxa,  Denies  322. 

Coxe,  Christo.  261,  Hugh  165,  Wm.  61, 
133. 


61 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Coxendale,  137. 

Coxes  Thickett  72. 

Coxon,  Bryan  325,  Wm.  513. 

Coxson,  Thomas  82. 

Coyte,  Willi.  58,  89- 

Cozens,  Dow.  184,  Walter  540. 

Cozier,  Wm.  47. 

Cozin,  Peter  548. 

Crabb,  Jon.  36,  80,  Robt.  185,  Roger  97. 

Cracker,  Tho.  165. 

Craddtock,  Lt.  157,  Robt.  04,  82,  84,  547. 

Cradock,  Robt.  80,  84  Wm.  323. 

Crady,  Jno.  530. 

Crafford,  Dorothy  133,  Eliz.  271,  James 

469,    John    271,    Martin    166,    Phill. 

271,  Tho.  426. 
Craford,  Ann  65,  387,  Ed.  352. 
Craft,  Bridget  46,  56,  Edwin  453,  Jon. 

61,  Oliver  151,  Robt.  349. 
Craftin,  Tho.  35,  59. 
Crafton,  Tho.   161. 
Crag,  John  293,  Thomas  58. 
Craggs,  Mary  289. 
Cragh,  Dennis  433. 
Craig,  Jno.  362. 
Crame,  Fra.  273. 
Cramer,  John  385. 
Cramp,  Peter  430,  Tho.  71. 
Cranage,    Edmund    84,    Eliz.    84,    117, 

Margaret  84,  117,  Mary  84,  Wm.  84, 

124. 
Cranaway,  Jane  268. 
Crand,  Robt.   199. 
Crandall,   Edw.   280. 
Crane,  Eliz.  186,  Geo.  254,  Samll.  236, 

Thos.  545,  Wm.  250. 
Cranedge,  James  428. 
Craner,   Peter  195. 
Cranew,  Tho.  483. 
Cranfeild,  Anne  283,  Jno.  349,  Joseph 

430,  Peter  102,  Wm.  107. 
Cranford,  John  314. 
Cranly,  Francis  425. 
Crannage,  Edmond  117,  Eliz.  117,  Mary 

117,  Wm.  117. 
Crannidge,  Wm.  462. 
Crantle,  Jno.  506. 
Cranz,  Samll.  470. 
Craortt,  Edward  110. 
Crashaw,  Joseph  89,  117,  188. 
Crauly,   Francis  425. 
Crave,   Fra.   181. 
Craven,    Emelia    534,    James    115,    152, 

Richd.   4,    188,    202,    316,   456,    534, 

Susan  309,  Tho.  137. 
Craw,  Samll.  483. 
Crawe,    Roger    85. 


Crawes,  Henry  126. 

Crawford,  Ann  37,  Wm.  178. 

Crawle,  Wm.  275. 

Crawley,   Richard   553. 

Crawly,  Michaell  129. 

Crawshaw,  Rawleigh  2,  Joseph  336. 

Cray,  Henry  433,  John  433,  562,  Myles 

395,  Richard  433,  Thomas  562. 
Creadell,  Eady  179. 
Creame,  Saml.   136. 
Creamer,  Jno.  483. 
Creaser,  Eliza.  23,  Tho.  23. 
Creed,  Jno.  509. 
Creedle,  Richard  42,  135. 
Creeke,   Edward   389,   394,   Henry   554, 

564,  Nicho.  206. 
Creekman,  Edmond  445,  565. 

CREEKS: 

Accahannock,  204,  216. 

Accaquon,  563. 

Acquintimack,  485. 

Adams,   181. 

Aliens,  113,  206,  309,  518,  528. 

Allingtons,  27,  182,  332,  497. 

Almonds,  504. 

Amburcomico,  425. 

Anancock,    307,    322,    328,   400,   405, 

407,  418,  553. 
Annogotegue,  258. 
Apostique,  276,  281,  328,  485. 
Apamatuck,  355,  382,  432,  447,  448, 

449,  488,  546. 
Aquoconde,  236. 
Arakoke,  185,  418. 
Aranews,  427. 

Arsantons,  272,  311,  368,  424. 
Arathusa,  425,  453. 
Aratico,  272,  424. 
Archer  Hope,  4,   17,   18,  24,  25,  30, 

54,  75,  80,  81,  104,  105,  112,  142, 

143,  159,  160,  161,  162,  174,  225, 

241,  336,  472,  466,  486. 
Armeslies,  228. 
Armogotegue,  258. 
Armsbies,  372,  375,  423. 
Arses,  268. 
Arracock,  327. 
Arratico,  457. 
Attapin,  205,  253,  446,  441,  468,  483, 

520,  538. 
Attopotomoyes,    224,    236,    265,    276, 

307,  416,  417. 
Awhore  Cock,  422. 
Axoms,  197. 
Back,   101,    102,   122,   127,    146,   147, 

206,  339,  356,  407,  462,  468,  536. 


General  Index 


619 


Back  Bay,  140. 

Bagwells,  353. 

Bakers,  519. 

Banfords,  341,  421. 

Barbacue,  248,  254,  380. 

Barbary,  448. 

Barbers,  480. 

Barneham,  502. 

Barnes,  187. 

Basses,  261,  279,  398. 

Bassetts,  533. 

Baylyes,  60,  74,  84,  93,  175. 

Baylys,  26,  31,  32,  188,  228,  268,  503. 

Bay  Tree,  464  . 

Beaver  Dam,  327. 

Bennetts,  79,  92,  104,  136,  143,  150, 
162,  169,  177,  193,  203,  211,  213, 
220,  221,  230,  260,  269,  272,  299, 
315,  348,  380,  415,  473,  502,  503. 

Bests,  344. 

Betts,  461. 

Beverly,  135,  145,  154,  156,  162,  163. 

Bever,  480. 

Billinsgate,  84,   193,   269. 

Black,  212,  213,  249,  297,  359,  403, 
408,  422,  472,  475,  478,  542. 

Blackwater,  132,  258,  261,  391,  417, 
493,  506. 

Blands,  283,  337,  416,  437. 

Bluff,  344. 

Blunt  Point,  11,  81,  89,  350. 

Bonners,  284,  337,  416,  437. 

Boswells,  370. 

Brices,  445,  504. 

Bridge,  252,  331,  488,  522. 

Bridges,  359. 

Broad,  6,  16,  110,  119,  129,  150,  158, 
165,  182,  228,  229,  233,  234,  241, 
247,  256,  269,  273,  278,  287,  298, 
306,  308,  325,  342,  372,  415,  423, 
449,  456,  474,  477,  489,  497,  514, 
520,  553. 

Broughtons,  212. 

Browns,  241,  269. 

Browns  Bay,  21. 

Bryers,  444,  467. 

Budden,  217,  416. 

Bullocks,  160,   166,  180. 

Burbage,   197. 

Burnhams,  142,  144,  179,  237,  242, 
269,  325,  334,  357,  365,  370,  380, 
384,  432,  433,  494,  496. 

Burts,  496r  508. 

Bushwood,   195,  299. 

Butchers  Island,  147. 

Cabin,  266,  398. 

Calthorps,  26. 


Cameages,  405. 

Canawoman,  207. 

Cannada  Island,   156. 

Cannaughsaugh,  425. 

Capitts,  206,  219,  264,  360. 

Caratocke,   357. 

Carsons,  186. 

Carters,  132,  172,  439. 

Casons,  84. 

Cassatowoman,    144,   536. 

Castinesfeild,  37. 

Cattaile,  269. 

Causey  Feild,  61. 

Cedar,  344,  346,  519. 

Cedar,  Island,  153,  187,  192,  379, 
448,  308. 

Chapawansick,  282,  292,  302,  340, 
348,  367,  371,  373,  381,  389,  402, 
420,  460,  470,  531,  565. 

Chappells,  35. 

Checroes,  58,  103,  116,  123,  138,  141. 

Cheesmans,  29,  88,  89,  96,  100,  108, 
114,  122,  127,  146,  151,  168,  169, 
201,  215,  232,  243,  288,  468,  469, 
524. 

Chenck,  504. 

Cherry  Point,  217,  438. 

Cherrystone,  72,  106,  170,  225,  434, 
524,  532. 

Chesnutt,  148,  253,  265,  417,  485. 

Chesticond,  382,  400. 

Chetanck,  198,  255,  262,  373,  382, 
395,  423. 

Chews,  89  . 

Chiccanessecks,  322,  328,  405,  406, 
407,  418,  419,  454. 

Chigandehee,  185,  418. 

Chingehan,   185. 

Chickhan,  252. 

Chinkahane,  362,  422,  459. 

Chippoakes,  3,  8,  16,  22,  23,  24,  28, 
29,  33,  38,  39,  40,  42,  45,  48,  51, 
55,  56,  59,  64,  67,  83,  86,  87,  90, 
94,  97,  103,  104,  107,  109,  111, 
124,  134,  139,  144,  145,  146,  147, 
159,  160,  161,  168,  170,  171,  175, 
179,  181,  183,  187,  189,  192,  193, 
198,  216,  219,  238,  254,  261,  277, 
279,  282,  283,  286,  287,  303,  312, 
328,  335,  341,  353,  354,  415,  423, 
425,  465,  493,  496,  501,  514,  549. 

Chohoake,   251. 

Chiskyake,   178,   180. 

Chotank,  210,  280,  319,  367,  422, 
533. 

Chuckahann,   252. 

Chuckatuck,  221,  252,  479,. 


620 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Church,  6,  188,  251,  285,  478,  5 

Chyconnessecks,  307. 

Citty,  298,  469,  508. 

Claphams,  347. 

Clarkes,  21,  34,   145,   168,   170, 

560. 
Clarksons,  44,  63. 
Claughtons,   423. 
Claytons,  185,  495. 
Clerkes,  269. 

Clifts,  236,  306,  424,  488,  557. 
Cloughtons,  205,  251,  292,  333. 
Coales,  347. 
Cocke,  523. 
Cohoake,  245. 
Compekeeke,  179,  183. 
Conawoman,  199,  252,  397,  420, 
Connaways,  271. 
Copelands,  384,  496. 
Cording,  488. 
Corratock,  217,  261. 
Coratoman,  343,  355,  382,  400, 
Corrattawoman,  435,  454. 
Coss  Coss,  446,  492,  522,  563. 
Cossatomen,  132. 
Cow,    142,   178,   200,   203,   222, 

356,  462,  493,  548,  553. 
Cowards,  166. 
Coxes,  234,  238,  251,  265,  281, 

366,  368,  370,  397,  398,  420, 

442. 
Craddocks,  183,  184,  225. 
Craney,  151,  177,  212,  222,  258, 

263,  302,  367,  417,  505. 
Creans,  182. 

Crooked,  453,  454,  553,  554. 
Cross,    25,   27,   31,   63,   64,   96, 

173,  181,  264,  275,  305,  314, 

440,  459,  478,  486,  520. 
Crouches,  353,  562,  509. 
Cupids,  236,  382,  395,  423. 
Cursons,  186. 
Curratuck,   287,  413,   425,   427, 

536. 
Curtaile,  9. 
Cypress,  248,  363. 
Damarons,  429. 
Davites,  207. 
Dawsons,  166. 
Dedmans,  391. 
Deep,  6,  29,  33,  133,  156,  169, 

209,  216,  223,  232,  263,  268, 

297,  303,  314,  328,  346,  394, 

409,  421,  430,  445,  455,  477, 

482,  492,  540,  542. 
Dennis,  211,  251,  252,  264,  280, 

330,  371,  423,  463,  516. 


11. 


172, 


520. 


436. 


267, 


334, 
436, 


262, 


105, 
397, 


428, 


174, 
272, 
407, 
479, 

288, 


Derries,  516. 
Dinites,  207. 
Dividing,    207,    210,    214,    234,    293, 

303,  343,  344,  504,  556,  566. 
Diggs,  394,  469. 
Dockham,   167. 
Dockman,  130,  138. 
Doctors,  428. 
Doegs,  432. 
Doggins,  93. 
Donne,  108. 
Downs,   173. 

Ducking  Pond,  193,  194,  200. 
Dum  out  of  the  Mire,  84,  93. 
Dumpling  Island,  81,  96,  155,  302. 
Dunn,   35. 
Eagle  Nest,  363. 
Edwards,   166. 
Englishs,  44,  63. 
Episkapanke,  148. 

Faireweather,  272,  277,  445,  472,  504. 
Falling,   41,   73,   99,    109,    324,   447, 

451,  457. 
Faram,  302,  354. 
Farnham,    194,    255,    263,    388,    397, 

408,  411,  441,  464,  466,  485,  495, 

501,  504,  506,  519,  521,  526. 
Feelds,  466. 
Felgates,  401. 
Fentons,  188,  304,  502. 
Fishing,  187,  189,  207,  211,  257,  292, 

332,  339,  348,  363,  402,  441,  447, 

449,  483. 
Fleets,  254,  259,  354,  472. 
Flower  de  Hundred,    145,   203,   329, 

347,  405. 
Floyds,  512. 

Footeball  Quarter,  41,  94,  96,  156. 
Fords,  184  . 
Forked,   338. 
Freshwater,  132. 
Frosbury,  135. 
Garden,  309,  310,  377,  389,  402,  416, 

501. 
Garden  Patch,  202. 
Garpaghie,  425. 
Gaythers,    174,    179,    180,    237,    247, 

288,  416,  445,  469,  540. 
Gibson,  353. 
Gills,  213  . 

Gilsons,  282,  441,  442,  562. 
Ginger,  277. 
Gingotege,  453,  517. 
Gleab,  132. 
Gleab  Land,  159,  161,  221,  299,  337, 

416,  486. 
Godspeed  Fort,  113. 


General  Index 


621 


Goose,  172,  182,  564. 

Goose  Hill,   69,   81,   118,   125,    126, 

168,  301,  346,  439. 
Goulden  Vale,  528. 
Graves,  152. 
Grayes,  115,  152,  374. 
Greenes,  564. 
Gresham,  258,  519. 
Greyes,  113,  130,  176,  177,  179,  234, 

243,  562. 
Grigory,  181. 
Grimes,  186,  478. 
Gwynns,  96,  239. 
Hackers,  181. 
Haddaways,  223,  259,  297,  316,  343, 

355,  396,  400,  436,  437,  505,  521. 
Haigers,  170. 
Hallowes,    193,   279,   312,   400,  448, 

471,  486,  501,  536. 
Harpers,  238,  396,  521. 
Harris,   14,   18,  20,  37,  77,  90,   112, 

135,  159,  272,  333,  445,  504. 
Hartquack,  530. 
Hartwell,  166,  284. 
Harwood,  39,  113,  143,  500. 
Hatefeild,  64. 
Hawkins,  82. 
Heard,  246. 
Hemlock,  393. 
Herring,  59,  120,  128,  198,  200,  201, 

219,  237,  249,  284,  292,  359,  371, 

395,  402,  435,  444,  464,  483,  491, 

499,  500,  536,  537,  547,  563. 
Hoccadies,  230,  349,  557. 
Hodskins,  227,  251,  309,  358,  400. 
Hog  Island,  24,  28,  67,  70,  123,  187, 

336,  421. 
Hogpen,  532. 
Hollawayes,  449. 
Hollins,  333,  355. 
Hollis,  236,  249,  291,  292,  371,  382, 

400,  446,  447,  471,  501,  510. 
Hollowes,  207,  279. 
Hollys,  211. 
Holobush  Swamp,  465. 
Hooks,  173. 
Hopkins  351,  359,  404. 
Horecock,   542. 
Home   Harbor,    194,    196,    223,    244, 

285,  319,  358,  416. 
Hoskins,    178,    282,    467,    477,    478, 

500,  517. 
Houstones,  552. 
Hudnalls,  466. 
Hughes,  367. 

Hungers,  23,  27,  31,  59,  77,  101,  110, 
115,  123,  135,  155,  157,  158,  203, 


(233,  285,  286,  287,  294,  330,  412, 
414,  455,  482,  483,  520. 

Hunting,  291,  315,  398,  430,  481, 
482,  483,  486. 

Hurds,  209. 

Hutchinsons,    147,    158,   466. 

Indian,  98,  127,  128,  129,  148,  163, 
165,  166,  168,  169,  174,  189,  191, 
197,  201,  205,  218,  222,  240,  257, 
262,  329,  332,  356,  464,  473,  480, 
489,  490,  518,  564. 

Indian  Quarter,  131. 

Island,  364,  375,  420,  424,  462,  560. 

Island  Neck,  186,  309,  313,  383,  439, 
531. 

Isle  of  Wight,  238,  261,  278,  499. 

Jackmans,  191. 

Jarnews,  92,  199,  257,  398,  432,  456. 

Johns,  173,  254,  257,  295,  319,  504, 
533. 

Johnny  Boyes,  111,  112. 

Jones,  148,  178,  202,  215,  229,  231, 
271,  278,  314,  317,  330,  336,  390, 
414,  417,  424,  487,  498,  516,  562. 

Jordaynes,  188. 

Julians,  274,  314,  329,  477,  479,  565. 

Juring  Point,  72,  113,  154,  299. 

Kennedeyes,  55,  78. 

Kethes,  14,  20,  25,  29,  30,  33,  39,  50, 
66,  68,  70,  83,  103,  106,  108,  114, 
231,  283. 

Kickotanck,  453. 

KifTs,  283,  499. 

Kimeno,  214. 

Kimiges,  31,  53. 

Kings,  7,  23,  43,  68,  84,  117,  163, 
186,  242,  285,  290,  292,  294,  303, 
319,  435,  482,  487,  491,  510,  552, 
554. 

Kings  Mill,  174,  394. 

Kisquotan,  425. 

Kittawan,  535,  542,  543,  566. 

Knotts,  355,  502. 

Lambdens,  309,  424. 

Langleys,  385. 

Laughleys,  165. 

Lawnes,  16,  22,  24,  26,  28,  29,  47, 
51,  53,  64,  61,  70,  81,  103,  110, 
112,  115,  123,  130,  131,  134,  140, 
141,  146,  155,  160,  177,  183,  187, 
193,  342,  421,  458,  497,  503. 

Lawsons,  196,  198. 

Lee,  185. 

Lewis,  229  . 

Little,  147,  182,  247,  270,  332,  456, 
469,  542. 

Little  Neck,  192,  196. 


622 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Lilleys,  133. 

Long,  9,  57. 

Long  Point,  260. 

Long  Pond,  102. 

Lower  Bay,  125,  153. 

Loyds,  239,  268,  471,  544,  564. 

Lucas,  301,  527,  557. 

Lutus,  301. 

Lyons,  336,  421. 

Matchocoes,  32. 

Matchotanke,  285,  324,  338,  407,  432. 

Machotick,   199,  207,   209,   246,  258, 

304,  398,  424,  432,  449,  456,  483, 

532. 
Maccadegums,  258. 
Maccadequin,   194,   244,   314. 
Maddisses,  27. 
Maggety  Bay,  225. 
Maiden  Sw.  166,  284. 
Majors,  103,  155,  158,  167,  188,  204. 
Manakin,  375,  478. 
Manimass,  492. 
Mannings, 41 5,  540. 
Mansotanzick,  185. 
Marteaws,  271. 
Martiaus,  120. 
Marsh,  190. 
Marsh  Poynt,  189. 
Marracoones,  324,  338. 
Masons,  179,  302. 
Matchemeeds,  303. 
Matchepungo,     174.    200,    235,    248, 

249,  280,  286,  288,  332,  408,  419, 

454,  551,  553. 
Matchoux  Bower,  205. 
Mather,  479. 
Mathews,    280,    358,    443,    451,   479, 

543. 
Matomkin,   393,  419,  429,  453,  455, 

536. 
Matrons,  296. 
Matshcoes,  203. 
Mattadequain,    213,    245,    295,    396, 

425,  480,  555. 
Mattapony,  249. 
Mattawomens,  27. 
Mattawompson,  185. 
Mattrons,  289. 
Matthews,  237,  239. 
Mattoones,   243. 
Matticoe,  25. 
Mattrams,   185. 
Merchants,  27,  50,  239,  471. 
Merchants  Hope,  34,  40,  45,  68,  86, 

93,  100,  103,  119. 
Meredeths,  462. 
Merry,  396. 


Merryman,  299. 

Mesango,    452,    454,    483,    552,    553, 

554. 
Milbecke,  191,  343,  489. 
Mile,  Five  55;  Four  Mile  19,  33,  45, 

55,  60,  65,  87,  88,   151,  268,  464, 

429,  493,  Three  Mile  33,  Two  Mile 

15,  61,  151. 
Milford  Haven,  362,  377. 
Mill,  567. 
Millers,  214. 
Moggadegum,  188. 
Mongars,  399. 
Moones,  76. 
Moores,  96. 
Morratico,   276,   358,   429,  436,  440, 

441,  469,  485,  494. 
Morraticon,  254,  270,  273,  283,  292, 

312,  317,  340,  341,  342,  350,  399, 

438,  459,  466,  499,  521. 
Morgans,    132,    149,    202,    214,    229, 

311,  389,  512,  540. 
Moses,  322,  326,  342,  522. 
Mosses,  268. 
Mossacotanzick,  185. 
Mountaines,  534. 
Mountneys,  152. 
Moyses,  249,  335. 
Muddy,  50,  228,  452,  453,  455,  454, 

482,  483,  499,  552,  554. 
Mundins,  280. 
Mungars,  441. 
Munns,  463. 
Munroes,  360,  509. 
Myem  Cocke  340. 
Narratico,  458. 
Narrow,   186,   189. 
Narrow  Neck,  212,  491. 
Nandewe,  357. 

Nantypoyson,  357,  399,  437,  441. 
Naswattocks,  139,  163,  164,  170,  171, 

174,  199,  203,  216,  251,  260,  400, 

455. 
Nehuntas,  84,  171,  269. 
New  Begin,  425,  427,  428. 
Newhaven,  192,  195. 
Newports,  434. 
Newport  News,  105. 
Nicholls,  196,  488. 
Nimcock,    204,    253,    284,    329,    370, 

465,  506. 
Niopsco,  358,  372. 
Nondewee,  413. 
Nondui,    265,    276,    285,    327,    406, 

412. 
Nondices,  418,  419. 
Nusaponucks,  548. 


General  Index 


623 


Nuswattocks,  82,  119,  129,  131, 
163,  233,  242,  285,  286,  296, 
337,  339,  353,  356,  410,  418, 
482,  483,  485,  515,   520. 

Nyemcock,   220,   253,   282. 

Oatspekety,  472. 

Obarts,  245,  422. 

Occahannock,  164,  171,  179,  183, 
193,  213,  215,  216,  217,  230, 
286,  287,  288,  294,  296,  306, 
330,  331,  337,  357,  405,  406, 
418,  419,  452,  455,  507,  516, 
551. 

Occapason,  268,  310,  311,  312, 
393,  394,  397,  419,  420,  423, 
481,  495,  500,  508,  557,  561, 

Occupare,  526. 

Oldmans,  74,  78,  118,  120,  128, 
203,  230,  485,  532,  537. 

Old  Plantation,  18,  23,  28,  30,  43 
46,  53,  73,  74,  91,  101,   112, 
139,  155,  159,  163,  181,  217, 
295,  331,  344,  353,  418,  482. 

Old  Towne,  239,  499,  556. 

Omen,  558. 

Oppactenoke,  408. 

Owaseake,  501. 

Oyster,  35,  67,  100. 

Oystershell,  122. 

Pachimon  Tree,  241. 

Pagan,  33,  58,  67,  76,  104,  105, 
124,  131,  140,  142,  255,  270, 
278,  322,  329,  346,  364,  462, 
478,  492,  512,  561. 

Pagan  Bay,  166,  522. 

Pagan  Point,   17,  25,  27,   28,  32, 
69,  77,  84,  143,  148,  411. 

Papatricke,  391. 

Parchmores,  469. 

Parkers,  326,  359,  513. 

Parsimore,  231. 

Parthmores,  319,  347,  504. 

Parretts,  277,  324,  334,  371, 
438,  440,  448,  466. 

Parting,  510. 

Pasatinck,    292. 

Pasbye,  Hayes,  58,  88,  295. 

Pasbetanke,  470. 

Pasbetanzey,  266,  377,  469,  473, 
489,  560. 

Pascatoway,   372,  442. 

Pascatticon,  297,  398,  420,  493. 

Paschataynon,  334. 

Paskato,  334. 

Patomac,  290,  297,  298,  312, 
378,  383,  423,  481,  486,  489, 

Paynes,  299. 


152, 
300, 
423, 


184, 
233, 
329, 
410, 
536, 

341, 

443, 
562. 

178, 

,44, 
130, 
260, 


115, 
275, 
466, 


54, 


380, 


481. 


315, 
505. 


Peanckatancke,   135,   136. 

Pearses  Stile,  40,  41. 

Pease  Hill,  224. 

Peircies  Toyle,  88,  549. 

Pemenoc,  101. 

Peminoe,   106. 

Penninoe,  139. 

Pepper,  195,  204,  219,  223,  232,  551, 

Pepetick,  251,  254,  262,  311,  315, 
333,  364,  384,  423,  424,  429,  431, 
442,  511. 

Pepetico,  300,  302,  494. 

Perins,  210,  216,  231,  317,  318,  508. 

Perrys,  221,  374,  567. 

Perringes,  231. 

Pettibon,   177. 

Phesant,  261,  417. 

Phillips,  267,  285,  308,  353,  356. 

Piny  Point  84,  101,  205,  391,  524. 

Piscaticon,  400,  435. 

Piscattaway,   472. 

Plantation,  435,  534,  551. 

Pocomeck,  296,  305,  338. 

Pohick,  403. 

Point  Comfort,  12,  16,  44,  50,  63, 
135,  146,  154,  157,  159,  165,  173, 
175,  194,  195,  333. 

Pongotegue,  260,  264,  265,  272,  277, 
285,  286,  296,  307,  401,  412,  418, 
419,  456,  513,  525,  532. 

Pooles  Island,  533. 

Poore  Jack,  199,  251,  420,  520,  523. 

Popes,  279,  384,  429,  482,  483,  484, 
537,  538,   567. 

Popemans,  397. 

Poplar,  493. 

Poplar  Neck,  154. 

Poquoson,  24,  62,  88. 

Poropotanck,  131,  132,  220,  221,  224, 
229,  231,  235,  249,  256,  260,  272, 
276,  277,  278,  282,  295,  303,  307, 
309,  312,  318,  329,  330,  337,  354, 
380,  396,  416,  417,  474,  484,  507, 
508,  509,  515,  520,  545,  550. 

Porortridge,   448. 

Porrengers,   118. 

Poteseck,  421. 

Potobaco,   523. 

Potomeck,  210,  218,  273,  275,  334, 
531,  534,  535,  559. 

Pot  Ash,  326,  374. 

Pounceys,  234,  379,  383. 

Powells,  56,  85,  117,  138,  140,  145, 
157,  175,  176,  185,  198,  199,  202, 
236,  237,  250,  270,  273,  301,  316, 
354,  436,  440,  458,  504,  543. 

Powell's,  John:  26,  39. 


624 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Powetridge,  448. 

Powmansend,  526,  528. 

Poytresses,  334,  335,  472. 

Preslys,  185,  362,  422. 

Priors,  132. 

Proctors,  47,  80,  106,  137. 

Puamunaremo,  440. 

Puamunvein,  442. 

Pudden,  218,  283,  289,  386,  528. 

Purton,  545. 

Puscaticon,  227,  238,  255,  263,  302, 
303,  310,  318,  319,  362,  366,  368, 
381,  392,  397,  431,  443,  463,  526, 
567,  568. 

Pussell,  238,  445. 

Pussell,  Point,  275,  493. 

Putanak,  140. 

Puzle,   513. 

Quantico,  291,  300,  362,  389,  512, 
543,  544,  546,  547. 

Queens,  62,  64,  76,  85,  90,  92,  95, 
100,  102,  107,  113,  114,  117,  118, 
120,  122,  123,  140,  166,  169,  174, 
179,  185,  203,  204,  210,  216,  229, 
230,  247,  253,  257,  277,  278,  284, 
288,  290,  291,  314,  330,  342,  344, 
366,  387,  405,  410,  417,  440,  468, 
474,  485,  521,  535,  537,  564. 

Queens  Grave,  285. 

Quintenocke,  282. 

Ragged  Island,  156,  513. 

Rainshawes,  82. 

Ralphs,  169,  384,  397,  441,  511. 

Rappahannock,  311,  323,  353,  391, 
396,  407,  423,  444,  467,  478,  494, 
496,  512,  567. 

Rayes,  112,  503,  519. 

Repulse,  148,  265,  485. 

Reynolds,  82. 

Richards,  239,  433,  477,  508,  512. 

Rickahocke,  336,  366. 

Ridges,  514. 

Riggs,  240,  445. 

Robin,  308. 

Rolfes,  31,  89,  105. 

Rosegill,  181. 

Rosewell,  134,  142,  179,  180,  184, 
215,  392. 

Rosiers,  288,  382,  449,  501. 

Roulstons,  182. 

Sack   453. 

Saffalls,  232,  300,  375,  423,  462. 

Salfords,  5,  10,  175. 

Salvadge,  222. 

Sanderland,  377,  384,  385,  495,  502. 

Sandersons,  205,  524. 

Sandy,  45,  66. 


Sandy  Point,  160,  214,  272,  281,  383, 

438. 
Savages,  23,  96,  169,  524. 
Scoggins,  252,  346,  395. 
Scotts,  382,  402,  459. 
Seasand,  141. 
Seawards,    118,    125,    126,    128,    147, 

148,  158,  166,  168,  301,  346,  439. 
Sedgey,  159,  269. 
Seniors,  425. 
Seymes,   186. 
Shallo,  186. 
Sharps,  296,  383,  422. 
Shawes,  250. 
Shipp,  90. 

Sizemores,  95,  117,  137. 
Slaughters,  184,  257,  295,  504. 
Skeale,  518. 

Skeaths,  110,  242,  274,  495,  518. 
Skiffs,  14,  15,  17,  19,  366,  476. 
Skimeno,    214,    260,    262,    263,    264, 

310,  422,  474,  517. 
Smarts,  315. 

Smiths,  238,  331,  445,  477,  508. 
Smith's  Fort,  85,  152,  153,  176,  185, 

225,  267,  271,  487. 
Snare,  152,  182,  565. 
Snow,  203,  347,  548. 
Southern,  456,  490. 
St.  Andrew,  133,  153,  180,  222,  263, 

479. 
St.  Johns,   232,   260,    300,   303,   422, 

461,  504. 
St.  Michaels,  136,  152,  182. 
St.  Stephens,  232,  507. 
Stokes,  133. 

Strattons,  179,  181,  186,  210,  330}  519. 
Stokelyes,  453. 
Sunderland,  190,  219,  237,  247,  257, 

269,  277,  365,  370,  412,  432,  433, 

496,  497. 
Sunken  Marsh,  88. 
Swan,  195. 
Swan  House,  19. 
Swaniscutts,   453. 
Swifte,  49,  59,  60,  81,  136,  137,  239, 

273,  352,  499,  556. 
Swifte  Round  Aboute,  556. 
Symons,   280,   301. 
Tabb,  357,  437. 
Taberers,  466. 
Tamahun,  269. 
Tanks,  234,  272,  474. 
Tanks  Pasbye  Hayes,  43,  47,  58,  126. 
Tankes  Cheskeyock,  131. 
Tanners    219,    242,    260,    284,    285, 

286,  327,  329,  331,  415,  549,  553. 


General  Index 


625 


Tappahannock,  98,  281. 

Tappin,  447. 

Tapscers,  209- 

Tarsantyan,  311,  368. 

Taskanock,  496. 

Tassiatums,  555. 

Taylors,  197,  280. 

Teages,  399. 

Thomaham,  182  . 

Thomasins,   518. 

Thomas,  11,  12. 

Timber,  452. 

Timber   Neck,    120,    142,    147,    358, 

393,  416,  496. 
Tidners,  230. 
Tigners,    197,    198,    319,    392,    430, 

431. 
Tindalls,  126. 
Tomahack,  335. 
Tomahun,  335,  522. 
Tomkins,  169. 
Totopotomoyes,   229,   474,  477,   509, 

514,  515,  558. 
Totoskey,    251,    273,    361,    362,    387, 

392,  397,  408,  430,  433,  435,  440, 

442,  443,  459,  460,  467,  468  ,470, 

484,  486,  495,  497,  502,  505,  506, 

514,  519,  520,  531,  545,  568. 
Townsends,   120,  271. 
Troublesome  Point,  319. 
Tuckers,  331. 
Turkey  Island,   64,  86,  88,   93,   120, 

138,  167,  266,  405,  465. 
Turners,  135. 

Tyascan,  246,  323,  388,  515. 
Ulikins,  263. 
Upright,  227. 
Uteys,   22,   79,   82,  90,  91,   94,   117, 

208,  270,  289,  296. 
Vassalls,   117. 
Venas,  206. 
Vincopo,  89. 
Virgoes,  17,  32,  140. 
Vulcan,  235,  280,  337,  349,  408,  460, 

461. 
Waddis,  258. 
Waddy,  519. 
Wadeing,    190,    239,    243,    266,    281, 

391,  398,  450,  457. 
Wadeing  Madley,  189. 
Wading  Muddy,  363. 
Wading  Place,  449. 
Waire,  548. 

Walters,   326,   373,  490. 
Wards,  27,  37,  55,  72,  87,  138,  140, 

144,  147,  152,  188,  201,  209,  286, 

305,  314,  328,  354. 


Ware,  130,  167,  176,  181,  225,  254, 

257,  268,  293,  317,  389,  393,  467, 

489,  511,  515,  516,  531. 
Warrany,  83,  98,  107,  108,  167,  175, 

181,  202,  212,  229,  240,  243,  246, 

257,  323,  327,  342,  373,  379,  387, 

388,  511,  540,  558. 
Warrens,  408. 

Warwick,  32,  124,  295,  336. 
Warwicksqueicke,  17,  25,  35,  41,  73. 
Waters,  4,  13,  44,  72,  158,  209,  258, 

443. 
Watkins,  93,  130,  165. 
Weare,  336. 
Webbs,  464. 
Weeks,  217. 
Wellinge,   387. 
West's,  24,  30,  80,  92,  132,  136,  180, 

189,  214,  220,  232,  243,  383. 
Whiptewasin,  560. 
Whitsapenny,  233,  401. 
Whitlocks,   397. 
Whites,  407. 
Whore  Cock,  500,  515. 
Wiccocomico,    178,    206,    216,    309, 

322,  331,  377,  395,  396,  398,  532. 
Williamsons,   443. 
Willing,  191,   192. 
Wipsewasin,  534. 
Wiscapanso,   30. 
Wiscoponson,  524. 
Wormeleys,  99,  122, 161, 164, 239, 215. 
Wrights,  21,  86,  132,  166,  170,  216, 

375. 
Wyre,  293. 
Yeocomoco,  351,  372,  375,  381,  398, 

486. 

Creese,  Marg.  294. 

Creeton,  Roger,  312. 

Creeye,  Hugh  296. 

Creighton,  Henry  402,   545. 

Cremer,  Jno.  465. 

Crensher,  Wm.  430. 

Crenson,  Tho.  430. 

Cresby,  Wm.  363. 

Cressy,  James  450. 

Crestin,  Charles  520. 

Creton,  Hen.  466. 

Crew,  Anne  279,  Jon.  134,  John  225, 
406,  453,  512,  Randall  95,  102,  122, 
151,  177,  450,  Randolph  83,  569, 
Rebecca  28,  Roger  85,  Tho.  406,  267. 

Crews,  James  466,  Mary  513,  Mr.  429. 

Crich  ,Rich.  42. 

Cricklock,  Jon.  135. 

Crightoun,  Henry  545. 


626 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Crillig,  Jane,  431. 

Crimly,  Robt.  452. 

Crippin,  Kath.  32,  103. 

Cripps,  Antho.  216,  George  525,  Kath. 

32,  103,  Marg.  195,  Mary  190,  Math. 

212,   282,   Mr.   149,   374,   Wm.   240, 

Zachariah  13,  67,  72,  127,  151,  267, 

308,  331,  349,  381,  533. 
Crispe,  Anth.  481,  Edmund  300,  James 

143,    John    116,    142,    Patrick    362, 

Thomas  425,  Wm.  341. 
Crismass,  John  203. 
Crisrall,  David  194. 
Criste,  Patrick  278. 
Crists,  John  218. 
Crockell,  Ja.  188. 
Crocker,  Pascall  23,  68,  Tho.  165. 
Croffa,  Francis  338. 
Croffeild,  Robt.  118. 
Croffs,  Edmond  551. 
Croffts,  Files  511. 
Croft,  Jon.  35,  100,  525,  Hen.  60. 
Crofts,   Anne   236,    Ja.    293,   Jno.    559, 

Wm.  558. 
Croiney,  Thomas  88. 
Croinly,  Robt.  452. 
Croleham,  Peter  319. 
Crome,  Rich.  429. 
Cromp,  Wm.   184. 
Crompe,  Tho.  31,  83. 
Crompton,  Arth.  510,  Henry  190,  Ralph 

557,  568. 
Cromy,  David  465. 
Cronall,  Tho.  204. 
Crone,  Jellian  389,  Tho.  509,  Wm.  509, 

550. 
Croney,  William  18. 
Crooke,    Abra.    450,    Ailce    190,    Rich. 

456,  Tho.  534,  Wm.  49,  185. 
Crookneck,  Nico.  171. 
Croopp,  Henry  185. 
Croper,  Francis  381. 
Croply,  John  277,  Wm.  277,  Xtoper.  453. 
Cropp,  Tho.  31,  84. 
Croppage,  Edw.  184. 
Crosbie,  Mr.  231,  503. 
Crosby,  Danl.  308,  348,  372,  373,  463, 

Gerrard    512,    Hen.    31,    141,    Nath. 

376,  Tho.  60,  78,  79,  121,  Mr.  270. 
Croshall,  Joseph  403. 
Croshaw,  Joseph  62,  89,  92,   117,   122, 

133,    142,    152,    166,    174,    178,    185, 

204,    222,    227,    249,    250,    271,    288, 

295,    308,    314,    359,    360,    361,   403, 

510,  Mr.   271,  415,  Richd.   152,   188, 

194,   222,  489. 
Croshaw,  Maj.  Joseph  440. 


Croshaw's  Desire  122,  222. 

Croshaw's  Extent  249,   297. 

Croshen,  Wm.  73. 

Crosia,  Joseph  67. 

Crosly,  Mary  293. 

Crosman,  Wm.  56. 

Cross,    Emmanuel    294,   Jane    183,   Jno. 

362,  568,  Kath.  150,  Nich.  147,  Mary 
428,  Wm.  432. 

Crosse,    Bartho.    349,    Eliza.    200,    441, 

Jane  280,  285,  Joane  193,  Kath.  140, 

Peter  382. 
Crosser,  An  545. 
Crossing,  Eliz.  196. 
Crossland,  Geo.  86. 
Crossman,  Wm.  47. 
Crosticke,  John  253,  316. 
Crostlewell,  Debora  222. 
Crosyer,  Fra.  309. 
Crotch,  Susan  335. 
Crouch,    Eliza.    276,    Geo.    205,    Math. 

475,  Nicholas   62,  Richd.   312,  Robt. 

203,    301,    499,    Thomas    367,    544, 

Wm.  29,  75,  76. 
Crouches,  Thomas  180. 

Crough,  153. 

Crouncher,  Tho.  487. 

Croutch,    James    525,    Thos.    98,    108, 

Wm.  75,  107. 
Crow,  Henry  49,  John  365,  468,  Mary 

363,  429,    484,    490,    Rebecca    453, 
Tho.  466,  Wm.  426,  468. 

Crowder,  Tho.  316,  348. 

Crowelden,  John  43. 

Crowell,  Jane  228. 

Crowtch,  Thomas  98. 

Croxon,  Alice  42,  91,  Fra.  222. 

Croynes  Quarter  195  . 

Crucksance,  Tho.  201. 

Crump,  Anto.  524,  Edw.  513,  Giles  60, 

John  299,  Tho.  309,  Wm.  496,  506, 

538,  556. 
Crumpe,    Thomas    83,    285,    381,    Wm. 

336,  506. 
Crumpton,  Robt.  552. 
Crumwell,  Mary  321. 
Crust,  Robert  390. 
Crusty,  Mary  349. 
Cruthen,  Hen.  198. 
Cruze,  Tho.  440. 
Cubberton,  Symon  431. 
Cuck,  Edw.  454,  Tho.  192. 
Cuckney,  Henry  120. 
Cude,  de  Allin  121. 
Cuddens,  Sara  198. 
Cuddington,  Allin  280. 
Cuffin,  David  325,  Mary  336. 


General  Index 


627 


Cugley,    Daniell    23,    John    25,    Patrick 

200. 
Culberton,  Symon  431. 
Culgy,  Toby  472. 
Cullaine,  Kath.  281. 
Cullam,  John  198. 
Culland,  Math.  433. 
Cullin,    Anne    366,    Joane    139,    262, 

Kath.  332. 
Cullumbine,  Rich.  23,  66. 
Cully,   Cornelius   525. 
Culmer,  Mathew  433,  Thomas  326. 
Culpeper,  Dennis  430,  Henry  242,  James 

523,  Jno.  171,  455,  Robt.  430. 
Culverton,  Jonathan  430. 
Cumber,  John  122. 
Cummings,  Nicholas  511. 
Cunagky,  Ven.  307. 
Cunicott  Path,  202. 
Cunningham,  James  356,  435,  Nehemiah 

130,  Wm.  39,  309,  381. 
Cunninghorm,  Jon.  79. 
Cunny,    Henry    121,    James    275,    Mary 

296,  388,  Saml.  508. 
Cuny,  Geo.  362. 
Cupperwhaite,  Tho.  30. 
Curant,  Tho.  300. 
Curawoman,  cliffs  of  496,  512. 
Curby,  Alice  47,  Mary  507,  Saml.  47, 

74. 
Curd,  Rich.  388. 
Cure,  Thos.  250. 
Curdey,  John  265. 
Cureday,  Mary  224. 
Curet,  Micha.  233. 
Curie,  Joane  275,  Tho.  479. 
Curies,  45,  54,  60,  87,  120,  121,  266. 
Curies,  Tho.  470. 
Curly,  Mary  507. 
Curman,  Edw.  501. 
Curnock,  Alice  250. 
Curr,  John  210. 
Currant,  Robert  50,  86. 
Curraway,  John  155. 
Curratuck,  434. 
Curret,  Mich.  164. 
Curry,  Macum  329,  492,  511,  Mary  296, 

511. 
Curtain,  Jno.  426  . 
Curtam,  Jno.  468. 
Curteanceaw,    Anne,   Jacob,   John   Wm. 

331. 
Curtice,  Alice  126,  Geo.  455. 
Curtis,    Alice    179,    Averilla    398,    407, 

536. 
Curtis,  Daniell  322,  441,  Eliza.  23,  50, 

86,  148,  195,  George  554,  Gyles  440, 


Joane  179,  John  43,  47,  64,  78,  296, 
334,  339,  371,  385,  391,  398,  407, 
434,  451,  465,  466,  474,  481,  499, 
567,  Joseph  353,  Major  407,  421, 
536,  Mary  441,  448,  Mr.  258,  384, 
Robt.  451,  Thomas  45,  49,  78,  82, 
108,  131,  132,  141,  184,  261,  279, 
337,  339,  345,  391,  398,  417,  423, 
Wm.  388. 

Cusens,  Jno.  462,  556,  Walter  540. 

Cusney,   Jno.  436. 

Cuspe,  Edmd.  227,  250,  300. 

Custipa  107. 

Custis,  Hannah  443,  John  251,  259, 
264,  346,  353,  414,  419,  434,  552, 
Joseph  353,  Mary  267,  Richd.  286, 
Tho.  261,  Wm.  360,  363. 

Cutchman,  Thomas  66. 

Cute,  John  206. 

CutfuII,  Mary  431. 

Cutler,  Chr.  76,  James  452. 

Cutt,  Capt.  533,  Baker  282,  Fra.  329, 
Wm.  457. 

Cutter,  Fra.  314. 

Cutten,  John  423. 

Cutterbrooke,  Hen.  444. 

Cuttler,  Tho.   300. 

Cutts,  Baker  340,  389,  Eliz.  340,  533, 
Mary  562,  Jno.  501,  Wm.  362. 

Cymber,  Wm.  432. 


Daberton,  Ann  240. 

Daby,  John  432,  Wm.  400. 

Dace,  Richard  439. 

Dade,  Mrs.  447. 

Dadson,  Tho.  144. 

Daeman,  John  149. 

Daid,  Anth.  481. 

Daines,  Samll.  450,  Wm.  534,  560. 

Dakin,  Tho.  362. 

Dakinn,  Ann  382. 

Dakins,  Gilbert  85,  Mary  236. 

Dalahay,  Sarah  60. 

Daldye,  Geo.  244. 

Dale,  Alex.  432,  Ann  113,  David  515, 
Edw.  137,  Eliz.  13,  163,  181,  319, 
414,  Geo.  272,  273,  Hump.  97,  185, 
Jno.  93,  246,  Judith  246,  291,  Lady 
79,  130,  Nicholas  91,  98,  113,  190, 
206,  249,  497,  515;  Thomas  3,  7,  8, 
16,  17,  27,  31,  32,  33,  34,  36,  38,  40, 
45,  68,  81,  90,  163,  181,  190,  242, 
249,  284,  322,  379,  392,  404,  414, 
437,  515,  519,  Robt.  230,  350,  Roger 
432,  Walter  162. 

Daley,  James   167. 


628 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Dallinge,  Eliz.  388. 

Dallion,  John  121. 

Dallison,  Hen.  509,  Tho.  352. 

Dally,  Geo.  325,  Tho.  567,  Wm.  306. 

Dalma,  Thomas  452. 

Dalnies,  John  280. 

Dalston,  James  553. 

Dalton,  John  278. 

Dam,  Eliza.  148. 

Dame,  Hen.  459,  Jane  260. 

Dameron,  Lawr.  234,  258,  325,  332, 
342,  364,  372,  449,  495. 

Dampen,  Lancelott  113. 

Dampher,  Alex.  246. 

Damsies,  Rich.  369. 

Damson,  Jon.  134. 

Damster,  James  445. 

Damsy,  Amosse  428. 

Dan,  Jno.  475. 

Danah,  Finniell  384. 

Danance,  Richard  182. 

Danbury,  Stephen  204. 

Danby,  Giles  444,  Ralph  349. 

Danceing  Place,  the  224. 

Dancey,  John  126,  133. 

Dancfeild,  Xph.  352. 

Dancy,  John  45,  133,  464. 

Dandall,  Gregory  200. 

Dane,  Eustace  264,  Tho.  216,  Yorath 
45. 

Daney,  Richd.  108,  525. 

Dangerfeild,  Jno.  567. 

Dangle,  Thomas  33. 

Daniel,  Roger  294,  Tho.  225,  Walter 
249. 

Daniell,  Adam  282,  Alex.  307,  Benj. 
558,  Edwd.  43,  82,  155,  Eliz.  33, 
Henry,  33,  97,  275,  285,  Jeff.  551, 
John  139,  178,  186,  249,  427,  482, 
536,  Mr.  357,  Oliver  281,  Tho.  185, 
257,  348,  517,  518,  521,  Walter  50, 
Wm.  284,  358,  363. 

Daniels,  Danll.   230. 

Danielson,  Marg.  202. 

Danister,  James   197. 

Danks,  Walter  307. 

Danne,  Anne  215. 

Danning,  Richd.  200. 

Danry,  Rich.  525. 

Danse,  Jno.  345. 

Dansey,  Alice  43,  John  42,  58,  74,  88, 
97,  99,  295. 

Dansy,  John  125. 

Dansye,  John  4. 

Danvers,  John  Sir  57. 

Danvires,  Jno.  453. 

Dany,  Eliz.  291,  John  241. 


Darby,  Ann  195,  Edward  364,  Henry 
307,  John  520,  532,  Sibilla  507,  Tho. 
24. 

Darbye,  Jno.  80,  451. 

Dareing,  Richd.  176. 

Darken,  Jno.  390. 

Darkeny,  John  374. 

Darker,  Tho.  263. 

Darkwell,  Patience  523. 

Daricutt,  Robt.   114. 

Darie,  John  117. 

Darley,  Tho.  363. 

Darling,  Dorothy  166,  Richd.  125,  Ruth 
295,  340. 

Darlins,  Davy,  404. 

Darly,  Jno.  532. 

Darnely,  Wm.  25. 

Darrell,  Thomas   375. 

Darrington,  Wm.  252. 

Darrow,  Anne  259,  Tho.  259,  287,  473. 

Darry,  Edw.  349,  Eliz.  370. 

Darsay,  Jno.  382. 

Darson,  Jonathan,  88. 

Dart,  Robt.  350. 

Dary,  John  110,  Lawr.  293. 

Daser,  Ann  428. 

Dasker,  Tho.  263. 

Dasvie,  John  160. 

Daton,  Margt.  172. 

Datrill,  Robt.  404. 

Daubles,  Thomas  446. 

Dauby,  Ralph  349. 

Daughly,  Edw.  279. 

Daukes,  Walter  78,   307. 

Daulding,  Mary  209. 

Dauncy,  Tho.  388. 

Daurnport,  Hannah  194. 

Dause,  Jno.  345. 

Dauson,  Richd.  278. 

Dauter,  Eliz.  78. 

Daux,  Wat.  491,  Wm.  59. 

Davey,  Richard   108. 

David,  Evan  125,  Henry  333,  Jon.  34, 
John  311,  Rice  355,  Richard  322, 
Robt.  331,  Runberen  312,  Thomas 
326,  489,  Wm.  178,  311,  312. 

Davie,  Hugh  93,  John  92,  117. 

Davies,  Eliz.  545,  548,  Evan  247,  545, 
568,  Henry  569,  James  230,  John 
226,  347,  470,  548,  Robt.  523,  545, 
568,  Sarah  531,  Tho.  162,  375,  517, 
Wm.  227,  527. 

Davis,  Alex.  273,  392,  403,  565,  And. 
397,  Ann  154,  Anth.  485,  David  97, 
275,  566,  Dorothy  47,  Edw.  301,  383, 
525,  557,  563,  Eliz.  85,  131,  137, 
196,  204,  323,  405,  Ellinor  380,  Evan 


General  Index 


629 


144,    245,    256,    257,    269,    277,    370, 

381,  422,  432,  442,  475,  476,  478, 
497,  527,  563,  564,  568,  Fra.  324, 
Geo.  285,  568,  Grace  213,  322,  334, 
Griffith  171,  Henry  164,  346,  436, 
441,  477,  487,  526,  550,  Hester  551, 
Hopkin  260,  Hugh  348,  351,  422, 
James  17,  99,  123,  192,  208,  210, 
215,  216,  230,  302,  349,  351,  Jane 
107,  212,  218,  567,  283,  286,  Joane 
40,  63,  336,  John  25,  35,  45,  52,  59, 
64,  65,  69,  82,  84,  92,  98,  107,  111, 
112,  123,  138,  144,  152,  166,  170, 
172,  174,  180,  183,  190,  206,  207, 
208,  213,  220,  222,  278,  344,  359, 
383,  386,  393,  403,  427,  466,  495, 
470,  530,  547,  553,  Jon.  47,  137,  141, 
143,  236,  237,  Jone  516,  Justin  178, 
Kath.  280,  Lawr.  205,  319,  Lewis 
502,  Luce  266,  Lucy  513,  Margt.  138, 
196,  197,  237,  355,  358,  438,  Maud- 
lin 397,  Mary  87,  138,  180,  205,  515, 
241,  249,  282,  383,  394,  517,  Mor- 
gan 190,  269,  Mr.  158,  446,  474, 
Nicho.  112,  178,  208,  Owen  185, 
219,  369,  513,  Rachell  17,  Rice  26, 
63,  176,  355,  Richd.  23,  153,  177, 
195,  258,  264,  265,  267,  304,  322, 
348,  366,  394,  399,  469,  511,  Robt. 
44,  83,  95,  116,  121,  136,  140,  147, 
177,  235,  348,  381,  430,  431,  472, 
482,  523,  Roger  87,  95,  117,  562, 
Sabina  265,  304,  Samll.  133,  137, 
165,  404,  426,  427,  Sarah  306,  Tho. 
6,  17,  28,  57,  67,  73,  76,  94,  101, 
104,  116,  119,  140,  146,  150,  156, 
158,  162,  163,  174,  188,  200,  209, 
221,  223,  230,  236,  244,  252,  283, 
287,    298,    315,    342,    357,    364,    373, 

382,  393,  394,  398,  426,  443,  450, 
490,  528,  552,  Walter  25,  William 
16,  25,  28,  33,  69,  82,  108,  112,  143, 
160,  195,  213,  214,  236,  240,  344, 
263,  308,  315,  317,  336,  351,  367, 
373,  405,  446,  551,  Xpher.  427. 

Davenall,  Wm.  564. 
Davenant,  Jno.  378. 
Davenport,    Ann    56,    366,    Edw.    148, 

Hannah  194. 
Davidson,  Charles  376. 
Davison,  Jon.  134,  Patrick  351. 
Davsell,  Eliz.  314. 
Davye,  Rich.  117. 
Davyes,  Thomas  451. 
Davys,  John  165. 
Daw,  George  327. 
Dawbee,  Nich.  160. 


Dawber,  Edmond  141,  238,  243,  462, 
Edw.  220. 

Dawbigg,  Ralph  254. 

Dawby,  Eliz.  151,  Jno.  151,  Lawr.  253, 
259. 

Dawcey,Ann  112,Christo.  112, Mary  112- 

Dawe,  An.  392,  John  392. 

Dawes,  Ailce  192,  Jno.  454,  Rob.  331. 

Dawkin,  Eliz.  302. 

Dawkes,  Henry  15,  32,  103,  Jno.  485, 
Wm.  15,  18,  19,  36,  40. 

Dawling,  Cor.  299,  Jno.  558. 

Dawsey,  Arthur  431,  Chr.  50,  112. 

Dawson,  Ann  54,  Edw.  199,  315,  Georg 
144,  502,  Henry  372,  Jane  196,  376, 
John  73,  134,  204,  300,  Jonathan  41, 
Marke  446,  Owen  19,  Tho.  29,  101, 
520,  Wm.  35,  60,  116,  270,  466, 
538,  516. 

Dawsy,  Wm.  458. 

Dawtres,  John  28. 

Day,  Elianor  77,  Eliz.  236,  519,  Geo. 
190,  195,  228,  388,  Henry  282,  311, 
Jon.  21,  John  41,  249,  265,  278,  308, 
311,  343,  416,  417,  515,  Lewis  515, 
Margery  311,  Mary  304,  Richd.  100, 
182,  311,  Robt.  486,  546,  Tho.  272. 

Dayes,  James  139,  John  116. 

Daynes,  John  268,  Wm.  160. 

Dayson,  Susan  307. 

Deacon,  Gilbert  323,  Martha  35,  59, 
Mr.  170,  Thomas  53,  114,  135,  Tri- 
phany  309,  Wm.  309. 

Deadman,  Henry  191,  245,  308. 

Deakes,  Wm.  98. 

Deane,  Alice  261,  305,  338,  Elinor  152, 
Eliz.  115,  Francis  563,  John  43,  John 
404,  Joseph  16,  Mary  276,  289,  Nath. 
35,  100,  Nich.  290,  Rich.  22,  85,  113, 
289,  Tho.  184,  200,  205,  Wm.  59, 
141,  291,  558. 

Deaning,  Kath.  242. 

Deany,  Ann  192. 

Dear,  John  304. 

Deare,  Joseph  81,  Wm.  254. 

Deareham,  Tho.  466. 

Dearing,  Kath.  242,  Sam.  517. 

Dearelove,  Isaak  445,  Martha  445. 

Deason,  Tho.  51. 

Death,  Eliz.  125,  Francis  220,  Peter  73, 
Richard  80,   125,   169,  Susan  125. 

Deaton,  Wm.  217. 

Debany,  Cornelius   514,   558. 

Debar,  John  228,  234,  297,  358,  489, 
Peeter   167. 

Debnam,  Wm.  39,  135,  223,  250,  258, 
402. 


630 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Debney,  Cornelius  558. 

Debford,  John  429. 

Debton,  Margarett  326. 

Deby,  Robt.  184. 

De  Carvalco,  Saliman  181. 

Dedewate,  Richd.  283. 

Dedman,  John  392. 

Dee,  Jon.  23,  66. 

Deepe,  Jane  374,  Deere,  Tho.  493. 

Deering,  Edm.  245,  Thomas  92. 

Deford,  Francis  558,  562. 

Degaris,  Elias  150. 

Degens,  Bastian  283. 

Dehall,  Vincent  52. 

Dehull,  Cornelius  52. 

Deines,  John  122,  Wm.  243. 

Deins,  Sam.  501. 

Delabeere,  Richard  85,  323. 

Delahay,  Gringall  60,  Thomas  439. 

Delamajor,  Thomas  13. 

Delamde,  Mareen  154. 

Delanmundayes,  Mareene  116. 

Delaware,  Essay  78,  San.  430. 

Delayhaye,  Gringall  129. 

Delf,  Thomas  311. 

Delfe,  Ann  455. 

Delke,    Alice    29,    53,    70,    160,    Clemt. 
539,  Roger  53,  70,  497,  Tho.  496. 

Dell,  Martha  468,  475,  476. 

Dellony,  John  304,  364. 

Delonie,  Gozen  467,  468. 
Delpha,  Phill.   240. 
Delton,  Margarett  326,  337. 
Delue,  Ann  349,  376. 
Deluke,  Sam.  385. 
Delumaine,   Alex.   311. 
Delvis,  Alice  129. 
Demacheto,  Christian  147. 
Demaley,  John  314. 
Demecry,  Ann  195. 
Dement,  Giles  440,  535,  563. 
Demerense,  Domingo  459. 
Demey,  Geo.  290,  Joan  290. 
Demond,  Martin  102. 
Demount,  George  541. 
Dempton.  Mary  530. 
Demor,  Tho.  476. 
Demson,  Rowland  119. 
Demster,  Wm.  293,  362. 

Denamere,  291. 

Denbie,  26. 

Denbv.    Denis    433,    Margt.    389,    Wm. 

362,  442,  568. 
Denchfeild,  Jeffery  148. 
Dendy,  John  245. 
Denellin,  Mary  325,  Tho.  325. 


Denham,   Tho.   153,  Walter   287,  Wm. 

31,  59,  85,  121. 
Denis,  Sam.  501. 
Denison,  Humph.   208. 
Denly,  Denis  433. 
Denman,  Ellice  318. 
Denmarke,  Fr.  50. 
Denn,  Christ.  75. 
Denne,  Roger  369. 
Denners,   Lewis   568. 
Dennes,  Humph.  120,  John  110. 
Dennett,  Jane  468,  James  207,  John  25, 
30,    66,    79,    114,    232,    Richd.    253, 
Robert  378,  Tho.  464,  568. 
Dennington,  Oliver  50,  86,  Thos.   182. 
Dennis,    Ann    195,    233,    Arthur    341, 
Barberry    183,    Christian    388,    Edw. 
383,    541,   Henry  430,   468,   Humph. 
303,    Joane    267,    John    23,    46,    51, 
183,    184    211,    288,    289,    295,    330, 
418,    467,    Moore    455,    Morris    455, 
Peter    427,    428,    Richard    330,    513, 
Robt.   383,   Shela   296,   Tonnoth   353, 
356,  Wm.  210,  324,  562,  Xpo.  217. 
Dennison,  Charles  558. 
Denny,  Abile  448,  Adam   371,   Daniell 

559,  Jane  351,  John  353. 
Denoson,  John  204. 
Denoware,  Fran.  479. 
Dense,  Edw.  303. 
Denson,  Row.  427,  Wm.  85,  277,  356, 

464,  473,  480. 
Densby,  Wm.  197. 
Densy,  John  356. 

Dent,  Eliza.  148,  John  558,  Robt.  546. 
Denton,  George  546,  Henrick  378,  John 

195,  553. 
Denwood,  Danll.   331,   Lewin  43,   Lev- 

inge  163,  164,  194,  199. 
Depoma,  Lewis  32. 
Deplace,  Francis  358. 
Depthford,  Jno.  363. 
Deratt,  Chas.  140. 
Derickson,  Peter  294. 
Derrell,  Mary  302. 
Derrick,  Francis  111,  113,  Tho.  344. 
Derrowe,  Jno.  356. 
Derry,  Orsell  328,  Robt.  30. 
Deryell,   Joseph  307. 
Deske,  Tho.  496. 
Devarr,  George  369. 
Devall,  John  138. 
Davedon,  Kath.  514. 
Devell,  Geo.  309. 
Devenith,  Jno.  450. 
Deverell,  George  10. 
Deviding,  the  511. 


General  Index 


631 


Devill's  Den,  the  456. 

Devine,  Mary  255. 

Devonshire,  Bartho.  525. 

Devorax,  Jon.  233. 

Dew,   Eliz.   430,   441,   Fardinando  430, 

Hannah   403,    526,   527,  Johna.   517, 

528,  Jno.  441,  517,  Saml.  441,  Tho. 

105,  118,  119,  122,  141,  150,  151. 
Dewe,  Tho.  56,  95,  116,  118. 
Dewes,  Nicho.  347. 
Deweex  ,David  129. 
Dewill,  Wm.  526. 
Dewitt,  Jacob  65. 
Dewse,  Mary  196. 
Dexton,  Ellinor  241. 
Dey,  Elinor  53,  John  447. 
Deynes,    Phillis    160,    Tho.    303,    Wm. 

160,  243,  385. 
Deyonge,  John  387. 
Deyoung,  John  514. 
Diamant,  Katherine  519. 
Diap,  James  430. 
Dias,  Thomas  546. 
Dibbin,  John  348,  Mary  348. 
Dibbins,  Rchd.  209,  263. 
Dibdal,  Joane  387,  John  244,  287,  387, 

543,  Sarah  276. 
Diccars,  Doro.  467. 
Dice,  Geo.  352. 
Diche,  Tho.  452. 
Dichfeild,  Ann  499. 
Dick,  Jeris  75,  James  218,  Jno.  510. 
Dickens,  Wm.  150. 
Dickenson,   Eliz.   335,   Giles   283,  Jeri- 

miah   45,    83,    86,    107,   Jeremy   303, 

Tho.  530,  Walter  304,  313,  350,  386, 

431,  519,  Wm.  21. 
Dicker,   Edward  95. 
Dickes,  Eliza.   81,  Isaac  482,  Wm.  76, 

472. 
Dickerson,     Jerimiah     104,     159,    John 

286,    483,    551,    Lidia    559,    Peter   7, 

Walter  424,  503. 
Dickey,  Danll.  196. 
Dickens,  Danl.  404. 
Dickinson,    Andrew    162,    Antho.    126, 

Griffith    335,   Jeremy    159,    189,   211, 

John  190,  258,  425,  Wm.  156. 
Dickors,  Mary  214. 
Dicks,  Edw.  178. 
Dickson,    Christian     164,    Richd.     164, 

Tho.  103,  362,  370. 
Diddicutt,  James  444. 
Dier,  John  262,  Robt.  520. 
Difneth,  John  425. 
Digby,   Ann   514,    Edw.    199,   Fra.    514, 

Jno.  514,  Robert  359,  514. 


Digg,  Edw.  209,  Maurice  554,  Samll. 
209. 

Diggs,  Edward  214,  236,  243,  305,  307, 
316,  321,  328,  343,  372,  376,  388, 
496,  541,  555,  Edmond  321,  Mr.  281, 
347,  379,  392,  417,  Richd.  156, 
Squire  317. 

Diggs'   Hundred,   105. 

Digwell,  Nich.  133. 

Dike,  Jno.  509,  545. 

Dile,  Dorothy  184. 

Dilke,  Clement  8,  9,  11,  12,  114,  Eliza- 
beth 9. 

Dillard,  Geo.  195,  541, 259. 

Dilloe,  Tho.  63. 

Dilton,  Geo.  458. 

Diminge,  Richd.  178. 

Dimock,  Martin  60. 

Dimon,  Ann  507. 

Dincock,  Jno.  455. 

Dine,  Luke  491. 

Dinely,  John  510. 

Dines,  Wm.  552. 

Ding,  Jno.  517. 

Dinglas,  Wm.  262. 

Dingley,  Wm.  289,  293,  562. 

Dining,   Richard   69. 

Dinsdale,  Thos.  118. 

Dinty,  John  207. 

Dios,  Thomas  499,  512,  544,  546. 

Dipdall,  John  250. 

Dipnell's  Landing,  439. 

Dipple,  Jon.  53. 

Dirbishire,  Rchd.  532. 

Discon,  Jno.  515. 

Dissey,  Tho.  347. 

Dison,  Tho.  276. 

Diston,  Tho.  496. 

Ditch,  Andrew  158,  Eliza.  196. 

Dittford,  Eliz.  493. 

Ditty,  Edw.  391,  Wm.  268,  .503. 

Dittye,  Wm.  228. 

Dix,  Hen.  78,  Jon.  134. 

Dixon,  Adam  8,  Ambrose  184,  259, 
264,  411,  Ann  8,  304,  Christo.  43, 
101,Eliz.  8,  318,  Geo.  145,  Hannah 
350,  Izabella  111,  John  102,  341, 
448,  Luke  318,  Mary  259,  Math.  97, 
Miles  343,  344,  391,  408,  437,  533, 
Mr.  131,  Rich.  41,  194,  230,  542, 
Robt.  457,  Tho.  241,  352,  Wm.  137, 
239,  363,  384. 

Dixson,  John  304,  Nicho.  165,  180. 

Dizen,  Jno.  475. 

Dobbins,  Richd.  223,  359,  390,  444. 

Dobbs,  James  268. 

Dobby,  John  225. 


632 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Dobday,  Kath.  387. 

Dobins,  Alice  58,  Richd.  440. 

Dobman,  John  449. 

Dobson,  Edward  98,  149,  250,  416, 
Elizab.  275,  516,  John  274,  561, 
Richd.  147,  Saml.  341,  Seth  429. 

Doby,  Anne  286. 

Dockstone,  Jno.  569. 

Doctors:  3,  10,  15,  154,  182,  265,  268, 
'302,  322,  331,  340,  382,  394,  396, 
412,  426,  460,  473,   525,   526,   558. 

Dodberye,  Eliz.   250. 

Dodd,  Jon.  138,  384,  444,  Tho.  141. 

Dodford,    Rich.    430,    484,    Tho.    243, 

260,  328. 

Dodman,  John  28,  81,  392. 

Dodridge,  Jarvis  501. 

Dods,  Ann  504. 

Dodsley,  Tho.  146. 

Dodson,  Ann  258.  Benj.  29,  Gervase 
205,  206,  235,  236,  256,  292,  308, 
315,  332,  343,  362,  371,  372,  373, 
381,  382,  384,  392,  400,  422,  436, 
460,  462,  463,  470,  471,  486,  488, 
490,  517,Isabella  517,  Jarvis  236, 
333,  Jeremy  308,  Tho.  383,  404,  462, 
556,  Wm.  516,  447. 

Doe,  Jane  324,  Jno.  24,   54,   389,  Ral. 

261,  Ralph  305. 
Doeby,  Ann  264. 

Doeggs  Cleare  Ground,  the  558. 

Doegood,  Job.  538. 

Doegs,  the  365,  Plantation  293. 

Doemy,  Joseph  432. 

Doffell,  Nicholas  559. 

Doge,  David  199. 

Dogwood  Spring,   530. 

Doine,  Anthony  360. 

Dolbey,  Edw.  434. 

Dolbin,  John  119,  Kath.  427. 

Dolby,  Jon.  134,  Jno.  455. 

Dolding,  Wm.  485. 

Dole,  Judith  405. 

Dolivell,  Eliz.  378. 

Doll,  Benj.  (Negro)  335. 

Dollar,  Mary  205. 

Dollatree,  Jonathan  523. 

Dolle,  Richard  378. 

Doller,  Dan.  212,  Geo.  281. 

Dollert,  Andrew  560. 

Dollin,  Wm.   143. 

Dollings,  Tho.  390. 

Dolly,  Wm.  379. 

Dolman,  Francis  536. 

Dolphenby,  Rchard  10. 

Dolson,  Andrew  179. 

Doltie,  Owen  110. 


Dolton,  Jno.  270,  284,  Wm.  403,  547. 

Domellaws,  Richd.   158. 

Donart,  David  247. 

Donaway,  Step.  293. 

Doncomb,  John  527. 

Done,  William  144. 

Donell,  Moragha  307,  Walter  291. 

Doney,  Antho.  279,  333,  561. 

Donibell,  Margery  242. 

Donington,  Thomas  457. 

Donir,  Timothy  369. 

Donkaster,  Ann  428. 

Donn,   Arthur   149,   507,   Clement   121, 

Joan  446. 
Donne,  Geo.  119,  John  245,  Richd.  115. 
Donned,  Arth.  172. 
Donnell,    James    248,     291,    Margarett 

375. 
Donniell,  Tho.  253. 
Donnings,  Geo.  139. 
Donoh,  Xpher.  327. 
Donouge,  Roger  306. 
Donson,  Mary  252,  Wm.  252. 
Dony,  Antho.  411. 
Doobees,  Jon.  93. 
Doodinge,  Hugh  284,  Thomas  369. 
Dooly,  Ann  412. 
Doone,  Danl.  287. 
Doore,  Robert  391. 
Dorcestor,  Mary  512. 
Dorcye,  Wm.  250. 
Dordon,  Step.  244. 
Dorefeild,  Richd.  431. 
Dorfeild,    Robt.    272,    276,    293,    Wm. 

293. 
Dorgle,  Christo.  269. 
Dorillios,  Solomon  26. 
Dorman,  John  172,  324,  326,  414,  418, 

Mrs.  548,  Mr.  343,  Peter  268,  Richard 

319,  Sarah  326,  Wm.  91. 
Dormer,  Wllam  317. 
Dome,  John  199. 
Dorr,  Thomas  394. 
Dorrant,  John  386. 
Dorrell,  Tho.  462,  Wm.  144. 
Dorrington,  Richd.  493. 
Dorrow,  Thomas  332,  373,  395,  396. 
Dorsett,  Jon.  147. 
Dorsey,  Edw.  170,  274. 
Dorwin,  Tho.  171. 
Dorwood,  Tho.   351. 
Dory,  Robt.  442. 
Dotson,  Abra.  483. 
Dotton,  Mary  543. 
Doubte,  Sampson  47. 
Doubty,  Mary  78. 
Doudinge,  Hugh  278. 


General  Index 


633 


Douer,  Edward  558. 

Douin,  Martin  77. 

Douges  land,  the  296. 

Doughert,  David  312. 

Doughting,  Jane  426,  427. 

Doughty,  Eliz.  465,  483,  Mary  461. 

Douglace,  Edward  360. 

Douglas,  Archeball  262,  Edw.  181,  226, 

414,  John  326. 
Dounman,  Wm.  186. 
Doune,  Clement  111. 
Douse,  Barbara  179. 
Dove,  John  100,  144. 
Dover,    Edward    558,    Pru.    189,    Timo. 

219. 
Dowd,  Rich.   525,  Tho.   338. 
Dowdin,  Sarah  376. 
Dowding,  Hugh  417. 
Dowdy  Hugh  312,  Jno.  345,  553. 
Downeinge,  William  359,  494. 
Dowen,  Robt.  171. 
Dowey,  Anthony  561. 
Dowglas,  Edw.  344,  Wm.  311. 
Dowglass,  Capt.   319,  Dan.   314,  Edw. 

163. 
Downie,  Ferd.  375. 
Dowinge,  Susan  261. 
Dowland,  Edm.   302,  Pet.   208. 
Dowling,  Fr.  144. 
Downe,  Jervas  483,  Jno.  476,  Tho.  198, 

Widow  383. 
Downer,    Fra.    324,    Jane    324,    Henry 

302,  Richd.  528,  Rob.  324. 
Downes,  Alex.    180,  Arthur  354,   Edw. 

490,   Fard.  425,   467,   Feild   173,   Fr. 

93,  Fred.  468,  Geo.   18,  34,  94,  98, 

James  561,  John  198,  431,  Jane  323, 

Joyce    316,    Eustace    60,    Mary    285, 

Richd.    116,    248,   Tho.    563,   Walter 

62,  Watkin  152,  William  69,  131. 
Downham,  John  5,  557,  Wm.  558. 
Downing,   Anne  264,   270,   Enoch   219, 

Richd.  192,  240,  Wm.  166,  409,  522, 

531. 
Downinge,   Geo.   268,   Wm.   210,    385, 

390. 
Downman,     Cressell     290,    Zach.     290, 

Wm.  186. 
Dowridge,  Susan  338. 
Dowrigg,  Susan  286. 
Dowring,  Susan  305. 
Dowry,  John  294. 
Dowse,  Ann  303,  Chas.  143,  Kath.  83, 

104. 
Dowseby,  Eliz.  361. 
Dowson,  Georg  144,  Gilbert  40,  68. 
Downton,  John  309. 


Doyley,  Jno.  456. 

Doza,  John  322. 

Dracott,  Wm.  137. 

Draiton,  John  301,  Mr.  353. 

Drake,  Ann  90,  Eliz.  46,  James  114, 
Joane  46,  John  57,  Robt.  46. 

Drakford,  Ann  429,  Wm.  429. 

Drana,  Mary  514. 

Drap,  John  282,  Richd.  302,  Robt.  269. 

Draper,  Alex.  4l4,  Hen.  192,  James 
273,  313,  456,  Jane  313,  John  34, 
367,  456,  524,  Mary  292,  Robt.  4, 
134,  269,  450,  Roger  553,  Wm.  450. 

Drapp,   James    181. 

Draton,  John  301. 

Dratt,  Anth.  143. 

Drawater,  Ann  58. 

Drawter,  Ann  29. 

Dray,  Wm.  253. 

Drayton,   21. 

Drayton,  John  301,  371,  458,  474,  Mr. 
294. 

Draywood,  Tho.   80. 

Dreaton,  Jon.  137. 

Drew,  Edward  46,  74,  106,  117,  170, 
171,  Henry  31,  Hugh  232,  Jon.  138, 
Jonathan  536,  Mary  170,  Mr.  77, 
147,  Richd.  232,  Symon  102,  520, 
Tho.  190,  201,  203,  347,  Thomasin 
181,  Wm.  43. 

Drewe,  John  354,  Richard  369,  William 
360. 

Drewer,  Joseph   107. 

Drewett,  John   144. 

Drewry,  Abigail  112,  Robt.  97. 

Drewrye,  Alice  75. 

Drinckwater,  David  199. 

Dringe,  Jno.  342. 

Drinker,  Tho.   323. 

Drinkwater,  Fra.  399,  Jon.  78,  John 
257,  559,  Mary  559. 

Drinking  Place,  the  493. 

Drischell,  James  534. 

Driver,  Giles  365,  Hanah  525,  Jane 
188,  Tho.  450. 

Drokee,  land  of  225. 

Dromer,  John  404. 

Drone,  Richd.  324,  Tho.  212. 

Drongold,  Peter  262. 

Drooyt,   Elizabeth   313. 

Drothers,  Brigett  528. 

Drout,  Tho.  282. 

Drove,  Tho.  212. 

Dru,  Mary  294,  Wm.  299. 

Drue,  Edward  434,  Richd.  152,  Toma- 
zin  273. 

Druell,  Mary  250. 


634 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Druen,  Martha  514. 

Druery,  Mary  265. 

Druett,  Oliver  481,  499. 

Druit,  Chas.  501,  Wm.  178. 

Drummen,  John  276. 

Drummer,  John  307. 

Drummond,  Sarah  560,  Will.  403,  Wm. 

124,  400. 
Drumon,  Jno.  388. 
Drumond,  William  58,  177. 
Drunkee,  Patrk.  404. 
Drunkin,   John    342. 
Drurey,  Chas.  257. 
Drury,   Charles    539,    Eliz.    235,   Robert 

425,  Susan  439,  Wm.  482. 
Druryford,  James  482. 
Dry,  Edw.  294,  John  425. 
Drye,   Wm.   294. 
Dryhurst,  Thomas  13. 
Dryver,  Gles  319,  John  298. 
Dubb,  Jno.  430. 
Duber,  Eliz.  326. 
Dubes,  Anne  266. 
Duble,  Walter  454. 
Dubte,  Walter  454. 
Duce,  Wm.  359. 
Duch,  Jon.  78. 
Duck,  Ri.  554. 
Ducke,  W.,  116. 
Ducket,  John  171,  333. 
Duckett,    James    429,    John    77,    551, 

Robt.  389. 
Duckley,  Luce  120. 
Dudifer,  Anne  191,  John  191. 
Dudley,  Ben.  212,  Richd.  258,  261,  391, 

500,  Wm.  223,  247,  277,  345,  423. 
Dudly,  Edward  56,  James  456,  Jno.  567, 

Mary   567,   Richd.    238,    528,    Symon 

525,  Wm.  474,  498,  557. 
Due,    Anthony    528,    Hanah    565,    566, 

Hany  525,  Martha  525. 
Duell,  Georg  367,  Thomas  316. 
Duewood,   Leving   129. 
Duffle,  John  378. 
Duffeild,  Eliz.  566. 
Duffell,  James  201,  Susan  388. 
Dugdale,  Benj.  118. 
Dugen,  Jno.  459. 
Dugg,  Robt.  27. 
Duglas,  Thomas   544. 
Duglass,  Geo.  198,  Jam.  198,  Tho.  198. 
Dugort,  Sarah  2'78. 
Dugrace,  Doll.  543. 
Duke,  Geo.   171,  James  493. 
Dukes,  Jone  390,   Samll.  205. 
Dukenson,  Giles  283. 
Dukeson,  Jno.  551. 


Dule,  Jno.  344,  Peter  459,  Tho.  452. 

Dum,  William  16. 

Dumott,    Francis    567. 

Dun,  Walter  352. 

Dun  out  of  the  moier,  49,  93. 

Dunbar,  An.  404,  Wm.  196. 

Dunbarr,  Alexr.  301. 

Dunberbeach,  Elianor  25. 

Dunce,  Tho.  403. 

Dunckley,  Edward  97. 

Duncomb,  James  553,  Roger  454,  Tho. 

297. 
Duncombe,   Alex.    363,   John   61,   Tho. 

250. 
Duncome,  Jon.  51. 
Dunell,  Francis  89. 
Dunery,  John  177. 
Dunham,  Robt.   199,  Tho.  206. 
Duning,  Richd.  35,  200,  203,  Sara  200. 
Duninge,  Richd.  267,  Tho.  375. 
Dunington,  Mich.  216,  Tho.  256. 
Dunkerdun,  Tho.  496. 
Dunketon,  Thos.  229. 
Dunkey,  Peter  356. 
Dunkin,  James  248,  Jane  443. 
Dunn,    Daniell    373,    Robt.    190,    Tho. 

381,   383,   456. 
Dunne,    Arthur    313,    Chas.    383,    Tho. 

208. 
Dunnidge,  John  339. 
Dunning,  Hen.  459. 
Dunningham,  Rich.  28. 
Dunnings,  Geo.  141. 
Dunnum,  Henry  448. 
Dunrich,  Ellis   196,  John  196. 
Dunridge,  Ellis  75. 
Dunstan,  Master  187,  Peter  200,  Wm. 

189. 
Dunstand,  Peleg  511. 
Dunster,  Henry  482,  Tobias  425. 
Dunston,  Andrew  253,  Cicely  40,   109, 

John  40,  48,  94,  109,  111,  Mary  444, 

Ralph  340,  William  316,  363. 
Dunthorne,  Elizabeth  6,  Thomas  6. 
Dunton,  Tho.   169,  285. 
Dupen,  James  138. 
Duram,  Geo.  492. 
Duran,  John  302  . 
Durand,  Wm.  23,  66,  114,  190,  193. 
Durant,  An.  543,  George  442,  543,  Ja. 

198,  Richd.  159,  Tho.  297,  300,  403, 

Wm.  109,  139. 
Durden,  Stephen  189. 
Dureing,  Honor.  256. 
Durford,  Wllam  84. 
Durham,  Elizabeth  314,  Jno.  369. 
During,  Richard  69. 


General  Index 


635 


Durish,  Francis  100. 

Durly,  Thomas  546. 

Durner,  Robt.  403. 

Durrant,  Richard  30,  162. 

Durren,  John  264. 

Durrington,  Richard   145. 

Durwell,  Fra.   253,   316. 

Dutch,  Robt.  156. 

Dutchfeild,  Eliz.  291. 

Dutchman,  a  382. 

Dutton,     Debora     277,     Dorothy     301, 

Henry  543,  James  543. 
Dyamond,  Eliz.   196. 
Dyar,  Tho.  243. 
Dyas,  John  131. 
Dyascun,  505. 
Dycott,  Robt.  298. 
Dye,    Eliz.    554,    John    322,    454,    554, 

Margtt.    554,    Robt.    74,     204,    232, 

Sarah  554. 
Dyer,  Ann  146,  David  283,  Geo.  460, 

John  22,  164,  328,  539,  Richard  212, 

Tho.    118,   218,   280,   387,  401,   473, 

Wm.  287,  415,  528,  538. 
Dyers,  John  322,  Mary  322,  Richd.  322. 
Dymont,  Edw.  251. 
Dyner,  Thos.  23. 
Dyon,  Wm.  188. 

Dyos,  Thos.  133,  492,  499,  512,  563. 
Dyres,  Samll.  516. 


Eacerman,  Edm.  444. 

Eackatoncke,  491. 

Eadly,  Ambrose  69. 

Eager,  Alex.  198,  Tho.  143. 

Eagle,  Geo.  29,  Walter  453. 

Eagles  Nest,  the  136,  564. 

Eailes,  Wm.  281. 

Eaines,  Wm.  492. 

Eale,  Samll.  490. 

Eales,   Sylvester  431. 

Ealerye,  Emerie  77. 

Earle,  John  162,  185,  198,  235,  246, 
251,  266,  295,  317,  319,  325,  379, 
380,  400,  420,  487,  491,  503,  Mary 
266,  Symon  565,  Wm.  281,  391. 

Earlsby,  Wm.  297. 

Earsby,  Wm.  297. 

Eartes,  Joane   132. 

Easill,  Christ.  68. 

Eason,  Edward  68,  Wm.  479,  543. 

East,  Clement  105,  Edw.  232,  Henry 
245,  Joane  438,  444,  512,  546,  547, 
Mu.  525,  Tho.  137,  Wm.  86,  144, 
276. 

Eastcote,  Jon.  25,  Martha  552. 


Eastern,  Dor.  242. 

Easthop,   Brid.  291. 

Easter,  Wm.  511. 

Easterfeild,  Lyd.  291,  330. 

Eastern  Shoare  7,  9,  13,  20,  30,  75,  371, 
Kng  of  the  30,  75. 

Eastindian  24,  54. 

Eastland,  Jno.  450. 

Easton,  John  266. 

Eastwood,  Edward  4,  Richd.  128. 

Easy,  Geo.  454. 

Eatere,  John  185. 

Eaton,  Barnaby,  422,  Eliz.  338,  388,  Fra. 
291,  Geo.  193,  214,  215,  236,  297, 
312,  315,  318,  419,  423,  436,  Henry 
82,  Jacob  554,  John  144,  215,  312, 
315,  Mr.  27,  175,  209,  Nathl.  28, 
135,  174,  269,  Peter  63,  126,  Richd. 
362,  461,  463,  Sam.  31,  Thomas  21, 
85,  186,  Tristrum  556,  Wm.  264, 
291,   Winifred   249,   Wm.   360,    513. 

Eaworth,  Mary  25. 

Eay,   Richard   528. 

Ebbell,  Eliz.  177. 

Ebernathell,  Robt.   268. 

Eberomy,  Gartwragh  176. 

Ebnes,  Wm.  222. 

Ebourne,  Wm.  267. 

Ecalfe,  Tho.  546. 

Eccles,  Richd.  254,  Sylvester  431. 

Echoll,  Joyce  267. 

Edan,  Mary  286. 

Edden,  John  136. 

Edderman,  Margt.   384. 

Eddon,  Mary  264. 

Eddow,  Mary  264. 

Edenborough  58. 

Edes,  Alice  32,  Eliza.  96,  Jeremy  213, 
Jno.  324,  Martha  439,  Sarah  536, 
Tho.  323,  Wm.  439,  458. 

Edee,  Xpr.  548. 

Edey,  Himph  236,  329. 

Edgar,  Chas.  138,  Mary  265. 

Edger,  John  429,  484,  Mary  286. 

Edge,  Henry  367,  Robt.  493,  Tho.  62, 
222,   229. 

Edgecomb,  John  162,  237,  359,  390, 
433,  Tho.  370. 

Edgerton,  Charles   518. 

Edghill,  Thomas   73. 

Edicke,  Sarah  380. 

Ediford,  Wm.  147. 

Edin,  John  92. 

Edins,  Eliz.  479. 

Edley,  Jno.  450,  Wm.  450. 

Edlington,  Jno.  511. 

Edrop,  Noah  546. 


636 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Edloe,  Alice  40,  52,  59,  61,  64,  86,  97, 

148,  547,  Capt.  233,  323,  447,  Major 
449,  Mathew  59,  88,  154,  471,  491, 
Mrs.  113. 

Edmonds,  Ann  89,  107,  113,  Chas.  249, 
254,  299,  317,  342,  347,  360,  386, 
392,  422,  433,  470,  489,  505,  538, 
Edm.  176,  374,  Ellyas  191,  192,228, 
259,  506,  Everd  564,  Geo.  429,  484, 
490,  Howell  60,  Hugh  520,  Isaack 
449,  559,  Jane  525,  Job  326,  Jeremy 
433,  John  7,  463,  Samll.  39,  73,  87, 
97,  159,Susan  403,  Thos.  315,  449, 
525,  Wni.  192,  375,  426,  467,  468, 
525. 

Ednall,  Edwd.  82. 

Edom,  Eliz.  353. 

Edridge,  Mary  562. 

Edsonne,  Francis  58. 

Edwards,  Alex.  554,  Alice  171,  Amy 
322,  Andrew  111,  182,  Bartho.  453, 
Christo.  109,  116,  David  452,  Doro- 
thy 176,  Dr.  526,  Edmond  88,  Eliz. 
123,  528,  Ellen  92,  Faith  557,  George 
433,  Henry  217,  218,  225,  244,  329, 
413,  Hugh  257,  Humph.  34,  195, 
453,  Isaak  538,  James  196,  Jane  466, 
558,  Jenkins  248,  Jon.  33,  John  101, 
128,  173,  228,  244,  248,  255,  260, 
283,  296,  350,  359,  374,  403,  409, 
415,  437,  462,  467,  513,  522,  525, 
530,  531,  541,  548,  562,  565,  569, 
Margt.  296,  300,  481,  Mary  167,  238, 

244,  266,  296,  308,  364,  374,  412, 
Merrick  558,  Mr.  231,  340,  365, 
Nathl.  539,  Nathan  559,  Peeter  350, 
564,  Rebecca  118,  Rich.  58,  61,  Robt. 
118,  148,  476,  519,  548,  Saml.  133, 
Seth.  348,  397,  Susan  444,  554,  562, 
Thomas  74,  89,  107,  110,  113,  261, 
273,  288,  405,  411,  525,  548,  Walter 
178,  559,   Wm.  22,  29,  47,  133,  143, 

149,  156,    160,    176,    177,   202,   203, 

245,  250,  253,  262,  311,  353,  355, 
385,  415,  433,  442,  468,  524,  525, 
554,  Xpher.  89. 

Edwardson,  Jno.  467. 

Edwin,  James   128,  Susan  559,  Thomas 

128,  Wm.  359. 
Edy,  Xpher.  385. 
Eeds,  Alice  103. 
Eells,  John  328. 
Efface,  Zach.  384. 
Efford,  Mr.  490,   521,  Peter  310,  405, 

Tho.  395. 
Egberow,  Wm.  170. 
Egborough,  Wm.  189. 


Egbourne,  Wm.  198. 

Egbrougn,  Wm.  198,  283. 

Egg,  Joane  446. 

Eggerly,  Tho.  446. 

Eggerton,  Henr*  377,  406. 

Eggleston,  Arthur  23,  Jon.  242,  Richd. 

228,  294,  304,  428,  465. 
Egleston,   Hugh   344,  Richd.   56,  Roger 

546. 
Eison,  Ncho.  253. 
Ekin,  Jam.  352. 
Ekine,  Hen.  366. 
Elaerton,  Eliz.  427. 
Elam,  Ann  262,  Robert  106,   157,   262, 

465,  323. 

Elay,  Lancelott  231,  340. 

Elberry,  William  16. 

Elcher,  Henry  314. 

Elcocke,  Joane  284,  John  219,  254,  349. 

Elder,  Wm.  430. 

Elderwell,  Eliz.  223. 

Eldon,  Ann  441. 

Eldridge,  Debo.  255,  Elder  388. 

Eldrige,  Hugh  265,  Saml.  47,  65,   143, 

197,  309,  Thomas  381. 
Elery,  Ann  429,  484,  Samll.  511. 
Eles,  Jon.  58,  Wm.  227,  282. 
Eley,  Christo.  220,  John  189,  Lanselett 

504,  Robert  114. 
Elfe,  Mich.  441. 
Elfrid,  Xtopher.  452. 
Elice,  Capt.  337. 
Elinge,  John  217. 
Elitherby,  Mary  187. 
Eliton,  Jno.  546. 
Elkenton,  Tho.  479. 
Elkes,  John  513,  Robt.  476. 
Elkeson,  Andrew  316. 
Elkins,  Ralph  364,  402,  462. 
Elkton,  Wm.  63. 
Ellcock,  Alex.  382. 
Ellens,  Hen.  483. 
Eller,  Sam.  513. 
Ellerye,  Charity  91. 
Elles,  Alice  291,  Robt.  324. 
Elletson,   Percivall   158. 
Ellett,   Abraham  499,   Alice  499,   Eliz. 

449. 
Ellford,  Martha  454. 
Ellice,  Elianor  121,  Mary  325,  352. 
Ellin,  Wm.  118. 
Ellinor,  Bridgett  342. 
Ellins,  Bridgett  178. 
Elliott,  Antho.  146,  154,  202,  223,  381, 

515,  548,  Charles  560,  Col.  462,  518, 

David  503,  John  192,  355,  431,  524, 

Lewis    176,    Rich.    491,    Robert    381, 


General  Index 


637 


512,  515,  Thomas  381,  512,  515, 
Vincent  443,  Wm.  145,  318. 

Ellis,  Alice  271,  An  475,  Bryan  390, 
David  137,  196,  231,  270,  Edw.  41, 
88,  225,  Elinor  279,  Eliz.  392,  Israel 
271,  Isaac  127,  James  453,  Jon.  24, 
54,  John  130,  158,  171,  225,  382, 
447,  479,  566,  568,  Kath.  551, 
Michaell  131,  Peter  173,  237,  463, 
Ra.  244,  Ralph  491,  492,  Richard 
394,  Row.  289,  Saml.  36,  50,  271, 
Sarah  143, Thomas 69, 90,  Wm.  78,  125. 

Ellies,  Jno.  506. 

Elliser,  Jonath.  84. 

Ellison,  Jonath.  31,  Jno.  444. 

Ellit,  Richd.  154. 

Ellmore,  Tho.  300. 

Ellom,  Robt.  42. 

Ells,  Henry  264,  Peter  162,  173,  298. 

Ellsey,  John  405. 

Elly,  John  189,  Jone  264. 

Ellyott,  Ann  315,  Antho.  157,  208,  309, 
328,  512,  518,  Edward  315,  Fra.  275, 
Hen.  300,  Kath.  308,  Phillip  315, 
Robt.  212,  322. 

Ellyson,  Capt.  550,  Jno.  512,  Robt.  240, 
Robt.  240,  241,  338,  348. 

Ellyus,  Wm.  245. 

Elmes,  Martha  525,  Tho.  427,  Tho.  466. 

Elmor,  Peter  458. 

Elmore,  Eliz.  392,  Henry  251,  527. 

Elnor,  Tho.  297. 

Eloer,  Jno.  456. 

Elrock,  Aron  185. 

Elsby,  Aug.  255. 

Elsey,  John  261,  291. 

Elsford,  Tho.  342. 

Elsmore,  Eliza.  249. 

Elson,  John  277. 

Elston,  Jno.  546. 

Elsworth,  Ann  78,  Anth.  78. 

Elton,  Ed.  233,  Jno.  523,  Tymothy  536. 

Elvart,  Tho.  458. 

Elver,  Jno.  429. 

Elves,  Wm.  222. 

Elwood,  Jno.  157,  Widdow  543. 

Ely,  Joane  54,  120,  Robt.  131,  525. 

Elzey,  John  412,  532. 

Emarson,  Tho.  160. 

Emaston,  Wm.  333. 

Embrock,  Richd.  192. 

Emerilla,  John  391. 

Emeroy,  Lydia  171. 

Emersley,   Isaac  217. 

Emerson,  Arthur  152,  Ed.  214,  John 
385,  Mich.  237,  Nicho.  130,  Paul 
454,  Tho.  128,  130. 


Emery,  Andrew  100,  Henry  237,  Isa. 
242. 

Emiss,  William  363. 

Emmenson,  Thomas  53,  77. 

Emmerton,  Ann  40,  95,  Alice  40,  59. 

Emmett,  Joane  362,  Mary  354,  Saml. 
440. 

Emnes,  Eliz.  428. 

Emperor,  Francis  248,  283,  343,  Mr. 
302,  311. 

Empson,  Jno.  446. 

Enbrooke,  Richard  183. 

Endin,  Wm.  443. 

Engard,  Chas.  167. 

Engineer,  315,  373. 

England,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  71,  168,  226, 
305,  550. 

England,  Francis  140,  147,  183,  261, 
278,  504,  525,  Humphry  45,  67,  147, 
330,  Israel  198,  John  45,  67,  82,  536, 
Joyce  525,  Mary  45,  Mr.  524,  Ralph 
190,  Samll.  551,  Sarah  140,  Wm. 
466. 

Engler,  James  278. 

English,  Abraham  91,  122,  131,  136, 
185,  206,  215,  564,  Alice  560,  Ann 
512,  Ellin  512,  Francis  512,  Geo. 
404,  462,  Jane  299,  Joane  135,  Jon. 
67,  John  245,  372,  400,  512,  Kath. 
325,  Mary  400,  428,  Ringer  218, 
Thomasin  450,  Walter  308,  343,  400, 
432,  560,  William  99,  102,  132,  135, 
181. 

Enhaynby,  Geo.  208. 

Enies,  John  22. 

Enngood  Richd.  134. 

Ennis,  James  196. 

Enns,  Darby  393. 

Enoch,  Noah  486. 

Ensome,  Eliz.  386. 

Enson,  Wm.  199. 

Ensworth,  John  228. 

Entertainment,  house  of  18. 

Epers,  Robt.  143. 

Epes,  (Epps)  Capt.  43,  154,  163,  165, 
466,  Francis  31,  61,  84,  130,  281, 
505,  Jon.  31,  84,  William  7,  13,  163, 
294. 

Epses'  Thickett  458. 

Epherby,  Geo.  199. 

Eping,  Wm.  430. 

Erefined,  Mary  187. 

Erett,  John  182. 

Erington,  Gerrard  481. 

Erlby,  Jno.  509. 

Errence,  Joseph  329. 


638 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Errington,  Henry  443,  Gerrard  373, 
Richd.   132. 

Ervin,  Tho.  431,  511. 

Erwin,  Geo.  130,  424. 

Ery,  Hannah  562. 

Escheator  463,  481,  533,  549,  550,  551, 
555,  557,  560. 

Escholl,  Joyce  267. 

Esgrame,  John  153. 

Esmy  Shichans,  30. 

Eson,  Phillip  451. 

Esquire,  John  93. 

Essex,  Elizabeth  362,  John  43,  207,  256, 
266,   292,   339,  475,   544,  Mary  481. 

Essington,  Thomas  56. 

Esson,  Edward  59. 

Estan,   Tristram   558. 

Ester,  Wm.  547. 

Esthop,  Mary  425. 

Esto,  Joshua  351. 

Eston,  Alice  523. 

Estowe,  John  369. 

Estwood,  Mary  558. 

Eterman,  Edmond  546,  547. 

Ethell,  Tho.  160. 

Etherid^e,  Hen.  296,  Tho.  174,  445. 

Ethey,  Wm.  468. 

Ethirton,  Saml.  143. 

Etmore,  Henry  527. 

Ettrig,  James  554. 

Eubanke,  Wm.  366. 

Eubunke,  Henry  245. 

Eules,  Richd.  263. 

Eusam,  Rich.  316. 

Eusell,  Christo.  40. 

Euson,  Nicho.  253. 

Eustis,  Jam.   29. 

Eusworth,  John  228. 

Evand,  Wm.  157. 

Evans,  Abigail  246,  Ann  48,  111,  246, 
314,  382,  Anthony  355,  Clement  47, 
65,  Chri.  45,  62,  144,  Dan.  54,  120, 
268,  Edward  79,  121,  204,  265,  286, 
393,  426,  444,  468,  516,  528,  Eliz. 
302,  Florence  552,  Francis  295,  Georg 
144,  272,  Henry  131,  308,  Humph. 
112,  257,  427,  James  78,  174,  Jane 
144,  Jeffery  93,  Joan  201,  236,  302, 
482,  John  27,  31,  49,  105,  110,  130, 
137,  141,  195,  246,  276,  285,  322, 
330,  382,  408,  411,  419,  425,  449, 
482,  528,  542,  553,  554,  556,  557, 
559,  561,  562,  563,  Jonas  29,  76, 
Jone  347,  542,  Kath.  239,  Lawrance 
110,  258,  Lucy  171,  Marg.  198,  Mary 
179,  201,  286,  348,  382,  429,  Matha 
563,    Maudlin   382,    Morgan    25,    69, 


99,  453,  Mr.  568,  Oliver  552,  Percy 
381,  Peter  541,  563,  568,  Phillip  427, 
428,  566,  Rachell  139,  Richd.  8,  23, 
117,  213,  385,  426,  Robt.  109,  324, 
393,  426,  444,  528,  542,  554,  Roger 
397,  Rowland  217,  265,  286,  Sesly 
302,  Susan  289,  556,  Symon  525, 
Thomas  99,  112,  133,  144,  146,  157, 
264,  274,  385,  452,  512,  559,  T.  546, 
Tompson  110,  Wm.  211,  258,  460, 
475,  525,  553,  559,  562,  Winefre 
558. 

Evason,  Math.   280. 

Evelin,  Geo.  401,  Mary  171,  362,  Mon- 
joy  401,  Robert  63. 

Eveling,  James  552. 

Everad,  Wm.  483. 

Everard,  Tho.   166,  450. 

Everat,  Ann  317,  William  317. 

Everdew,  Richd.  527. 

Evere,  John  158. 

Evered,  Tho.  342,  Wm.  412. 

Everedge,  William  50. 

Everfleet,  Wm.  195. 

Everet,  Wm.  512. 

Everett,  Geo.  344,  Joane  212. 

Everson,  Math.  280. 

Everthet,  Phil.  482. 

Everton,  Samll.  460. 

Everidge,  Tho.  301,  415,  497,  541,  564, 
Wm.  86,  562. 

Everilla,  John  35. 

Everitt,  Christo.  35. 

Everye,  Edw.  263,  Nicho.  225. 

Eves,  Jon.  51,  61. 

Evorahoo,  Nola  350. 

Ewcon,  Rich.  485. 

Ewen,  Jane  180,  John  180,  Nicholas  95, 
Richd.  95,  Wm.  176,  401. 

Ewens,  Ann  139,  John  139. 

Ewin,  Richd.  143,  Wm.  53,  147,  176. 

Ewing,  Mr.  102. 

Ewington,  Henry  443. 

Ewins,  Element  142,  Elnor  566. 

Ewres,  Robt.  197. 

Ewrin,  Tho.  485. 

Exall,  Anne  230. 

Excell,  Anne  230. 

Exoll,  John  370,  520,  563,  Wm.  520. 

Exton,  Geo.  152,  Willi.  22. 

Eye,  Wm.  188. 

Eyes,  Dennis  459,  492,  493,  544. 

Eyre,  Robt.  510. 

Eyres,  Jon.  135,  John  404,  Marth.  483, 
Robt.  129,  178,  256,  Wm.  24,  45,  73, 
74,  77,  83,  100,  102,  118,  129,  139, 
153,  187,  241,  378,  381. 


General  Index 


639 


Fabian,  Gilbert  162. 

Fabin,  Gilbert  216,  Tho.  262. 

Fabitt,  Henry  211. 

Fablett,  Henry  278. 

Faikes,  Tho.  499. 

Fain,  Mary  426. 

Fairbanke,  John  282. 

Faire,  Fra.  399,  Jno.  371,  Mathew  143, 
Richd.   143. 

Fairebrother,  Nathll.  99. 

Fairefax,  Margery  109,  William  109, 
143,  197. 

Fairepoint,  Jno.  353,  Joseph  376. 

Falch,  Lawr.  448. 

Falconer,  Richard  93. 

Falim,  Wm.  440. 

Falkener,  Tho.  159. 

Falkner,  Fran.  359. 

Falow,  James  470. 

Falston,  Eliz.   133. 

Faltham,  Tho.  193. 

Famill,  Wm.  428. 

Fanch,  Tho.  242. 

Fanell,  Willi.  119. 

Faning,  Elinor  204. 

Fann,  Wm.  27. 

Fantaine,  Peter  551. 

Fantleroy,  Geo.  154,  Mary  532,  Moore 
114,  116,  135,  154,  191,  194,  255, 
273,  299,  319,  341,  397,  459,  464, 
467,  469,  495,  497,  500,  527. 

Fantrees,  Fardin.  180,  Ferd.  221. 

Far,  Wm.  510. 

Farbarne,  Lawrence  49,  61. 

Farbush,  Hugh  214. 

Farbuth,  Danl.  267. 

Fardinando,  Geo.  445. 

Fared oth,  Wm.   536. 

Fargason,  Thomas   108. 

Farington,  Jno.  454,  Mary  196. 

Farley,  Wm.  275. 

Farlin,  Henry  278. 

Farling,  Jno.  412. 

Farloe,  Grace  309,  381,  Joice  175. 

Farlow,  Alex.  300,  Edw.  482,  Fra.  469, 
Wm.  465. 

Farly,  Ann  147,  Fra.  312,  John  312, 
Joseph  312,  Joyce  312. 

Farmar,  Humph.   199. 

Farme,  Eliz.  391. 

Farmer,  Andrew  281,  489,  Doro.  397, 
Eliz.  441,  Fra.  448,  John  115,  259, 
291,  322,  383,  466,  Mary  248,  399, 
432,  Nich.  440,  Richd.  193,  Samll. 
192,    468,    Susan,    452,    Symon    377, 


Wm.   397,  464,   500,   509,   550,   567. 
Fame,  Alice  514. 
Farnell,  Mary  307,  Susan  526. 
Fames,  Dina  428. 
Farnham,  Jos.  481. 
Famill,  Tho.  278. 
Faror,  Jno.  463. 
Farr,    Edw.    440,    464,    John    33,    483, 

Mary  199,  402,  Robt.  512,  Wm. 

331. 
Farra,  Wm.  191,  516. 
Farrahoe,  John  157. 
Farrall,  Jno.  565. 
Farrant,  Jos.  558,  Phillip  315. 
Farrar,  Ann  171,  George  528,  Mr.  33, 

Phillip  481,  William  41,  54,  60,  69, 

516. 
Farrast,  John  380. 
Farrell,  Alexr.  335,  Bryan,  358,  Garrett 

79,     118,    Jno.    548,    Margarett    358 

Patrick  102,  Seph.  427,  Tho.  375. 
Farrer,  Maret.  411. 

Farrington.Cha.  28, Henry  425,  Tho.  351. 
Farriott,  Dominick  478. 
Farro,  Jno.  499. 
Farror,  John  178. 
Farrow,  Jon.  34. 
Farrs,  Jno.  499. 
Farrwell,  Grace  386. 
Farsen,  Susan,  475. 
Farsey,  John  400. 
Farston,   Frederick  530. 
Farth,  Jon.  81. 
Farthin,  Robt.  45. 
Farthing,  Bar  50,  61,  86,  Charles  403, 

Lewis  453,  Robt.  66. 
Farthy,  Hugh  426. 
Fartree,  Margtt.  555. 
Fartsen,  Frederick  475. 
Farye,  Ann  89,  Joseph  89. 
Faslowe,  Elias  233. 
Fatherell,  Jno.  294. 
Fathinge,  Tho.  345. 

Faucett,  John  251,  337. 

Faulconer,  Tho.  126. 

Faulkner,    Edw.    435,    470,    Fra.    377, 

386,   Jno.   492,  Margaret    111,   Thos. 

Ill,   151,   155,   225,   254,    349,  Wm. 

484. 
Fauster,  Geo.  222,  Wm.  208. 
Fautres,   Fardin.   180. 
Fawcett,    Adam    304,    John    292,    332, 

551,  552. 
Fawden,    Jno.    506,    Major    274,    Wm. 

514. 
Fawdon,  Georg  23,  26,  36,  111,  Major 

487. 


640 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Fawder,  Georg  24. 

Fawding,  Rich.  512. 

Fawkner,  Tho.  155. 

Fawne,  Geor.  521,  Mary  338,  Tho.  292, 
Wm.   22. 

Fawsett,  John  276,  402,  475,  551,  544. 

Fay,  Tho.  323. 

Fayden,  Jonathan  82. 

Feanes,  Tho.  84. 

Fear,  Thomas  358. 

Feard,  Thomas  358. 

Fearebrace,  Roper  31. 

Fearing  78,  80,   137. 

Fearne,  J.  538. 

Fearson,  Mathew  544. 

Feasly,  Robt.  143. 

Feathergill,  Chris.  178. 

Feathy,  Eliz.  308. 

February  John  97,  185. 

Fee,  Neale  135.      , 

Feele,  Geo.  568. 

Feelee,  Prissell  267. 

Feepond,  Peter  556. 

Feeres,  Margarett  338. 

Feete,  Geo.  568. 

Feeton,  Nicho.  76. 

Feild,  Abraham  339,  537,  538,  Ann 
145,  Bartholomew  523,  Chas.  142, 
Christo.  103,  115,  249,  Daniell  61, 
177,  Edw.  513,  James  139,  Jon.  35, 
John  209,  325,  504,  Mary  213,  456, 
Richd.  102,  200,  312,  Tho.  78,  145, 
278,  Wm.  312,  349,  376,  397,  441, 
472,  485. 

Feild:  the  great  41,  Old  478,  547,  Race 
305,  Scotch  Quarter  406. 

Feilding,  Joseph  350. 

Fele,  Rich.  454. 

Felgate,  Erasmus  70,  121,  210,  315, 
John  36,  97,  98,  103,  121,  123,  125, 
288,  524,  Judith  121,  Margt.  121, 
Mr.  192,  196,  215,  Robt.  14,  15,  70, 
91,  114,  121,  210,  315,  318,  372, 
401,  Sibbella  210,  315,  Tho.  270, 
Toby  15,  Tobias  56,  Wm.  215,  288. 

Felix,  Jon.  230. 

Felkes,  John  369,  Walter  516. 

Fell,  Wm.  302. 

Fellmore,  Edw.  455. 

Fells,  John  92,   142,  157. 

Felter,  Timo.  236. 

Felton,  Andrew  223,  390,  James  361, 
433,  Jon.  84,  John  118,  134,  180, 
221,  Tho.  303,  370,  511. 

Fendall,  Georg  385. 

Fenman,  Nich.  149. 

Fenn,  SamlP.  70,  Tymothy  137,  Wm.  129. 


Fennan,  Nicho.  172. 

Fennell,  John  190,  Martha  434. 

Fenner,  Edward  315. 

Fennett,  Wm.  553. 

Fenny,  Dan.  428. 

Fenton,  Est.  341,  Henry  104,  124,  188, 
Jane  263. 

Fentrice,  Ro.  157,  Robt.  142. 

Ferby,  Jno.  457. 

Ferepoint,  John  58. 

Ferewether,  Fra.  181. 

Ferman,  Nicho.  276,  293,  341,  350, 
494. 

Fermer,  Rich.  60. 

Fernice,  Wm.  273. 

Ferr,  Mary  237. 

Ferreby,  Tho.  37,  66. 

Ferrer,  William  13. 

Ferres,  Jno.  525. 

Ferriatt,  Dominick  347,  526. 

Ferriott,  Dominick  359. 

Ferris,  Rich.  41. 

Ferynes,  Wm.  148. 

Fetherston,  Ellen  131. 

Fetherstone,  Ch.  255,  Wm.  552. 

Fettyplace,  Gyles  466. 

Feverstone,  Tho.  385. 

Fewell,  Wm.  427. 

Fewson,  Edwd.  60. 

Fickling,  John  225. 

Fiddewent,  Wm.  387. 

Fidings,   Richd.   201. 

Field,  (See  Feild)  Abra.  483,  484,  Ann 
250,  James  262,  Jno.  468,  Tho.  255. 

Figes,  Arthur  245. 

Figg,  John  49,  144. 

Filch,  Joseph  249. 

Filby,  Joan  119. 

Filkin,  Robert  318. 

Filline,  James  336. 

Filliott,  Mich.  384. 

Fillkin,  Robert  334. 

Fills,  Prescilla  454. 

Filmer,  Mr.  149. 

Filmore,  Edward  555,  Hen.  230,  562, 
Mary  545,  Mr.  311. 

Filmott,  Ed.  559. 

Filpot,  Henry  556. 

Filton,  Mathew  559. 

Finch,  Anne  243,  Eliz.  189,  Frances  86, 
Francis  136,  194,  429,  484,  490, 
Geo.  462,  Hugh  209,  John  78,  189, 
228,  241,  430,  484,  499,  525,  Mary 
189,  327,  450,  466,  Richard  189,  433, 
545,  Samll.  483,  Thomas  542,  Wm. 
189,  228,  315. 

Fine,  Timothy  550. 


General  Index 


641 


Fineash,  Francis  113. 

Fines,  Timothy  509. 

Finly,  Adam  184. 

Finny,  Richd.   117. 

Firbush,  Edw.  453. 

Firby,  Eliza.  201. 

Firman,  Nicho.   342. 

Firmant,  Samuell  96,   127,  218. 

Firsh,  Anne  343. 

Fish,  Jane  544,  John  523,  537,  Martha 
453,  Wm.  212. 

Fishbrooke,  Ellinor  388. 

Fisher,  Barbery  551,  Bridgett  38,  Chris- 
tian 119,  Edw.  134,  197,  Eliz.  126, 
Fra.  513,  Geo.  339,  Grace  309,  381, 
Henry  566,  James  348,  357,  444, 
Jane  444,  506,  Jasper  475,  John  44, 
148,  223,  283,  291,  293,  362,  370, 
387,  543,  548,  562,  Marke  464, 
Martin  432,  Mary  318,  442,  443, 
481,  557,  Masld.  179,  Mr.  283,  549, 
Peter  385,  Phillip  414,  Richd.  414, 
Robt.  309,  381,  Sarah  37,  158,  Tho. 
96,  440,  509,  545,  Wm.  114,  327, 
383. 

Fishes,  Danll.  516. 

Fishpond,  Jno.  394. 

Fishpoole,  Nicholas  369,  Roger  363. 

Fiskell  James  375. 

Fiskins,  Nicholas  8. 

Fister,  Joseph  95. 

Fitby,  Edwd.  459. 

Fitch,  Mary  164,  222,  Saml.  106. 

Fitcher,  Edw.  302,  Silvester  104,  Tho. 
512. 

Fitchet,  Mr.  491. 

Fitchett,  John  25,  69,  99,  139,  177, 
232,  240,  313,  399. 

Fits,  Robt.  208. 

Fitts,  Carey  424,  Carry   178,  Cary  355. 

Fitzell,  Danll.  234. 

Fitzgarrell,  John  44. 

Fitzgarrett,  Redman  26. 

Fitz-Symons,  Homer  386. 

Five,  Lewis  291. 

Fixer,  James  217. 

Fixmus,  Richd.  155. 

Flabian,  Wm.  235. 

Flack,  Robt.  516,  538. 

Flag,  Henry  513. 

Flaharty,  James  220,  332. 

Flake,  Giles  234,  Robt.  123,  197,  233, 
426,  485,  516,  Wm.  514. 

Flaminge,  Alexr.  327. 

Flanard,  Samll.  520. 

Flanders,  Michaell  431. 

Flanny,  Teague  306,  310. 


Flar,  Wm.  391. 

Flariott,  Samll.  520. 

Flarrell,  Abiather  428. 

Flash,  John  450. 

Flaunders  Tho.  360,  Tho.  496. 

Flaxon,  Jno.  176. 

Fleet,  Fra.  457,  510,  George  547,  Mary 
501. 

Fleete,  Henry  13,  14,  177,  194,  259, 
311,  316,  332,  353,  375,  390,  407, 
437,  478,  494,  534,  John  164,  264, 
267,  270,  474,  509,  538,  Robt.  152, 
Capt.   289,   296,   310,   396,  438,   521. 

Fleete's,  Capt.  "people",   521. 

Fleetwood,  David  201,  Edward  425, 
Francis  251,  274,  493,  Mary  327, 
Robt.  425,  Tho.  456. 

Flemin,  Cha.  248,  Patrick  264. 

Fleming,  Alexr.  384,  419,  424,  431, 
442,  503,  518,  519,  524,  Christo. 
245,  Eliza.  192,  442,  John  249,  386, 
397,  558,  Richd.  147,  151,  Wm.  411. 

Fletcher,  Alice  431,  Ann  190,  Antho. 
129,  Cath.  375,  Cutt.  425,  467,  468, 
Elinor,  336,  Eliz.  22,  Francis  476, 
483,  Geo.  251,  266,  280,  423,  463, 
475,  516,  544,  Hanniball  22,  24,  51, 
Isaac  222,  Isabell  324,  James  28,  John 
112,  148,  166,  345,  433,  Mary  448, 
459,  Math.  463,  Michaell  137,  Mr. 
252,  Nathanll.  568,  Nathun  258, 
Peter  144,  Robt.  267,  349,  Ryon  182, 
Susan  393,  517,  Tho.  148,  Valent.  54, 
120,  Wm.  23,  200,  486,  501. 

Flewellin,  Ann  146,  Tho.  146. 

Flewelling,  Rich.  501. 

Fleyneye,  Thomas  72. 

Flide,  Eliz.  355,  Teage  355. 

Fliers,  James  456. 

Flincher,  John  356. 

Flind,  Tho.  455. 

Fling,  John  107. 

Flinge,  Daniell  451. 

Flint,  Capt.  36,  242,  408,  John  406, 
Lt.  10,  Mary  13,  272,  Mr.  343,  390, 
494,  Richd.  164,  214,  238,  272,  355, 
372,  373,  377,  461,  519,  Tho.  8,  9, 
12,  13,  19,  30,  67,  71,  81,  127, 
Tomasin   399. 

Flinton,  Eliz.  86,  192,  Farrar  147,  192, 
Jane  192,  Mr.  140,  301,  470,  Pharoah 
4,  5,  128,  159,  274,  Wm.  343,  Xpher. 
480. 

Flips,  Timothy  550. 

Flitt,  Robt.  269. 

Floid,  Geo.  325,  James  292,  Tho.  345, 
(See  Floyd). 


642 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Flood,  (See  Fludd)  Col.  276,  286,  326, 
Abra.  199,  David  79,  Francis  212, 
214,  410,  Hercules  508,  Joane  268, 
Jon.  32,  John  194,  228,  268,  286, 
305,  326,  Mary  194,  Patrick  512, 
Rich.  32,  128,  Robt.  63,  Samll.  61, 
Thomas  334. 

Floop,  Jno.  562. 

Floreday,  Morgan,  136. 

Florine,  Robert  370. 

Floring,  Robt.  404. 

Florra,  Kath.  353,  356. 

Florriday,  Wm.  370. 

Flower,  Ann  311,  George  447,  John 
159,  Joseph  479,  Nicho.  186,  422, 
Phillip  444,  523,  Sam.  513,  Xtopher. 
193. 

Flowerday,  Eliza.  155. 

Flowerdew,  Eliza.   142. 

Flower  de  Hundred,  72,  81,  250. 

Flowers,  Edwd.  344,  John  159,  Wm. 
458,  460. 

Floyd,  Anth.  166,  Capt.  562,  Dan.  501, 
David  304,  543,  Fardinando  510,  Flug. 

75,  George  325,  Margt.  493,  Mary 
391,  459,  Melchesedick  94,  Mich.  304, 
Nathl.  8,  75,  106,  522,  Nowell  80, 
Rice  110,  Richd.  207,  264,  285,  Robt. 

76,  433,  Tho.  112,  432,  Trevor  229, 
Walter  17,  Wm.  548. 

Floyne,  Joane  127,  John  127,  Teague 
259,  310. 

Floyton,  Wm.  442. 

Fludd,  Capt.  149,  Francis  171,  172, 
John  86,  103,  104,  176,  Martha  93, 
Ralph  90,  Richd.  103,  Wm.  554. 

Fluell,  Mary  493. 

Fluellin,  Wm.  187,  248. 

Flye,  John  67,  Math.  453,  Tho.  453. 

Flyne,  John  169. 

Flynt,  Rich.  461. 

Foanes,  Tho.  31,  84. 

Foard,  Ann  465,  Chas.  29,  40,  88,  246, 
259,  276,  Dennis  297,  Dorothy  406, 
Garrard  483,  Henry  377,  386,  Ismaell 
464,  Jon.  53,  Mr.  286,  326,  Peter 
369,  Richd.  230,  282,  324,  399,  Robt. 
438,  Wm.  247. 

Focknham,  Tho.  375. 

Fogg,  Wm.  521,  Whittingham  252. 

Foker,  John  45,  60. 

Foland,  Lafaland  378. 

Folcner,  Jno.  502. 

Folder,  Katherin  75. 

Foley,  Tho.  525. 

Folke,  Wm.  501. 

Folland,  John  200. 


Follard,  John  184. 

Follett,  Ed.  541. 

Follit,  Tho.  508. 

Follor,  Wm.  498. 

Follow,  Wm.  509. 

Followes,  John  219. 

Folly,  Xpian.  217. 

Fonding,  Rich.  547. 

Fontleroy,  Col.  374,  Moore  151,  (See 
Fantleroy). 

Fooke,  Wm.  455. 

Fookes,  Ann  102,  John  215,  266,  293, 
430,  Mary  324,  Robert  393,  Wm.  51. 

Foord,  Adrian  148,  Chas.  194,  Hester 
190. 

Foot  Company,  the  162. 

Foot,  Geo.  468,  John  300. 

Foote,  Robt.  387,  Tho.  198,  223,  244, 
416,  Mr.  447. 

Footman,  Henry  304,  345. 

Forbush,  Hugh  201,  John  43,  94,  201. 

Forby,  Ben.  239,  Jno.  432,  457. 

Ford,  Chas.  40,  Harman  528,  Hen,  463, 
475,  Jon.  23,  John  66,  77,  110,  Mr. 
518,  Peter  180,  307,  505,  530,  541, 
Richd.  117,  118,  219,  275,  377,  381, 
Thomas  453,  Wm.  45,  66,  433. 

Forden,  Mathew  56. 

Fant,   Ford   135. 

Fore,  Peter  530. 

Forecaster,  Tymothy  431. 

Forecraft,  Tho.  275. 

Forehead,  Jno.  283. 

Foreman,  Alex.  445,  514,  Andrew  527, 
Jno.  528,  Wm.  254. 

Foreast,  Tho.  433. 

Forester,  Toby  309. 

Forgeson,  Patr.  261. 

Forgott,  Margary  493. 

Forke,  Tho.  148. 

Forman,  Nicholas  494. 

Former,  Symon  476. 

Formor,  Jno.  390. 

Fornham,  Mich.  440. 

Fornor,  Jno.  361. 

Foron,  Richd.  546. 

Forrast,  Thomas  433. 

Forrest,  Ann  378,  Danll.  218,  Edward 
377,  Eliz.  345,  377,  378,  Henry  345, 
377,  James  316,  Jno.  378,  Joseph 
208,  Rich.  404,  Robt.  455,  Tho.  270. 

Forrester,  Jone  369,  Toby  381. 

Forrister,  488. 

Forscue,  Martin  115. 

Forshew,  Hugh  128. 

Forsith,  John  183. 

Forst,  Robt.  280. 


General  Index 


643 


Forstan,  Barneby  568,  Mary  568. 

Forstive,   Arspell   428. 

Forts:  188,  Old  128,  Bridge  515,  Chica- 
hominy  349,  403,  Godspeeds  112 
Henry  12,  255,  411,  James  234, 
Manaskin  514,  Matapony  236,  555, 
Point  Comfort  122,  Royall  187 
Smith's  61,  175,  176,  177,  Totopo- 
tomoy  235. 

Fort,  Capt.  of  the:  70,  122. 

Fort  Feilds:  36,  62,  70,  76,  173,  188. 

Fort  Land,  the:    275,  298,  489,  535. 

Forte,  Mary  514. 

Fortescue,  Nich.  34. 

Fortree,  Thomas  554. 

Fortsen,  Mrs.  426. 

Fortson,  Barnaby,  557,  Mary  428,  557, 
Mr.  427. 

Forty,  Anne  351. 

Forville,  Tho.  196. 

Foscutt,  Symon  130. 

Foskett,  Eliz.  286,  Symon  286. 

Foskutt,  Eliz.  294,  Simon  294. 

Foson,  Mr.  530. 

Fossett,  James  391,  Robt.  31,  62,  84, 
131,  Wm.  253. 

Fosseting,  Eliz.  491. 

Fossick,  Marke  566. 

Foster,  Ann  309,  Armstrong  28,  Brid- 
get! 152,  Dorcas  249,  Edw.  350,  481, 
Eliza.  60,  Ellen  306,  Ferd.  184,  Geo. 
266,  343,  357,  377,  489,  Giles  147, 
Henry  98,  169,  239,  403,  James  138, 
162,  166,  196,  218,  259,  271,  337, 
408,  451,  513,  516,  Jane  117,  John 
125,  152,  174,  295,  340,  348,  534, 
Margarett  82,  Mark  34,  266,  289, 
386,  416,  Mary  142,  203,  276,  306, 
Mr.  200,  Nicholas  32,  103,  Pemett 
178,  Peter  430,  Phillip  54,  208,  Rich- 
ard 94,  182,  249,  306,  377,  430,  473, 
490,  508,  Robt.  302,  338,  413,  459, 
520,  534,  Seth.  501,  Susan  264,  286, 
412,  Susanna  239,  Tho.  267,  Wm.  58, 
129,  150,  176,  238,  353,  399,  461, 
Zachariah  35,  341. 

Fostly,  Rob.  323. 

Fother,  Dennis  371. 

Fothergale,  Wm.  315. 

Fouch,  Edwd.  431,  Gilbert  362,  Hugh 
211,  236,  255,   367,   382,  395. 

Fouesham,  John  250. 

Fouke,  John  34,  Mr.  297. 

Foules,  John  199. 

Foulsham,  Jon.  227,  300. 

Found,  Ann  425,  447. 

Founding,  Rich.  444,   546. 


Founteine,  Ro^er  331. 

Fourd,  Ann  483. 

Fourson,  Tho.  476. 

Fourth,  Jno.  361. 

Fourty,  Tho.  351. 

Foutch,  Hugh  198. 

Fowby,  Jane  507. 

Fowch,  Hugh  349,  422,  423. 

Fowke,  Gerard  298,  378,  388,  432,  469, 
470,  473,  489,  5.05,  531,  533,  536, 
Jane  361,  John  444,  566,  Lawr.  470, 
Mary  510,  Mr.  373,  496,  Mrs.  490, 
Richd.  237,  Tho.  297,  298,  383,  489, 
505,  533,  Walter  489,  Wm.  160. 

Fowkes,  Tho.  462,  Wm.  292. 

Fowler,  Antania  154,  182,  Elinor  355, 
Francis  33,  36,  37,  63,  72,  94,  104, 
113,  123,  124,  154,  182,  483,  George 
539,  Hanna  315,  James  31,  John  161, 
282,  323,  Mary  150,  Mathew  388, 
Susan  294,  Tho.  97,  185,  202,  327, 
457,  William  11,  23,  66,  426. 

Fowler's  Shambles  138. 

Fowles,  Edw.  498,  Mary  476,  487, 
Wm.  485. 

Fowlor,  Richd.  516. 

Fowte,  Anto.  554. 

Fox,  David  200,  214,  215,  219,  238, 
263,  265,  270,  273,  276,  277,  279, 
305,  313,  317,  318,  346,  374,  391, 
410,  425,  435,  438,  439,  450,  459, 
466,  469,  472,  477,  491,  524,  541, 
550,  Edw.  117,  188,  345,  518,  Francis 
112,  Hugh  78,  James  342,  Jane  196, 
Joane  453,  Mary  304,  Mr.  334, 
Stephen  524,  Susan  446,  Wm.  403. 

Foxcraft,  Isaac  332. 

Foxcroft,  Mr.  348,  Isaac  333,  376,  402, 
Wm.   562. 

Foxhill:   13,  16,  50,  63. 

Foxen,  Rich.  475. 

Foxly,  Mary  171. 

Foxmond,  Edm.   175. 

Foxon,  Rich.  429,  484,  490. 

Foy,  Alec.  352,  Eliz.  429,  Wm.  260. 

Foye,  Mr.  204. 

Foyle,  Jno.  552. 

Fraford,  Victo  22. 

Fraine,  Rebecca   196. 

France:    11. 

France,  Jon.  60,  Wm.  304. 

Francis,  Ann  543,  Bedford  142,  Edw. 
491,  Eliz.  543,  James  126,  Ja.  341, 
Jon.  66,  John  23,  131,  314,  324, 
Mary  179,  Rebecca  134,  Sam.  426, 
Susan  547,  Susanna  543,  Thomas 
104,  318,  543,  Wm.  234,  307. 


644 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Franchiss,  Tho.  166. 

Franck,Daniell  l6,Robt.  442,  Robet.  447. 

Francklin,  Anthony  517,  Francis  22, 
John  69,  Marg.  341,  Mary  525,  Peter 
403,  525,  Rich.  452,  Susan  459. 

Francks,  Henry  525. 

Franclin,  Edward  397. 

Franke,  Hen.  236,  Peter  356,  435,  Robt. 
135,  223,  357,  370. 

Frankes,  An.  546. 

Franklin,  Ellin  411,  John  210,  Hamond 
391,  Henry  23,  269,  Isaack  336,  386, 
Marg.  250,  Mary  233,  Rich.  348, 
Wm.  327. 

Franklind,   Ann   153. 

Frankling,  Edw.  441. 

Franks,  Ann  513. 

Frame,  Capt.  250,  543,  Jon.  60,  John 
305,  329,  Mr.  316,  Rebecca  329. 

Framblin,  Susan  459. 

Frapney,  Robt.  557. 

Frasey,  Barbara  218,  John  218,  Tho. 
218,  Wm.   218. 

Frassall,  Richard  369. 

Fraunces,  Tho.  302. 

Frayle,  Tego  138. 

Freak,  Wm.  292. 

Freake,  Wm.  207,  236,  371,  448,  471. 

Freame,  John  214. 

Freare,  John  390. 

Frederick,  John  93,  218,  224,  298,  308, 
Xpian.  181. 

Free,  John  450. 

Free  Man,  a  4. 

Freebody,  John  168,  Paule  557. 

Freechat,  the  166. 

Freeding,  Peter  455. 

Freehorne,  Jno.  152. 

Freeke,  Jno.  490,  Wm.  249,  279,  486, 
488,  501. 

Freel,  John  429. 

Freeland,  Richard  39,  63,  Wm.  154. 

Freeman,  Ann  136,  318,  Bennett  36,  82, 
102,  108,  126,  182,  212,  295,  335, 
364,  522,  Bridges  18,  19,  33,  36,  63, 
94,  104,  113,  123,  124,  125,  126, 
182,  224,  295,  299,  364,  522,  Bridgett 
36,  Captain  160,  415,  Charles  507, 
Edward  334,  Fra.  240,  498,  Henry 
222,  522,  James  388,  John  75,  138, 
358,  454,  536,  553,  Jone  78,  Mary 
446,  Mill.  29,  Mr.  517,  Nicho.  270, 
474,  Phillip  408,  409,  470,  Richard 
41,  Robert  92,  97,  138,  522,  Tho. 
222,  265,  299,  William  77,  92,  131, 
156,  162,  170,  190,  245,  294,  299, 
483,  337. 


Freeman,  William  65. 

Freeman's  Ford,  343. 

Freeme,  Anne  145,  John  140,  145. 

Freer,  Tobias  166,  284. 

Freestone,  Henry  259. 

Freethorne,  John  42. 

Freeze,  Arnall  45,  62,  Rachell  49. 

Freind,  Peter  151. 

Freiston,  Robt.   107. 

Freith,  Robt.  301.  499. 

Freke,  Fra.  391,  Wm.  355. 

Freman,  Bridgett  383,  Edw.  505. 

Fremes,  John  145. 

French,    Anth.    441,    Barnaby    352,    Dr. 

182,  Fra.  405,  Henry  282,  355,  Mary 

530,  Nicholas  521,  Peeter  324,  Richd. 

189,  Tho.  491,  Wm.  300. 
French  Ordnary,  the  480. 
Frenchmen,  536. 
Frere,  Robt.  127. 
Frerick,  Hugh  492. 
Freshwater,  Geo.  327,  Thomas  430,  443, 

481,  568.  • 
Frett,  Jeremiah  528,  Wm.  487. 
Fretwell,  G.  479. 
Frevitt,  Jno.  544. 
Frey,  Eliz.  479,  Humphrey  108. 
Frice,  Ann  255. 
Frich,  Wm.  506. 
Fricker,  John  97. 
Frie,  Mr.  330. 
Frier,  James  323. 
Friggett,  the  145,  160. 
Friggott  Landing,  the  356. 
Frigot,  Dicke  of  the  327. 
Frimer,  Andrew  223. 
Fringworth,   Paul  220. 
Frisby,  Ann  78,  Em.  432,  Nath.  432. 
Frisall,  Alexr.  205,  Geo.  183,  Wm.  564. 
Frish,  Jno.  537. 
Friske,  John  370. 
Frissell,  Dan.  301,  John  483,  548,  Tho. 

469,  473,  510,  Wm.  509,  563. 
Frisser,  Mary  184. 
Frissoll,  Peter  548. 
Fristo,  Mary  430. 
Fristow,  Robt.  485. 
Frith,  Ed.  427,  Henry  170,  430,  Joseph 

430,  Mary  470,  Tho.  520. 
Frizell,  Alexr.  428,'George  324,  Wm.  428. 
Frizer,  Thomas  382. 
Frizzar,  Jno.  326,  Tho.  292. 
Frizzell,  George  374. 
Froast,  Joane  562. 
Froland,  Edmd.  559. 
Frost,    Edward    403,     565,    Geo.    237, 

Mary  453,  Wm.  180,  302,  378. 


General  Index 


645 


Froste,  Edward  403. 

Frostly,  Rob.  352. 

Froth,  Roger  452. 

Frowell,  Edw.  207. 

Frowne,  Ann  555,  Eliza.  131. 

Fruell,  Wm.  499. 

Frumpton,  John  396,  560. 

Fry,   Alex.   209,   Eliz.   538,  Henry   195, 

James  486,  John  369,  Mary  296,  Mr. 

337,  Tho.   191,   267,   504,  Wm.  241, 

275,  276,  295,  322,  323,  330,  469,  510. 
Fryar,  Edward  315,  Rich.  559. 
Frye,  Jeffery  68,  Wm.   33,   56,   72,   85, 

88,   106,   126,   147,  323,  Edw.  207. 
Fryer,  Edw.  207,  John  180,  351,  Martha 

349. 
Fryse,  Wm.  214. 
Fryth,  Dyana  199,  Robt.  203. 
Fuell,   Mary  432,   492,   Tho.   391,   493, 

Wm.  391,  499,  500,  510. 
Fuer,  Sam.  268. 
Fufflett,  Tho.  507. 
Fulcher,  John  254,  259,  507. 
Fuljam,  Antho.  201,  236. 
Fullgam,  Antho.  424. 
Fulgham,   Antho.   476,    518,   John  476, 

519,  Wm.  484. 
Fulker,  Fran.  385. 
Fuller,  Alex.  146,  Alice  58,  George  558, 

Henry  393,  Ja.  426,  James  468,  John 

211,  278,  282,  Margt.  483,  Mary  465, 

Robt.    535,    563,    Tho.    7,    481,    483, 

Wm.  479,  484. 
Fullerton,  James  381. 
Fulliamb,  Antho.  150. 
Fulwood,  John  14. 
Funge,  Jane  192. 
Furboyes,  Fra.  188. 
Furbush,  David  308,  Fr.  40,  109,  Hugh 

214,  John  43. 
Furbusher,   Wm.   298. 
Furmis,  Wm.  472. 
Furnish,  Jane  513. 
Furr,  Henry  381. 
Furreer,  la  Antho.  226. 
Furton,  Saml.  430. 
Fussell,  Simon  497. 
Fustin,  Fardinando  535. 
Fute,  Robt.  93. 
Fybill,  Jacob  150. 


Gabell,  Tho.  552,  Wm.  347. 
Gable,  Jno.  425. 
Gabriel,  Jane  236. 
Gadd,  Wm.  432. 
Gadle,  Nathan  77. 


Gadstone,  Andrew  401,  Jane  458. 

Gafer,  Jno.  426,  468. 

Gaffer,  John  426,  444. 

Gage,  Edward  553,  Eliz.  265,  Fra.  300, 

Jno.  444,  Mary  403,  565,  Peter  527, 

Wm.  86,  290. 
Gagecomb,  Thomas  439. 
Gagen,  Fra.  227. 
Gailer,  Wm.  425. 
Gain,  Roger  384. 
Gaines,    Daniell    523,    528,    557,    558, 

561,  562,  Randall  453,  Tho.  492. 
Gainnie,  Robt.  23. 
Gainsbrooke,  James  361. 
Gainye,  William  6. 
Gale,    Daniell    183,    Geo.    472,    Hugh 

248,  John  123,  Tho.  489. 
Galipin,  Wm.  180. 
Galla,  Edward  548. 
Gallant,  Glode  182. 
Gallard,  Wm.  143. 
Gallaway,  Mary  166,  Wm.  7. 
Gailer,  John  314. 
Gallile,  Jno.  501. 
Gallingson,  Chris.   204. 
Galliott,  John  121. 
Gallipin,  Wm.  221. 
Gallop,  Allen  269,  Ellen  479. 
Gallopin,  Wm.  27. 
Galloway,  Richd.   165. 
Gaily,  Joane  113,  Richard  61. 
Galy,  John  208. 
Garlington,  Mr.  361. 
Gamball,  John  439. 
Gamberson,  Con.  315. 
Gambling,  Josias  46. 
Gambore,  Peter  378. 
Gamefield,  Samll.  558. 
Games,  Daniell  527,  Mr.  523. 
Gamlin,  John  211,  264,  372. 
Gammock,  Robert  109. 
Gamon,  Anne  242,  Jon.  242. 
Gancer,  Tymothy  183. 
Gandee,  Ralph  387. 
Gandons,  Edw.  401. 
Ganes,  Richard  46. 
Ganey,  Richd.  115. 
Gangrine,  Mich.  180. 
Ganlett,  Wm.  377. 
Gannes,  Edwd.  552. 
Ganock,  Wm.  456. 
Gantlet,  Wm.  325,  432. 
Gantlett,  Wm.  269,  311,  313,  422,  439, 

473,  496. 
Gantlett's  Land,  473. 
Gany,    Alice    134,    Ann    31,    Henry    31, 

Wm.  31. 


646 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Gapeing,  Wm.  219,  283,  354,  423. 

Gapin,  Wm.  144,  249,  287. 

Gapins,  Wm.  549. 

Gapper,  John  198,  Phillip  364. 

Gapps,  Wm.  6. 

Gapreil,  Edw.  181. 

Garden,  the  2,  488. 

Gardiner,  Bryan  115,  Dorothy  86,  Edw. 
86,  James  472,  Richd.  104. 

Gardner,  Archibald  309,  Bridgett  388, 
Danll.  218,  224,  298,  Edw.  240,  317, 
561,  Eliz.  403,  Fra.  183,  James  273, 
Jane  393,  John  196,  350,  559,  Joseph 
213,  July  260,  Kath.  330,  Mary  181, 
203,  507,  Phillip  327,  Richd.  314, 
322,  Sarah  393,  Step.  229,  302,  Tho, 
140,  208,  464,  467,  515,  516,  Xtopr. 
524. 

Gardworth,  Tho.  431. 

Gare,  Israel  258. 

Gares,  Rich.  440. 

Garey,  John  426,  468,  Robt.  178, 
Stephen  315. 

Garford,  Nathaniell  523. 

Gargaine,  Eliz.  54. 

Gargame,  Ellis  120. 

Gargrave,  Isaac  30. 

Garingoe,  Saml.  268. 

Garland,  Francis  288,  405,  Peter  204, 
318,  334,  Ro.  325. 

Garlick,  Robt.  194. 

Garlington,  Christo.  371  ,  383,  467, 
Xtoper.  186,  556. 

Garment,  Susana  400. 

Garnefield,  Samll.  558,  562. 

Garnell,  John  339,  348,  357,  426. 

Garner,  Alex.  23,  66,  Ann  176,  Daniell 
93,  Dorothy  50,  Edward  50,  Ellen 
127,  John  60,  78,  199,  315,  Mary 
107,  271,  Michaell  81,  Phillip  200, 
Richard  60,  84,  Stephen  402,  Wm.  129. 

Garnett,  John  26,  202,  Thomas  24, 
Wm.  176,  198. 

Garnoll,  Jno.  461. 

Garnum,  Richd.  124. 

Garrard,  Hen.  511,  John  84,  96,  Mar- 
garet 96,  Tho.  284. 

Garratt,  John  329,  310,  476,  518,   527. 

Garraway,  Evans  78,  232,  555. 

Garret,  Eliza.  173,  John  168,  173,  231, 
489,  Mary  493,  Tho.  172. 

Garrett,  Adrey  58,  Eliza.  44,  142,  Fran- 
cis 120,  Geo.  283,  James  382,  Jane 
202,  John  40,  62,  109,  118,  127,  128, 
129,  131,  133,  163,  164,  174,  205, 
257,  262,  327,  356,  381,  382,  480, 
Henry  286,  Marius  279,  Miller  283, 


Rebecca  394,  Retrun  378,  Robt.  467, 

559,  Rowland  62,  Tho.  122,  309,  409, 

424,  Wm.  130,  404,  411. 
Garrince,  John  118. 
Garryson,  Amos  233. 
Garth,  Geo.  454. 
Garton,  Ellinor  465. 
Garves,  James  290. 
Garwood,  John  166,  168,  205,  240. 
Gary,  John  55,  Stephen  490,  Walter  119. 
Garye,  John  37,  55,  69. 
Gascoigne,  Thos.   183. 
Gascoine,  Robert  370,  Tho.  330. 
Gascom,  Tho.  494,  461. 
Gascott,  Judith  388. 
Gascoyne,  Thos.  184,  288. 
Gaskin,  Savill  415,  William  550. 
Gaskins,  Alice  46,  Cevell  90,  Eliz.  46, 

James  557,  Josias  46,  Mary  46,  Savill 

269,  Thomas  46,  Wm.  443. 
Gass,  Jon.  29. 
Gassent,  John  316. 
Gasser,  Marke  254. 
Gassett,  Judith  296,  388. 
Gaston,  Fra.  481. 
Gastrey,  Tho.  166. 
Gastrock,  Wm.  23. 
Gate,  Tho.  122. 
Gatehouse,  John  270. 
Gately,  John  42. 
Gater,  Jane  93,  Joane  49,  John  49,  84, 

93,  555. 
Gates,  James  301,  John  111,  Jon.  148, 

Mathew  116,  Thomas  3,  121. 
Gaterson,  James  80. 
Gatlett,  Wm.  75. 
Gatlin,  John  47,  450. 
Gatling,  John  116. 
Gaton,  Geo.  90. 
Gatricke,  Ann  288. 
Gatwood,  Jno.  558,  562. 
Gaole,  Saxon's  13. 
Gaudge,  Eman.  283. 
Gaule,  Jno.  516. 
Gault,  John  379. 

Gaultney,  Thomas  562,  Wm.  465. 
Gaunt,  Geo.  462,  Jeffery  130,  Rich.  85, 

Robt.  58. 
Gaviott,  Peter  149. 
Gay,    Ann    493,    Geo.    289,    Hen.    492, 

Margarett  446,  Sara  452,  Thomas  395. 
Gaye,  Jno.  444. 
Gaying,  Bernard  144. 
Gayle,  John  447. 
Gaylor,  James  434,  John  274. 
Gaylord,  James  375. 
Gayne,  Anne  192,  Tho.  278. 


General  Index 


647 


Gaynes,  Edw.  198,  Jane  197,  Tho.  177. 

Gayney,  Richd.  322. 

Gayny,  Robt.  290,  Wm.  110,  170. 

Gayter,  Wm.  375. 

Gayton,  John   173. 

Geabe,  John  127. 

Geames,  Kat.  192. 

Geary,  John  119. 

Geat,  Wm.  78. 

Geates,  James  301. 

Geatley,  William  75. 

Geby,  Prudence  199. 

Gedley,  Richard  62. 

Gedon,  Ann  44. 

Gee,  Edw.  154,  Jon.  85,  Tho.  302,  Wm. 
111. 

Geere,  Fr.  94. 

Geers,  John  119. 

Geiles,  Henry  49. 

Geines,  Bernard  297,  Eliz.  297. 

Gelding,  Eliza.  179,  John  97,  Wm.  121, 
550. 

Gellett,  Eliza.  107,  Jno.  430. 

Genesis,  Ezekiell  461. 

Genings,  Edw.  493. 

Gentell,  Susan  538. 

Gentlemen,  James  491. 

Geny,  Gilbert  528. 

George,  Anne  256,  Griffith  146,  176, 
Hall.  265,  Jane  32,  93,  John  32,  74, 
93,  99,  127,  130,  228,  249,  459,  503, 
Leo.  482,  Marg.  270,  Nicholas  105, 
249,  270,  278,  374,  437,  488,  504, 
Richd.  200,  232,  Robt.  136,  Silvester 
209,  Symon  460,  Thomas  96,  Wm.  300. 

George's  Feild  122. 

Gepperson,  Hewett  274. 

Gerdan,  Dan.  332. 

Gerey,  Jon.  137. 

Gerford,  John  164. 

Gerish,  Henry  446. 

Gerrard,  Charles  551,  Fra.  198,  Gilbert 
143,  Jon.  30,  John  198,  Justinian 
198,  Mr.  201,  Nicho.  284,  Peter  314, 
Susana  198,  Temp.  198,  Tho.  198, 
324,  325,  424,  532. 

Gerrell,  Jno.  343. 

Gerris,   Stephen   140. 

Gerrish,  John  127. 

Gerry,  John  47,  87,  104. 

Gery,  Gilbert  528. 

Gesorroro,  Jno.  216. 

Gestee,  Henry  220. 

Gethings,  Jane  393. 

Gibbinne,  Jno.  390. 

Gibbins,  John  325,  349,  Olliver  123, 
Tho.  483. 


Gibbons,  Humphrey  432,  John  130, 
Mary  555,  Oliver  131. 

Gibbnie,  Jno.  361. 

Gibbs,  Ann  369,  Edward  96,  254,  263, 
277,  315,  352,  Eliz.  325,458,  Humph. 
114,  302,  339,  346,  500,  Joell  199, 
266,  John  98,  189,  278,  325,  442, 
Mary  458,  Nath.  239,  Robt.  307, 
Roger  349,  Samll.  557,  Tho.  458, 
552,  Wm.  294. 

Gibett,  Hen.  303. 

Gible,  Richard  339,  Rich.  462. 

Giblin,  John  197. 

Gibsey,  a  place  called  by  Indians  407. 

Gibson,  Alice  491,  Andrew  555,  Doro- 
thy 342,  Edward  80,  273,  Geo.  283, 
549,  Henry  541,  Jon.  60,  87,  145, 
John  36,  467,  475,  530,  Joseph  426, 
468,  Joshua  375,  Mary  508,  Nicholas 
96,  141,  369,  Phineas  555,  Robt. 
174,  261,  305,  Tho.  112,  173,  174, 
176,  208,  210,  336,  369,  387,  388, 
457,  504,  Walter  107,  Yeoman  57. 

Giden,  ohn  399. 

Gidin,  Jno.  437. 

Gidney,  John   112. 

Giffry,  Richd.  140. 

Giggins,  Mr.  516. 

Gilbert,  Eliz.  23,  66,  Georg  28,  147, 
154,  294,  430,  475,  505,  507,  547, 
Jane  149,  Penelope  332,  Rich.  67, 
147,  Roger  179,  Rose  357,  Sam.  165, 
Tho.  158,  Tho.  385,  Wm.  438,  444, 
512,  546,  547. 

Gilbrit,  Geo.  475. 

Gilburt,  George  428,  505. 

Giles,  Georg  111,  261,  Hannah  278, 
Hen.  28,  James  121,  John  28,  111, 
131,,  315,  341,  362,  Robt.  278,  Tho- 
mas 375,  425,  Wm.  233,  472. 

Gilford,  Eliz.  551,  Peter  283,  Rob.  219. 

Gilgraffe,  Tho.  258. 

Gilham,  George  526. 

Gill,  Ann  52,  Capt.  270,  Edw.  43, 
Elinor  322,  Geo.  208,  271,  278,  387, 
504,  Jon.  51,  65,  78,  237,  John  290, 
Michaell  450,  457,  Peter  386,  442, 
502,  Phillip  386,  Richd.  148,  Sarah 
483.Stephen  52,  107,  114,  122,  134, 
142,  179,  180,  213,  215,  270,  304, 
354,  496,  544,  Sarah  551,  Thomas 
370,  391,  Wm.  33,  87,  351. 

Gilla,  Edw.  289,  503,  Marke  127,  Susan 
289. 

Gillam,  George  526,  Wm.  200. 

Gillard,  Eliz.  400,  Petro  400. 

Gillatt,  Robt.  420. 


648 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Gillealew,  Coner  307. 

Giller,  John  196,  Jonathan  520. 

Gilles,  Jonathan  520,  Jno.  369. 

Gillett,  Arter  357,  Augustine  232,  Eliz. 
275,  Jon.  75,  John  265,  282,  293, 
300,  316,  324,  345,  346,  347,  348, 
355,  356,  363,  371,  381,  442,  458, 
467,   500,   517,   519,   528,  Robt.   274. 

Gilley,  Robt.  202. 

Gillgate,  John  99. 

Gillid,  Edw.  343. 

Gillin,  Georg  99. 

Gillingham,  Henry  136. 

Gillins,  Danl.  208. 

Gilliot,  Germon  554,  Jno.  344. 

Gillis,  Elin  186. 

Gillman,  Richd.  257,  Wm.  389, 393. 

Gills,  Jonathan  170,  217. 

Gilman,  Lewis  537,  Mary  551. 

Gilnett,  Tho.  301,  428. 

Giloe,  Jno.  426. 

Gilpin,  Jane  267. 

Gilson,  Andrew  197,  290,  293,  392, 
430,  431,  441,  478,  567,  Henry  455, 
Mary  197,  Walter  554. 

Giltoe,  Jno.  393. 

Gimblet,  Dan.  324. 

Gina,  Marke  150. 

Gingey,  William  99. 

Gining,  Grace  198. 

Ginings,  Wm.  290,  300. 

Ginkin,  Wm.  181. 

Ginsey,  Sarah  300,  Wm.  181,  212,  241, 
278,  283,  308,  380,  494,  509,  515, 
550. 

Ginsie,  Wm.  550. 

Girdle,  Thomas  453. 

Gire,  Robert  6. 

Girringe,  Robert  390. 

Gisfry,  Richd.  140. 

Githred,  John  262. 

Gittins,  Eliz.  422,  Jane  330. 

Gladder,  Geo.  450. 

Glade,  Wm.  277. 

Gladeinge,  Hoell  356. 

Gladeine,  Howell  286,  354. 

Gladen,  Mary  324. 

Gladiil,  Reuben  476. 

Glading,  Howell  242,  353,  412. 

Gladson,  Jno.  151,  440. 

Glamfeild,  Jno.  296. 

Glan,  John  322,  Robt.  275. 

Glanfeild,  Joane  136,  John  343. 

Glantum,  John  245. 

Glascocke,  Geo.  507,  Jane  146,  Rich. 
23,  66,  Robt.  32,  111,  Thos.  146, 
209,  276,  293,  350,  440,  494,  521. 


Glass,  Dunkin  269,  Geo.  526,  John 
314,  Mary  221,  Robt.  448. 

Glass  House,  the  240,  313. 

Glasse,  Duning  275. 

Glayne,  Geo.  301,  Mary  301. 

Gleab  Lands:  6,  18,  28,  31,  36,  45,  50, 
58,  60,  70,  83,  91,  101,  103,  120, 
136,  147,  150,  151,  158,  159,  162, 
165,  173,  177,  183,  188,  205,  210, 
221,  270,  285,  292,  304,  320,  333, 
357,  364,  401,  423,  486,  499. 

Gleare,  Peter  77. 

Gleed,  Tho.  99. 

Glendoner,  Wm.  282. 

Glendorier,  Wm.  282. 

Glenister,  Robt.  45. 

Glew,  Tho.  452. 

Glight,  Thos.  139. 

Glinn,  Jane  303. 

Glissen,  Eliz.  325. 

Glissow,  Fra.  291. 

Gload,  David  513. 

Glorie,  Tho.  24. 

Glouce,  Ann  290. 

Glover,  Abella  392,  Cornelius  530, 
Dorothy  77,  393,  444,  530,  Edward 
99,  218,  Elinor  327,  Fran.  393,  426, 
444,  468,  James  309,  381  John 
221,  310,  Morgan  108,  146,  Rich. 
403,  Robt.  447,  Sarah  59,  464,  Tho. 
218,    331,  Wm.   106,   203,  426,  470. 

Glower,  Samll.  523. 

Glowers,  Edw.  218. 

Glyn,  Morris  244. 

Goade,  Ann  466,  Richd.  344. 

Goales,  Jno.  517. 

Goane,  John  199. 

Goardlad,  Tho.  148. 

Goardon,  Tho.  192. 

Goate,  Wm.  549. 

Gobert,  Jos.  175. 

Gobson,  Wm.  524. 

Goch,  Mary  364. 

Goche,  Geffery  349. 

Godale,  Jno.  564,  Martha  536,  Mary 
402,  (Note:  First  name  omitted  in 
abstract)  Wm.  526. 

Godard,  Joseph  492,  Rich.  538,  Sarah 
562. 

Godbeare,  Hector  28,  81,  108,  Jno.  525. 

Godbery,  Joane  39. 

Godby,  Ann  172,  Tho.  159,  172,  248, 
445. 

Godbye,  Thos.  5,  82,  420. 

Goddin,  Jon.  240,  Jno.  538,  Wm.  192. 

Goddinge,  George  369. 


General  Index 


649 


Godfry,   James   452.   Jon.   33,  John   72, 

101,  458,  460,  544,  Mary  448,  Rich. 

538,  Tho.  555,   wm.  62. 
Godfrey,    John    157,    188,    260,    Richd. 

272,  Sarah  260,  Tho.  403,  547,  Wm. 

124. 
Godgrave,  Ann  390. 
Godheard,  Timothy  459. 
Godlad,    Anthony    544,    Ed.    559,    Jane 

401,  Jno.  556,  Peter  543,  Susan  526, 

555,  Stephen  402. 
Godlar,  Edw.  558. 
Godman,  Thos.  568. 
Godsmen,  John  249. 
Godson,    Christo.    200,    Ed.    556,    Peter 

557,   559,  Richd.  215,  Tho.  273. 
Godwin,  Danll.  35,  Devorux  294,  Eliz. 

294,    Jo.    294,    Jno.    166,    201,    338, 

514,  Rob.   521,  Tho.   197,   319,   327, 

392,  396,  Step.  100. 
Godyal,  Edwd.  237. 
Godyer,  Henry  563. 
Goffe,  Aaron  517,  Barnaby  355,  James 

518,   Jon.   237,   John   346,   426,    517, 

537,  Martha  496,  Mathew  537,  Peter 

545,    Richd.    156,    Walter    75,    Wm. 

368,  380,  388,  496. 
Goffell,  Jno.  384,  Step.  384,  Wm.  384. 
GofTs,  William  440. 
Gold,  Edw.  199,  Richd.  218,  Robt.  171. 
Goldborne,   Edw.    124,    135,    303,   Mary 

124,  Richd.  383. 
Goldcock,  Tho.  256. 
Golden,  Mathew  449. 
Goldfinch,  Jone  387. 
Golding,  Dorothy  89,  107,  113,Gabriell 

196,   John   223,   275,   435,    500,    553. 

Rebecks    348,   Thomas   89,    107,    113, 

194,  Wm.  42,  80. 
Goldsmith,    Geo.    196,    248,    305,    374, 

John    198,    264,    Mary    269,    Nicho. 

112,  Richd.  171,  Tho.  388,  Wm.  93, 

289.   518. 

Goldston,  Richard   314. 

Goldstone,  Rich.  498. 

Golleffe,  John  387. 

Gones,  William  7. 

Gonn,  Mary  353. 

Gonnion,  James  192. 

Gonnyon,  Robt.   192. 

Gooch,  Capt.  408,  Col.  422,  Edwd.  431, 

Henry   408,   Jefferies    206,    263,    408, 

Lt.  Col.   397,  464,  Major  323,  Wm. 

199,   311,   384,   534,  484,   485. 

Good,  Richard  313,  Thomas  353. 

Goodacre,  James  483. 

Goodale,   Alice   403,    David    378,    Geo. 


325,  Jno.  365,  565,  Michael  373,  563, 
Susan  549,  Tho.  252,  540. 

Goodall,  Mich.  512,  Rich.  41. 

Goodard,  Sarah  558. 

Gooday,  Richd.   119. 

Goodcross,  James  165. 

Goode,  Ann  466,  Richd.  211. 

Goodgaine,  Henry  132,  360. 

Goodgame,  Henry  360. 

Goodin,  Georg  44. 

Goodlad,  Andrew  528,  Peter  541,  Robt. 
518,  Stephen  437. 

Goodland,  Martha  525. 

Goodlin,  Edw.  461. 

Goodman,  Andrew  562,  Francis  76,  95, 
Geo.  247,  Henry  501,  John  110,  Jane 
561,  John  520,  Kath.  231,  Mary  326, 
Richd.  92,  259,  358,  Robt.  57,  Tho. 
557,  Wm.  213. 

Goodnought,  Luke  128. 

Goodrand,  Doctar  343. 

Goodrich,  Anne  275,  Tho.  275,  347, 
362,  397,  428,  500,  517. 

Goodriffe,  Grace  178. 

Goodrige,  Ann  72. 

Goodry,  Tho.  374. 

Goods,  Wm.  143. 

Goodson,  Edw.  342,  Henry  39,  Jon.  32, 
John  103,  486. 

Goodtry,  Jno.  431. 

Goodwin,  Capt.  338,  Daniell  100,  Edw. 
359,  Geo.  62,  James  367,  371,  383, 
462,  Jon.  35,  John  59,  429,  Mary 
541,  Mat.  298,  Samll.  203,  334, 
Sarah  148,  Steph.  35. 

Googins,  Mary  221. 

Gookins,  Daniell  51,  55,  56,  69,  73,  78, 
99,  111,  132,  135,  138,  139,  189, 
237,  374,  560,  John  50,  58,  65,  100, 
109,  129,  148,  169,  182,  193,  252, 
269,  314,  503,  Marg.  269,  Mary  139, 
415,  Saml.  139. 

Gookins'  Landing  Place  193,  503. 

Goose,  Jane  431. 

Goose  Hill,  3,  12,  13,  81,  143,  197. 

Goose  Hill  Howse,  319,  347,  469. 

Goose  Hill  Marsh,  56,  231. 

Goower,  Wm.  403. 

Gordan,  Danll.  220,  Henry  270. 

Godaine,  Tho.   212. 

Gorden,  Geo.   183. 

Gordon,  Nathll.  457. 

Gore,  Geo.  501,  John  302,  384,  525, 
547,  548,  557,  559,  560,  Mary  444, 
Peter  525.  555,  Thomas  446,  543, 
554,  Timothy  547,  Wm.  547. 

Gorein,  Christian  391. 


650 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Goring,  Jno.  452. 
Gorne,  Tho.  476. 
Gorsuch,     Anne,     Chas.     Eliz.,     Kath. 

Richd.,  Robt.  275. 
Gorting,  Eliz.  383,  James  458. 
Gosall,  Jon.  87. 
Gosden,  Geo.  269. 
Gose,  Jno.  476. 
Goskins,  Sewell  260. 
Goslin,    Edw.    453,    John    252,    James 

390,     458,     Jon.     144,     Mary     535, 

Mathew  555,  Sam.  367,  Wm.  563. 
Gosmore,  Eliz.  22. 
Gosnell,    Eliz.    244,    John    352,    Marg. 

244,  Wm.  383. 
Gosnell's  land   351. 
Goss,  Jane  336. 
Gosse,  Christo.  59,  Edmond  385,  Richd. 

156. 
Goswaine,  Robert  370. 
Goswell,  Doro.  488. 
Gouch,    Danll.    548,    Hugh    390,    Jeff. 

280,    Mathew    51,    Mr.    180,    Oplier 

224,  Xtopr.  218,  298. 
Goug,  Mr.  507. 
Gouge,  Jane  430,  Jno.  195. 
Gough,  Hen.  519,  Jeffery  461,  Mathew 

111,  Samuell  436. 
Gould,  Robert  76. 
Goulding,    Jane    198,    John    347,    444, 

Tobias     538,    Thomas    96,    Vavastin 

384,  Wm.  24. 
Goulson,  Danll.  166. 
Gouldsmith,  Wm.  564. 
Gourd,  Andrew  273,  James  306. 
Gourden,  Geo.  474. 
Gourdon,  Geo.  301. 
Gouteer,  John  387. 
Gouth,  Xpher.  298. 
Gover,  Tho.  248. 
Governor,  place  of  the  160,  415. 
Goverson,  Cor.  215,  266. 
Goverty,  Ellis  233. 
Goward,  Wm.  309. 
Gower,    Edward    331,    Fran.    251,    310, 

387,  568,  James  310,  John  248,  Nich. 

65,  82,  Wm.  397. 
Gower,  Wm.  327,  482. 
Gowin,  Wm.  257. 
Gowing,  Jno.  32. 
Gowlate,  Richd.  242. 
Gowry,  Wm.  328. 
Goyse,  Mary  382. 
Grace,  Edw.  525,  Georg  104,  109,  123, 

124,  Isabell  257,  Jane  242,  Robt.  33, 

Roger  72. 
Gracewood,  Bennedick  250. 


Graddon,  Nich.  290. 

Gradin,  Edw.  80. 

Grafton,  Michaell  380,  509,  550,  Wm. 
442. 

Gragg,  Mary  227. 

Graggs,  Tho.  392. 

Graham,  And.  223,  Mary  257. 

Graies,  Thomas  13. 

Grainger,  Hen.  Ill,  Nicholas  337,  423, 
Walter  512. 

Grand,  John  198,  Mary  113,  Tho.  222. 

Grandinson,  Rich.  431. 

Grandy,  Jon.  27. 

Grane,  John  117. 

Granfield,  Xtopr.  190. 

Grange,  John  62. 

Granger,  Eliz.  255,  John  374,  Mr.  545, 
Nicholas  170,  305,  Rich.  298,  432, 
Tho.  230,  283,  458,  Walter  407,  554, 
Wm.  78,  129,  Xpher.  382. 

Grangrave,   Brin.   307. 

Granley,  Jone  86. 

Granson,  Rich.  466. 

Grant,  Antho.  262,  Duncom  192,  Eliza- 
beth 194,  John  100,  558,  Michaell 
397,  Wm.  330. 

Grasheare,  John  146. 

Gratwich,  Wm.  548. 

Graunt,  Christo.  81,  James  535,  Joane 
107,   124. 

Graunger's  Point  197. 

Grave,  John  117. 

Gravelin,  Joan  194. 

Graves,  Alexr.  257,  Ann  59,  287,  369, 
Chr.  170,  Edward  548,  Edm.  166, 
Georg  130,  Jeremy  555,  John  32,  38, 
62,  88,  110,  175,  222,  403,  527, 
Katherine  62,  222,  Richd.  43,  55,  56, 
85,  Robt.  144,  Robins  196,  Sam.  517, 
Thomas  13,  62,  213,  222,  344,  358, 
416,  417,  437,  534,  Wm.  113,  269, 
313,  325,  369,  422,  439,  466. 

Gravett,  John  184. 

Gravin,  Edward  326. 

Gravis,  Tho.  82. 

Gray,  Alice  207,  337,  Ann  337,  Anis 
31,  Avis  105,  David  491,  Edw.  492, 
Eliz.  280,  Fran.  28,  337,  355,  432, 
Geo.  501,  Hanah  546,  Henry  209, 
John  219,  397,  Joshua  337,  Mary  207, 
337,  444,  Miles  322,  454,  Rebecca  31, 
105,  Richd.  555,  Robt.  371,  380,  Roger 
375,  Symon  558,  Tho.  31,  105,  113, 
115,  152,  264,  387,  452,  469,  492, 
Wm.  31,  105,  202,  260,  335,  475, 
490,  531,  551. 

Grayes,  Thomas  36,  95. 


General  Index 


651 


Grayne,  Elizabeth  93,  John  93,  Jonathan 
86,  93,  Rowland  93. 

Graynes,  Wm.  565. 

Grayve,  Eliz.  93,  Jonathan  93. 

Gread,  And.  290. 

Greaves,  Wm.  260,  269. 

Greborne,  Henry  178. 

Grecheare,  Donell  307. 

Gredall,  Rich.  516. 

Greefore,  Mary  548. 

Greeg,  Thomas  560. 

Greeke,  Rich.  60. 

Greeling,  Wm.  263. 

Greeman,  Wm.  299. 

Green,  Adam  481,Alexr.  200,  Ann  209, 
313,  322,  386,  Cha.  249,  232,  403, 
565,  Dorcas  233,  Dorothy  17,  Edw. 
200,  201,  Eliz.  40,  68,  249,  293, 
Elinor  481,  499,  Edmond  166,  For- 
tune 359,  Georg  109,  403,  Henry 
257,  427,  Herbert  354,  James  134, 
242,  377  546,  Jane  200,  Joane  524, 
525,  Jon.  25,  John  110,  148,  174, 
175,  187,  192,  196,  201,  202,  286, 
293,  309,  316,  352,  371,  372,  392, 
396,  404,  424,  432,  441,  442,  463, 
470,  473,  506,  545,  559,  Joseph  546, 
Judith  32,  103,  176,  Kath.  362,  Kat. 
309,  Margt.  270,  Margery  252,  Martha 
519,  Mary  152,  194,  238,  322,  382, 
Millisent  267,  Mr.  365,  513,  Oliver 
224,  235,  239,  260,  307,  343,  348, 
417,  464,  474,  488,  Percy  428,  Peeter 
181,  134,  312,  344,  351,  503,  Prist. 
214,  Prudence  351,  Ralph  178,  179, 
203,  232,  272,  278,  284,  307,  314, 
336,  338,  347,  368,  377,  424,  464, 
505,  541,  Richd.  139,  200,  244,  262, 
309,  451,  524,  Robt.  33,  55,  382, 
Roger  365,  385,  405,  Saml.  449,  465, 
Sarah  338,  349,  Tho.  120,  176,  203, 
267,  268,  290,  291,  300,  314,  316, 
455,  462,  493,  507,  564,  Timothy 
365,  Wm.  78,  98,  242,  358,  381, 
474,  479,  548,  559. 

Greendon,  Mr.   176. 

Greenfeild,  Jane  434,  John  97,  106, 
198,  Robt.  26. 

Greenfell,  John  361. 

Greenhill,  Nicholas  51,  65. 

Greenhoe,  Tho.  268. 

Greenhough,  John  268,  464. 

Greenhoure,  Wm.   343. 

Greening,  John  261,  305. 

Greeneleafe,  Robt.  34,  45,  60,  Susan  34, 
45. 

Greenmay,  Antho.  445. 


Greenshan,   John  276. 

Green  Spring,  the  415. 

Greenwell,  Richd.   194. 

Greenwill,  Jas.  142,  Robt.  276. 

Greenwood,  Armagall  327,  Edw.  465, 
Eliz.  57,  Jno.  460,  523,  Judeth  216, 
Mary  406,  419,  Richard  80,  Tho.  229, 
273,  274,  480,  487. 

Greere,  David  176. 

Greested,  Wm.  198. 

Greete,  Alice  60,  Elianor  60,  Geo.  264, 
Richd.  52,  60. 

Greeting,  Wm.  263. 

Greeves,  John  201. 

Greg,  Thomas  560. 

Gregman,  Jon.  236. 

Gregorie,  Antho.  493,  Joseph  356,  527, 
Tho.  161. 

Gregory,  ^lexr.  243,  370,  Benj.  59,  250, 
Chas.  275,  298,  Fran.  335,  Geo.  35, 
100,  Ja.  314,  Jno.  459,  467,  Joseph 
261,  267,  490,  Richd.  10,  Tho.  79, 
92,  161,  314,  362,  493,  502,  Wm. 
493. 

Gregson,  Richard  128. 

Greme,  Rich.  538. 

Grene,  Charles  78,  Christian  426. 

Grensly,  Francis  313. 

Grenway,  Geo.  517. 

Gresham,  Ed.  204,  370,  John  258,  519, 
Wm.  454. 

Gressam,  Humphrey  432. 

Gressum,  David  431. 

Grethwait,  Isaak  547. 

Gretwell,  G.  479. 

Grew,  John  32. 

Grey,  Alex.  184,  Alice  546,  Ann  292, 
Christo  265,  Danl.  290,  300,  Duncan 
298,  Francis  231,  288,  351,  449,  483, 
501,  559,  563,  Georg  388,  Hanah  265, 
Henry  219,  James  455,  516,  Jane 
452,  481,  Jasper  351,  Jeremiah  128, 
John  251,  259,  295,  329,  414,  547, 
Margt.  411,  Mary  385,  Miles  291, 
330,  370,  Rich.  137,  367,  Robt.  204, 
233,  Symon  523,  Thomas  113,  130, 
177,  234,  271,  293,  298,  362,  Wm. 
200,  263,  295,  521,   (See  Gray). 

Greyhan,  Jone  366. 

Gridwell,  Henry  149. 

Griffell,  Jno.  479. 

Griffen,  Ann  178.  Bridges  289,  Joan 
301,  John  314,  548,  Wm.  302. 

Griffeth,  Anne  267,  Antho.  200,  Col. 
267,  Edw.  456,  534,  Evan  254,  279, 
301,  Jon.  237,  Margt.  222,  Mary  267, 
286,    Silvanus    193,    Tho.    218,    300, 


652 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


397,  519,  Wm.  200,  403,  406. 

Griff ett,  Herbert  117. 

Griffin,  Ann  57,  96,  David  339,  397, 
459,  557,  Danll.  441,  Dorothy  314, 
Edward  78,  83,  Effin  491,  Eliz.  548, 
Elias  78,  Georg  89,  94,  Hopkin  144, 
Hugh  189,  271,  Humph.  451,  Joane 
565,  Jno.  20,  36,  87,  99,  106,  129, 
190,  314,  373,  386,  431,  501,  549, 
Jone  514,  Larry  495,  Leroy  263,  Lewis 
479,  Mary  153,  Mathew  148,  Reginald 
17,  Richd.  280,  449,  466,  483,  537, 
Roger  456,  Samuel  392,  397,  408, 
441,  459,  501,  Symon  96,  Tho.  130, 
136,  137,  189,  220,  255,  429,  441, 
456,  525,  541,  Wm.  35,  58,  69,  100, 
118,  322,  362,  423,  434,  435,  494, 
516,  530. 

Griffing,  Jane  455. 

Griffith,  Edw.  429,  Jane  335,  Jeremiah 
438,  Joane  345,  John  55,  Mary  412, 
Mr.  481,  Owin  562,  Ralph  125,  Tho. 
143,  160,  169,  411,  440,  441,  485, 
501. 

Griffton,  Abra.  342. 

Griges,  Samuell  30. 

Grigg,  Blanch  202,  Robt.  289,  402, 
Wm.  440. 

Grigges,   Francis   386. 

Griggs,  Mary  370,  Robt.  250,  438,  439, 
Tho.  62,  178,  560,  Wm.  475,  525, 
528,  Xtopr.  205. 

Grigorie,  Joseph  203. 

Grigory,  Joseph  212. 

Grigs  John  115. 

Grigson,  Antho.  402,  Jone  55,  Richd. 
55,  162,  195,  219,  527,  551,  Robt. 
175. 

Grimble,  Rich.  460,  Wm.  523. 

Grime,  Eliz.  462. 

Grimes,  Ann  131,  Arthur  96,  Chas.  282, 
349,  354,  355,  410,  459,  527,  558, 
Edw.  33,  147,  212,  215,  238,  249, 
308,  313,  383,  439,  491,  Eliz.  305, 
Francis  568,  Hen.  195,  Jon.  24,  54, 
John  205,  Margtt.  396,  Martha  453, 
Mary  391,  463,  Mr.  379,  464,  Parson 
514,  Rich.  350,  Robt.  268,  338,  388, 
Walter  30,  559,  Wm.  512,  539,  546, 
(See  Grymes). 

Grimsditch,  John  147,  Tho.  189. 

Grimston,  Anthony  62,  291. 

Grindall,  Edw.  4,  168,  Mr.  128,  Tho. 
89,  107,  113. 

Grindall's  Hill  128. 

Grinder,  Ailce  222. 

Grindith,  Geo.  270,  Wm.  270. 


Grindon,  Edward  1,  3,  8,  105,  190, 
401,  Mr.  176,  Tho.  58,  105,  401, 
Wm.   564. 

Grindson,  Richard  390. 

Grinett,  Alice  33,  Eliz.  33,  John  33. 

Grinfield,  John  219,  Robt.  117. 

Gringer,  Robt.  146. 

Grinshaw,  Wm.  222. 

Grinsin,  league  371. 

Grim,  Bened.  262. 

Grinwood,  Dorothv  126,  Mary  126, 
Tho.    126. 

Gripps,  Zachary  158. 

Grissell,  George  543,  Wm.  301. 

Grivett,  John  137. 

Grizell,  Humph.  41. 

Grodson,  Jon.  74. 

Grokin,  Daniell  189. 

Grome,  Richd.  538. 

Gromwell,  Gerson,  85,  106. 

Grone,  Mary  509. 

Groome,  Jno.  356,  Mary  550. 

Groomer,  Joseph  194. 

Groose,  Saml.  170. 

Gross,  Sampson,  82. 

Grosse,  Saml.  Ill,  112,  170,  Thomas 
561. 

Grote,  de  Antonia  111. 

Grouch,  Danll.  548. 

Grout,  Jno.  538,  558. 

Grove,  Joane  114,  Mary  562,  Peter  404. 

Groves,  John  278,  Rich.  85,  253,  257, 
Simon  429,  484,  490,  Wm.  300,  564. 

Growndy,  Eliz.  459,  463. 

Grubb,  John  109,  205,  Peter  517,  Wm. 
552. 

Grum,  Wm.  400. 

Grunsditch,  Jon.   134,  John  147. 

Gryer,  Wm.   199- 

Grymes,  Chas.  254,  296,  300,  340,  391, 
441,  466,  472,  485,  Edw.  215,  309, 
478,  Eliz.  255,  John  275,  323,  411, 
Parson  467,  Robt.  341,  477,  494, 
Saml.  481,  Tho.  254,  Wm.  101. 

Grymsditch,  John  105. 

Gualtney,  Thomas   562. 

Guard,  la  Elias  14,  18,  19. 

Guard,  Peter  454. 

Gudle,  Nathan  53. 

Gudloe,  Margaret  336. 

Gues,  Robt.  476. 

Guest,  Geo.  172,  Wm.  464. 

Guffer,  Jno.  393. 

Gugson,  Tho.  279. 

Guige,  Tho.  218. 

Guigey,  Wm.  99. 

Guilfeth,  Edw.  245. 


General  Index 


653 


Guilham,  John  130,  Tho.  130. 

Guilt,  Nicho.  195. 

Guinns,   Leonard   174. 

Guinsey,  Wm.  212. 

Guisey,  Wm.  494. 

Gulfe,  the  69,  91,  92,  97,  109,  541. 

Gulin,  Wm.  399. 

Gullam,  Jno.  326. 

Guillis,  John  160. 

Gully,  Tho.  513. 

Gulrich,  Tho.  526. 

Gulton,  John  119. 

Gum,  Humph.  148,  Jon.  237. 

Gumer,  Geo.  137,  Tho.  132. 

Gummy,  Richd.  328. 

Gun,  Margery  134,  Wm.  35. 

Gundry,   Eliza.    194,   John   70,    71,    79, 

194,  195,  Mary  70,  Tho.  440. 
Gunery,  John  70. 
Gunn,  John  301,  Wm.  491. 
Gunne,  Jno.  422. 
Gunnell,  Antho.  450,  Capt.   548,  Wm. 

196. 
Gunner,  Tho.  132. 
Gunnery,  John  6,  70. 
Gunny,  Rich.  58,  Sarah  282,  433. 
Gunsby,  Jno.  301. 
Gunstocker,  Nedd  566  . 
Gunston,  Antho.   131. 
Gunter,    Edwd.    259,    297,    Jacob    220, 

Jno.    513,    Tho.    396,    Timothy    349, 

390,  Wm.  397,  459. 
Gunther,  Richd.  209. 
Gunting,  Jno.  538. 
Guntler,  Richd.  209. 
Guny,  Mary  370. 
Gurganey,  Ann  60,  Edward  60. 
Gurgunye,  Edw.  157. 
Gurman,  Fran.  349. 
Gurnett,  John  202. 
Gurney,  joane  336. 
Gurr,  Georg  3. 
Gurrington,  John  250. 
Gurtfurd,  Elias  430. 
Gusere,  Jno.  559. 
Guterige,  Lt.  Col.  567. 
Guterson,  James  80. 
Gutheridge,  Mr.  247,  Tho.  274. 
Gutrich,  Tho.  526. 
Gutt,  Henry  157. 
Gutteridge,   John    301,   460,    470,   Xho. 

332. 
Gutton,  Wm.  468. 
Guttredge,  Lt.  Col.  567. 
Guttridge,  Henry  255. 
Guttrige,  Peter  171. 
Gutts,  Hen.  274. 


Guy,  Ann  514,  Hen.  76,  John  173,  223, 

357,  442,  Margt.  241,  Robt.  106,  110, 

Tho.  559. 
Guyer,  Robt.  141,  Tho.  141. 
Guygoll,  Daniell  390. 
Guyne,  Anne  192. 
Gwalpmey,  Tho.   192. 
Gwany,  Henry  315. 
Gwilford,  Alice  551. 
Gwilliford,  Georg  528. 
Gwillin,  Geo.  201. 
Gwillum,  Geo.  174. 
Gwin,  Col.  239,  Eliza.  301,  553,  Griffin 

276,  Hugh  132,  263,  298,  301,  362, 

523,  John  287. 
Gwinn,  Col.  375,  Jno.  405,  Wm.  501. 
Gwinns,  Leonard  174. 
Gwynn,    Abigail    253,    Alex.    243,    Ann 

141,  Col.  265,  416,  Hugh   141,   182, 

247,  248,  263,  417. 
Gye,  Gilbert  22. 
Gyer,  Tho.  146. 

Gyles,  Johna.  482,  Nich.  493,  514. 
Gyllom,  Hen.  60. 
Gylls,  Francis  534,  Jonathan  534. 
Gylyard,  Richard  57. 
Gymes,  Geo.  249. 
Gynes,  Jno.  471. 

H 

Habe,  Tho,  343. 

Habitill,  Geo.  77. 

Hacherne,  John  94. 

Hack,  Ann  525,  Geo.  265,  285,  412, 
413,  473,  525,  George  Nicholas  525, 
Isaac  144,  John  144,  Peter  525, 
Richd.  284,  437. 

Hackady,  Wm.  557. 

Hacker,  Alice  49,  Dennis  506,  Henry 
272,  313,  John  38,  67,  68,  94,  115, 
147,    158,    231,    232,    559,    Margery 

76,  Richd.  283,  436,  Walter  49,  

559. 

Hackerly,  Elias  290,  Scippia  290. 

Hackerstone,  Tho.  203. 

Hackerton,  Ralph  296. 

Hackery,  Henry  219,  Tho.  180. 

Hackes,  Elell  105. 

Hackett,  Capt.  469,  477,  550,  Henry 
213,  James  253,  280,  Tho.  131,  208, 
278,  284,  291,  353,  360,  374,  425, 
495. 

Hackey,  Jno.  358. 

Hackley,  Jane  258,  Jon.  90,  Richd.  283. 

Hackney,  Wm.  89,  460. 

Hacney,  Jno.  467. 

Hackson,  Robt.  284. 


654 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Hackworth,  John  104,  Rich.  517. 

Hacro,  Wm.  250. 

Hadaway,  Peter  396. 

Hadderill,  Georg  116. 

Haddon,  Nath.  391. 

Haddy,  John  114,  136. 

Hade,  Wm.  459. 

Hadlington,  Wm.  482. 

Hadly,  Jno.  363,  Mary  515. 

Hadway,  Tho.  370,  Wm.  191. 

Hadwell,  Wm.  150. 

Haelly,  Edward  546. 

Haes,  Owen  62,  344. 

Hagar,  Richd.  250. 

Hagate,  James  112. 

Hager,  Jno.  404. 

Hagg,  James  458,  John  369. 

Haggaman,  Isaak  550,  John  550. 

Haggell,  Mary  449. 

Haggett,  Humph.  284,  497,  Mary  449. 

Haggist,  Hump.  303. 

Haiberd,  Richd.  446,  543. 

Haies,  Alex.  147,  Anne  326,  Eliza.  282, 
326,  Isabell  147,  John  219,  377,  378, 
Joseph  315,  357,  Nath.  147,  Richd. 
66,  Robt.  147. 

Haile,  Edw.  463. 

Hailes,  Fra.  481,  James  481,  John  402, 
Rachaell  447,  Robt.  567,  Tho.  333. 

Haily,  Hester  566. 

Haimon,  Martha  548. 

Haines,  Antho.  231,  369,  409,  500,  502, 
Evan  475,  Henry  118,  James  433, 
476,  Jane  244,  John  389,  Kath.  147, 
Mary  440,  Mathew  404,  Morgan  345, 
567,  Mr.  319,  502,  542,  Rebecca  364, 
Richd.  147,  156,  244,  258,  Robt.  160, 
351,  Susanna  275,  Tho.  368,  Tho- 
masin  463,  Wm.  243,  244,  369,  443, 
545. 

Hainye,  John  213,  460. 

Haire,  James  141. 

Haistwood,  Tho.  329. 

Hake,  Tho.  343. 

Halbar,  John  298. 

Hale,  Ann  125,  Barbary  93,  Edward  29, 
245,  Francis  244,  Jno,  560,  Nath. 
314,  Nicholas  362,  569,  Richd.  542, 
Tho.  49,  93,  267,  325, 487. 

Hales,  Barbara  224,  Edw.  383,  Fra.  285, 
John  136,  Joyce  481,  Tho.  219. 

Halfpenny,  Eliz.  525. 

Haling,  Jno.  296. 

Hall,  Alexr.  296,  377,  378,  Anne  345, 
Benj.  548,  David  172,  Dorothy  327, 
Edw.  25,  33,  39,  66,  108,  168,  169, 
172,    193,   260,   269,   287,   367,   497, 


Eliza.  172,  Fra.  176,  214,  382,  Georg 
38,  46,  172,  175,  179,  183,  Henry  282, 
Hugh  4,  Hum.  169,  James  202,  213, 
249,  393,  525,  John  74,  143,  254, 
271,  300,  352,  514,  Joseph  268,  Kath. 
268,  Margt.  483,  Martha  453,  Mary 
218,  336,  359,  Mathew  268,  274, 
Mr.  244,  Peter  166,  176,  Patience 
205,  Richd.  195,  223,  236,  268,  394, 

396,  477,  Robt.  134,  275,  Saml.  146, 
268,  Step.  195,  345,  379,  Susan  167, 
Symon  376,  Thos.  174,  269,  315, 
285,  325,  365,  373,  376,  385,  393, 
394,  420,  423,  459,  495,  508,  516, 
566. 

Hall's  Land  283. 

Hallack,  Andrew  144. 

Hallawaye,  John  158,  Joyce  450,  Richd. 

236,  Wm.  205. 
Hailes,  Danl.  465. 
Halley,  Mercifull  22. 
Halliard,  Alice  266,  Fr.  258,  Goodman 

386,  Tho.  266,  Wm.  385. 
Hailing,  James  465. 
Hallingham,  Wm.  268. 
Hallington,  Arthur  123. 
Hallis,  John  391. 
Halliway,  Richd.  387. 
Halliwell,  Bernard  367. 
Hallom,  Ann  86,  88,   120,  Francis  138, 

Mr.    266,   Mrs.    120,   Robt.    86,    120, 

138. 
Hallum,  Richd.  54,  Robt.  40,  59. 
Hallow,  Robt.  307. 
Hallowes,    John    193,    279,    293,    315, 

397,  448,  510,  538,  Robt.  200,  Tho. 
499,  Wm.  421,  492. 

Hallwell,  John  375. 

Hally,  Jos.  4~3,  68,  Marg.  355. 

Hallyson,  Wm.  293. 

Halmer,  Morris  148. 

Halsey,  Ann  196,  Edgar  553,  Jon.  123, 

Robt.  113,  245. 
Halstead,  Henry  221. 
Halsworth,  Robt.   198. 
Haly,   Alice  295,   Ann  295,   Edw.   546, 

Fra.  295,  James  295. 
Ham,  Jerom  275,  336,  John  386,  Joseph 

82,  Kath.  304,  Mr.  386,  Margt.  480. 
Hama,  Nich.  288. 
Hamack,  Eliz.  479- 

Haman,  John  65,  Jon.  228,  Marke  118. 
Hambleton,  Geo.  233,  John  215. 
Hamblin,  Mr.  314,  Stephen  203. 
Hamblyn,  Stephen  102,  140. 
Hame,  Jerom  275. 
Hamelin,  Stephen  203. 


General  Index 


655 


Hamelton,  Amos  197. 

Hamellton,  Jno.  338. 

Hamelyn,   Stephen  550. 

Hamer,  Edw.  29,  Pee.  250,  Ralph  90. 

Hamerson,  Jno.  548. 

Hames,  Evan  475. 

Hamilton,  Danl.  262,  David  307,  James 
306,  313,  Ma.  184,  Mary  385. 

Haming,  Wm.   130. 

Hamleton,  David  555. 

Hamlett,  David  548,  Richard  323,  388. 

Hamlin,  John  211,  428,  Margt.  282, 
458,  Mr.  469,  564,  Peeter  341,  Phillip 
245. 

Hamlyn,  Stephen  550,  Widdow  550. 

Hamocke,  long  the  503,  Smoake  503. 

Hamon,  Ambrose  548,  Christo.  57,  Ellin 
322,  Francis  298,  Garrett  344,  Man- 
warring  187,  Marke  165,  Mary  357, 
433,  Peircey  228,  Susan  560. 

Hamond,  Anne  351,  Christopher  84, 
Edmond  194,  Edw.  233,  Francis  298, 
299,  Henry  204,  233,  371,  John  315, 
Maj.Genrl.  408,  Mannaring  212,  299, 
312,  383,  Marke  233,  306,  Martin 
109,  310,  Mary  307,  Machaell  400, 
Perty  315,  Rich.  428,  Tho.  168,  253, 
316. 

Hammer,  Humph.  122. 

Hammock,  Wm.  338. 

Hammon,  Marke  110,  Martin  41. 

Hammond,  Fra.  425,  John  98,  Manering 
425,  Mr.  279,  Wm.  265. 

Hammore,  Humph.   142. 

Hamor,  Capt.  3,  Percy  218,  Ralph  2,  9, 
Thomas  4. 

Hamorell,  Wm.  360. 

Hamper,  Thomas  366,  288. 

Hampier,  Tho.  350. 

Hampleton,  John  215. 

Hampson,  Bridgett  220. 

Hampshire,  Eliz.  560,  John  463,  560, 
Judeth  431,  Rich.  430. 

Hampton,  Ed.  235,  Eliza.  126,  Grace 
126,  John  80,  99,  181,  309,  389,  501, 
Joane  126,  Mr.  323,  388,  Philad.  213, 
Richd.  299,  Robert  395,  Thomas  56, 
71,  118,  141,  154,  165,  169,  285, 
379,  387,  390,  427,  William  11,  18, 
20,  37,  126,  128,  162,  165,  213,  274, 
485,  559. 

Hampton  Key,  105. 

Hamwood,  John  250. 

Hana,  Nicola  209. 

Hanbury,  Peter  114. 

Hanby,  Sarah  142,  Rich.  142. 

Hance,  Wm.  128. 


Hanch,  John  207. 

Hanckes,  Tho.  484,  490. 

Hanckles,  Hen.  201. 

Hancks,  Thomas  314,  335. 

"Hancock,  Andrew  181,  Edw.   216,  455, 

Eliz.   426,    George   366,   James    263, 

John  349,  425,  447,  525,  Mary  272, 

Mat.    302,    Richd.    209,    325,    Sarah 

302,  354,  Symon  354,  Tho.  548,  566, 

Wm.  475. 
Hancoke,  John  113,  Robt.  428. 
Hancorne,  Gerrard  184. 
Hand,    Richd.     348,    Robt.     167,     334, 

Saml.  220,  Thomas  5. 
Handcocke,  Sarah  505,  Wm.   504,   505. 
Handley,  Wm.   176. 
Handly,  Nicho.  262,  Row.  559. 
Hane,  James  184,  Jon.  66,  Rob.  334. 
Haneat,  William  354. 
Haner,  John  321. 
Hanerly,  Do.  298. 
Hanes,  Jo.  207,  Xpher.  349. 
Haney,  John  234. 
Haniger,  Robt.  502. 
Haninge,  John  213. 
Hanker,  Sara  378. 
Hankes,  Tho.  298,  490. 
Hankin,  Geo.  126,  John  364,  Wm.  402. 
Hankins,  John  464,  Richd.  268. 
Hanly,  Rich.  142,  Sarah  142. 
Hannah,  Neal  316. 
Hannan,  Thos.  407. 
Hanniver,  Wm.  351. 
Hannock,  Isaak  546. 
Hans,    Jerom    336,    Jude   479,    Richard 

549. 
Hanscome,  Tho.  148. 
Hansen,  Thomas  318. 
Hansfoard,  Tobias  421. 
Hansford,    Eliza.    220,    281,    John    220, 

281,  347,  383,  Mary  542,  Richd.  220, 

Tho.  420. 
Hanshorne,  Henry  170. 
Hansin,  Mary  381. 
Hanson,  And.  484,  Rich.  435,  Tho.  204, 

318,  422. 
Hansworth,  Fra.  315,  Tho.  213. 
Hantrinpp,  Francis  245. 
Hanwell,  Wm.  370. 
Hany,   John    207,    303,    349,    377,    382, 

402,  408,  505,  566. 
Happ,  Row.  275. 
Hapworth,  John  393. 
Harback,  Hen.   108. 
Harbard,  Ann  130. 
Harber,   Fra.   170,  Geo.   349. 
Harbert,  Tho.  216. 


656 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Harbott,  Richard   144. 

Harbottle,  John  261. 

Harbrough,  Edw.  290. 

Harbutt,  Wm.  361. 

Harby,  Mathew  322. 

Harcey,  James  370. 

Harcock,  John  109. 

Harcocke,  Jon.  41. 

Harcourt,  Phill.  435. 

Hard,  Wm.  509,  Xpher.  210. 

Hardacur,  Sam.  506. 

Hardeman,  Israeli  342. 

Harden,  Ja.  171. 

Hardess,  Thomas  554. 

Hardest,  Geo.  213. 

Hardey,  Geo.  176. 

Hardich,  Stephen  540,  Wm.  520,  523. 

Hardick,  Stephen  566,  Tho.  369,  Wm. 
480,  520. 

Hardidge,  Wm.  251,  252,  420. 

Hardie,  Geo.  146,  509,  John  569. 

Hardin,  Ann  338,  Wm.  350. 

Harding,  Ann  222,  Blanch  476,  548, 
Eliz.  351,  Geo.  140,  Ja.  220,  Joane 
128,  Jno.  456,  Mary  23,  66,  294, 
Mr.  130,  134,  155,  Peter  537,  Sarah 
152,  Tho.  Ill,  195,  256,  277,  415, 
422,  Wm.  199,  219,  466. 

Hardish,  Wm.  420,  432. 

Harditch,  Wm.  523. 

Hardman,  Richd.  351. 

Hardridge,  Wm.  420. 

Hardrop,  Susan  402. 

Hardware,  Ann  548,  James  499. 

Hardway,  James  301,  Jno.  198. 

Hardwin,  Grace  150. 

Hardy,  Georg  67,  176,  177,  221,  509, 
John  166,  386,  404,  569,  Mary  256, 
Oliver  569,  Richd.  230,  246,  Rich. 
394,  Samll.  312,  Tho.  140,  199,  371, 
Walter  481,  Wm.  297. 

Hare,  Abagile  362,  Andrew  256,  James 
208,  212,  280,  291,  304,  316,  John 
297,  Nicho.  186,  Patriack  454,  Susan 
91,  Tabitha  382,  Wm.  426,  Xtopr. 
210. 

Harebridge,  Tho.  230. 

Harecastle,  Math.  192. 

Harecourt,  Thos.  204. 

Harelin,  Jno.  510. 

Haretree,  Elias  233,  482,  520. 

Harfeild,  Wm.  177. 

Harfinch,  Wm.  385. 

Harford,  Margt.  67,  Mary  42,  Samll. 
404. 

Hargas,  Geo.  137. 

Hargessey,  Gill  365. 


Hargrave,  Abra.  171,  Barabry  199, 
Christo.  56,  108,  Richd.  423. 

Hargrove,  Paul  402,  Peter  298,  Richd. 
229,  Richd.  423. 

Harin,  Tho.  424. 

Harker,  Jno.  559. 

Harkin,  Bryan  358. 

Harkwood,  Benj.   143. 

Harland,  Geo.  142. 

Harle,  Randall  418. 

Harleston,  Georg  144. 

Harloe,  Ann  217,  555,  John  184,  217, 
Mary  217,  Step.  217. 

Harlow,  Agnis  46,  Ann  46,  130,  Charles 
500,  Edward  510,  John  46,  130,  139, 
273,  Step.  46,  130,  Tho.  197. 

Harlowe's  Hole  260,  418. 

Harlston,  Ro^er  350. 

Harlltree,  Elias   131. 

Harly,  Grace  340. 

Harma,  Richd.  404. 

Harman,  Alice  345,  Andrew  209,  Elias 
43,  Joane  46,  Mary  256,  Mr.  15, 
Richd.  324,  366,  426,  512,  Robert 
359,  Wm.  215,  345,  266. 

Harmanson,  Jno.  554,  Tho.  294. 

Harmar,  Charles  331,  Elizabeth  331, 
John  261,  331,  466,  Thomas  331, 
Wm.  370. 

Harmata,  Abra.  136. 

Harmer,  Ann  28,  Charles  28,  130,  155, 
Doraty  383,  Eliz.  155,  Henry  323, 
Jane  275,  298,  484. 

Harmison,  Tho.  296. 

Harmon,  Eliz.  291,  John  115,  558, 
Joseph  83,  Richd.  451,  Robt.  366, 
555,  Susan  557,  Wm.  172. 

Harmond,  Henry  536,  Wm.  536. 

Harmor,  Ambrose  125,  George  559, 
Jane  125. 

Harner,  Roger  194. 

Harnings,  Robt.  205. 

Harny,  James  403   . 

Harp,  Hen.  375. 

Harper,  Ann  462,  Francis  31,  301, 
George  376,  John  133,  304,  448, 
Joseph  292,  Luke  510,  Mary  441, 
462,  500,  528,  Patrick  238,  Richd. 
313,  325,  Rob.  322,  Symon  301,  Tho- 
mas 381,  428,  431,  442,  499,  Wm. 
135,  200,  207,  208,  238,  396,  423, 
464,  510,  521. 

Harr,  Wm.  331. 

Harrad,  Capt.  408. 

Harrage,  Eliz.  247. 

Harrard,  Garrard  317. 

Harratt,  Jon.  81. 


General  Index 


657 


Harren,  James  304. 

Harrer,  Wm.  556. 

Harreson,   Roger   316. 

Harrett,  Mathew  531. 

Harringham,  Phillip  95. 

Harrington,  Edward  144,  285,  296,  412, 
413,  Edm.  453,  Fran.  381,  Ralph  128, 
Susan  286,  Wm.  294,  394. 

Harris,  Abraham  338,  Adry  101,  Andrew 
520,  An.  396,  Ann  227,  246,  282, 
527,  Anthony  129,  401,  Banill  195, 
Bryan  359,  Capt.  129,  140,  266,  269, 
Christo.  361,  375,  486,  492,  Clemt. 
361,  Danl.  197,  526,  Edw.  223,  272, 
279,  311,  382,  433,  445,  479,  487, 
504,  557,  559,  562,  Eliz.  56,  101, 
134,  139,  216,  262,  Elinor  319,  504, 
Emll.  448,  Erasmus  569,  Geo.  487, 
543,  Giles  216,  Grace  262,  Hen.  24, 
28,  80,  Israeli  150,  166,  James  222, 
285,  286,  348,  369.  440,  453,  464, 
471,  536,  Jane  109,  136,  382,  394, 
565,  Joane  33,  John  22,  48,  111,  113, 
116,  131,  167,  182,  198,  240,  254, 
257,  263,  270,  317,  324,  338,  365, 
396,  410,  420,  438,  479,  491,  492, 
493,  524,  525,  556,  559,  561,  564, 
Jon.  78,  79,  134,  Jonathan  251,  Kath. 
230,  405,  Mr.  122,  339,  407,  Mary 
293,    351,    372,    389,    476,    Mathew 

372,  Owen  111,  121,  Penelope  200, 
Peter  558,  Robert  393,  510,  562, 
Roger  146,  334,  Richd.  43,  55,  56, 
128,  131,  153,  240,  246,  444,  457, 
480,  527,  Robt.  464,  Stephen  401, 
427,  Susan  438,  527,  Thomas  10,  33, 
37,  40,  41,  54,  60,  68,  101,  118, 
120,  152,  166,  177,  203,  278,  281, 
319,    332,    334,    343,    348,    365,    372, 

373,  386,  436,  476,  485,  492,  527, 
543,  Wm.  6,  11,  12,  51,  53,  54,  77, 
150,  171,  240,  305,  307,  313,  372, 
383,  388,  399,  404,  439,  452,  492, 
554,  559,  Xtopher.  461,  462,  558, 
Weltin  386. 

Harrison,  Anth.  237,  Barth.  293,  562, 
Benj.  16,  25,  40,  45,  56,  86,  94,  152, 
159,  163,  186,  224,  276,  287,  326, 
Daniell  448,  Edw.  140,  152,  249, 
289,  364,  522,  Eliza.  208,  472,  Eras- 
mus 120,  Fra.  54,  153,  155,  172,  245, 
302,  319,  470,  565,  Georg  54,  104, 
120,  325,  355,  Grace  351,  Hen.  29, 
Isaac  221,  Jas.  29,  94,  501,  548,  Jeremy 
302,  John  116,  128,  268,  312,  319, 
565,  Jon.  25,  140,  141,  Jonathan  480, 
Joseph  230,  405,  Katherine  94,  Math. 


367,  Peter  326,  Rebecca  396,  Richd. 
243,  270,  296,  459,  472,  520,  Robt. 
170,  183,  213,  389,  411,  444,  489, 
Susan  559,  Tho.  43,  157,  248,  Wm. 
104,  118,  186,  190,  204,  318,  405, 
444,  543. 

Harrold,  Jno.  331,  472. 

Harrop,  place  called  15,  80,  466. 

Harrow,  Charles  484,  Richd.  197,  Tho. 
569. 

Harrow  Attocks  40,  47,  52,  59,  61,  64, 
74,  97,  233,  447,  471. 

Harry,  James  213,  Joseph  290,  Mary 
501. 

Harryson,  Benj.  152,  287,  Edw.  249, 
Jno.  451. 

Harsey,  Stephen  170. 

Harsley,  Stephen  170. 

Harsnett,  John  147. 

Harson,  Wm.  166. 

Harswell,  Rebecca  285. 

Hart,  Ann  396,  437,  530,  Aug.  216, 
267,  Danl.  126,  David  315,  557, 
Eliza.  37,  63,  291,  316,  466,  554, 
Elnor  322,  Fra.  391,  496,  Henry  31, 
61,  63,  86,  115,  121,  153,  176,  367, 
527,  559,  Isack  352,  Ja.  236,  506, 
Jacob  482,  James  283,  292,  313,  475, 
Jane  479,  John  180,  480,  510,  Kath. 
349,  Lyddy  235,  Margtt.  556.  Marma- 
duke  486,  Mary  398,  404,  430,  483, 
484,  543,  564,  Maudlin  235,  Methu- 
salem  190,  Nicho.  264,  422,  Peter 
548,  Rebecca  31,  Richard  67,  509, 
Robt.  296,  414,  Samll.  313,  Simon 
499,  Susan  331,  525,  545,  547,  554, 
Tabitha  383,  Teague  307,  Tho.  89, 
118,  135,  175,  176,  213,  235,  268, 
316,  322,  352,  557,  Timothy  549, 
Walter  192,  Wm.  235,  399,  400, 
492,  494,  530,  559. 

Hartees,   Rich.   441. 

Hartery,  Elias  520. 

Hartfild,  Edw.  482. 

Hartford,  Eliz.  352,  Edwd.  249,  John 
425. 

Hartfort,  Jno.  430. 

Hartgrave,   Rich.   483. 

Harting,   Richd.   521. 

Hartland,  Tho.  188. 

Hartless,  Richd.   397. 

Hartley,  Tho.  141. 

Hartly,  Eliz.  324,  Tho.  352. 

Harton,  Eliza.  190. 

Hartop,  Edward  80,  John  295. 

Hartree,  Elias  103,  286,  414,  482,  Jos. 
483. 


658 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Hartsford,  Tho.  375. 

Harvard,  Richard  429. 

Harvey,  Abreall  383,  Edw.  180,  Eliz. 
149,  277,  Sir  Georg  31,  Henry  126, 
James  387,  427,  Jane  232,  John  2,  14, 
17,  20,  27,  28,  45,  51,  53,  119,  121, 

122,  123,  128,  156,  161,  164,  205,  240, 
250,  313,  425,  427,  428,  484,  553, 
560,  Lady  108,  149,  374,  Margtt. 
559,  Mary  123,  Mr.  299,  Rice  128, 
397,   Richd.   404,    511,   Tho.    19,    30, 

123,  232,  364,  Valentine  200,  Wm. 
391,  464,  469,  492,  538. 

Harvis,  Wm.  215,  399. 

Hartwell,  Edwd.  85,  Hen.  28,  John  95, 
100,  114,  133,  166,  179,  246,  284, 
Mary  483,  506,  Richd.  564,  Wm.  467. 

Harway,  Richard   182. 

Harward,  Chas.  252,  Mary  429. 

Harwell,  John  35,  69,  389,  459,  Jone 
325,  Robt.  382,  Wm.  430. 

Harwood,  Ann  270,  274,  4l4,  Capt. 
294,  383,  Constant  355,  Ellen  422, 
Eliz.  236,  249,  342,  Fra.  430,  Geo. 
149,  Giles  68,  Humphry  97,  138, 
274,  518,  John  83,  233,  414,  557, 
Joseph  535,  Mary  456,  484,  Nicholas 
20,  Paul  359,  Peter  125,  Phillip  375, 
395,  Ralph  25,  69,  505,  Robt.  179, 
Stephen  557,  Thomas  14,  15,  25,  30, 
36,  41,  49,  75,  83,  101,  105,  143, 
149,  150,  168,  186,  216,  242,  254, 
259,  262,  274,  313,  354,  378,  393, 
439,  476,   500,  Wm.   201,  275,   439. 

Hary,  Edward  399,  Joseph  375,  395, 
Mr.  480. 

Haryfold,  James  395. 

Hasellock,  Geo.  433,  435,  459. 

Haselwood,  Judith  358. 

Hasker,  Jno.  560. 

Haslelock,  Geo.  459,  531. 

Hasledine,  Marg.  219. 

Hasleton,  Priscilla  145,  Symon  148. 

Haslewood,  Edw.  112,  Jane  250,  Rich. 
119,  Walter  45. 

Hasleworth,  Henry  264. 

Haslington,  Arthur  53,  74,  95,  145. 

Hasnet,  Jno.  362. 

Hasplock,  Geo.  495. 

Hassall,  Jon.  235,  Wm.  235. 

Hassor,  Edwd.  286. 

Hassord,  John  123. 

Hasting,  Jno.  172,  Rich.  472,  521. 

Hastings,  Wm.  54,  120. 

Hastier,  Andrew  77. 

Hatburn,  Hen.  298. 

Hatby,  Eliz.  450. 


Hatch,  Lawr.  448. 

Hatcher,    Edward    538,    Geo.    207,    Ja. 

248,   Sarah   44,   Tho.    156,   Wm.   40, 

59,  89,  347. 
Hatchett,  Edw.  138. 
Hatchway,  Tho.  151. 
Hatchworth,  Mary  482. 
Hate,  Susan  79. 
Hately,  Wm.  555. 
Hatfeild,    Grace   312,   Joseph    19,    Tho. 

281,  Wm.  96,  114,  128,  164. 
Hath,  Abra.  454. 
Hataway,  Fra.  264,  Thomas  101. 
Hathorne,  Leo.  276,  428. 
Hathrone,  Jno.  338. 
Hatly,    Elizabeth    327,    450,    John    329, 

Wm.  352. 
Hatock,  Tho.  28. 
Hatoft,  Richard  547. 
Hatred,  Mary  78. 
Hatsell,  Susan  544. 
Hatt,  John  266,  Tho.  273. 
Hattaway,  Saml.  501. 
Hatton,   Jefferv   24,   54,   Jon.   85,   John 

150,  250,  269,  Marmaduke  520,  Mary 

372,  Richd.  265,  270,  273,  317,  399, 

438,  Tho.   118,   350,   390,  Wm.  292. 
Hattey,  John  205. 
Hattfeild,  Thomas  64. 
Hattoft,  Richard  546. 
Haughton,  Henry  543. 
Hauker,  Easter  378,  Sara  378. 
Haukes,  Tho.  298. 
Hauton,  Mathew  56. 
Havannest,  Charles  359. 
Havant,  Eliz.  194. 
Havat,  Wm.  323. 
Haveat,  Mathew  512. 
Haver,  John  321. 
Haverell,  Georg  49. 
Havert,  Wm.  79,  115. 
Havett,  Wm.  138,  286,  328. 
Havord,  Alice  127. 
Haw,   Hamlett   133. 
Haward,    Ben.    167,    Edw.    219,    Grace 

204,    Jon.    50,    John    138,    227,    345, 

385,    421,    553,    Richard    180,    Sam. 

564,  Wm.  230,  306. 
Hawes,  Ann  296,  Walter  286,  357. 
Hawis,  Reynald  158,  Richard  117,  Wm. 

215. 
Hawker,    Enoch    279,    333,    343,    346, 

411,  561,  569,  311,  487. 

Hawkers,  John  209. 

Hawkes,   Edmond   200,  Ellin   146,  Jno. 

457,   Mary   32,    103,    146,   384,  

436. 


General  Index 


659 


Hawkes  Nest  Ridge,  533. 

Hawke  Pine  Nest  242. 

Hawkenett,  Jno.  392. 

Hawking,  Wm.  549. 

Hawkins-Hawkings,  Abigail  464,  Eliza- 
beth 39,  233,  George  359,  Henry  82, 
152,  177,  221,  304,  362,  James  120, 
John  175,  228,  231,  233,  240,  256, 
292,  401,  464,  474,  533,  Marg.  369, 
Mary  326,  Mich  290,  Mr.  354, 
Nicholas  191,  Phillipp  144,  Richd. 
206,  304,  312,  567,  Robt.  107,  254, 
291,  Richd.  291,  Sarah  446,  Tho,  35, 
39,  69,  113,  190,  240,  246,  254,  255, 
284,  311,  312,  364,  365,  370,  390, 
397,  419,  420,  424,  464,  501,  511, 
557,  Wm.  58,   355. 

Hawkinson,  Wm.  28. 

Hawkshead,  Jno.  392. 

Hawkwood,   Fra.   198. 

Hawlee,  Law.  523. 

Hawlet,  Wm.  506. 

Hawley,  Alice  125,  Ann  125,  Ed.  428, 
Francis  Ann  125,  Henry  151,  James 
125,  148,  167,  309,  325,  395,  432, 
561,  565,  John  409,  469,  Jon.  232, 
:Mr.  149,  461,  536,  537,  Thos.  428, 
484,  Wm.  484. 

Hawlie,  Mr.  499. 

Hawlis,  Will.  552. 

Hawly,  Ann  340,  Ed.  426,  James  340, 
362,  Jane  516,  Leonard  143,  Mr.  398. 

Hawoes,  John  207. 

Hawoods,  Humph  258. 

Hawranly,  Darby  281. 

Hawstone,  Tho.  323. 

Hawten,  Richd.  149. 

Hawwood,  Martin  557. 

Haxom's  Gaole  4. 

Hay,  Eliz.  291,  James  453,  John  263, 
462,  Wm.  370,  381,  393,  466,  503,  514. 

Hay  Meadow,  the  465. 

Hayall,  John  327. 

Hayberd,  Richard  544. 

Haycocke,  John  263. 

Hayden,  Elizabeth  6,  Richd.  207. 

Haydin,  Tho.  363. 

Hayes,  Alex.  231,  An.  560,  Ann  147, 
Anth.  152,  Bellinda  369,  Charles  55, 
David  86,  Edw.  255,  Eliz.  86,  212, 
388,  518,  Fr.  229,  Henry  86,  200, 
Hugh  28,  James  86,  393,  John  5, 
Joseph  210,  211,  Mary  66,  315, 
Nathl.  221,  Owen  433,  434,  Peter  67, 
69,  76,  Richd.  23,  141,  Robt.  79,  138, 
151,  182,  Roger  196,  Tho.  55,  Wm. 
92. 


Hayfeild,  Ben.  195. 

Hayhes,  Allen  128. 

Hayle,  Nicho.  157,  Tho.  246. 

Hayler,  Henry  215. 

Hayles,  Barbara  218,  298,  George  522, 
Jeremiah  45,  86,  93,  John  351,  432, 
515,  Tho.  234,  266,  364,  420,  440, 
461,  508,  518. 

Hayly,  Georg  102,  Tho.  393. 

Hayman,  Ed.  562,  Eliz.  405,  Jer.  233, 
John  451,  Mrs.  405. 

Haymon,  Sym.  479. 

Haynes,  Anthony  368,  369,  Chas.  462, 
Geo.  156,  203,  334,  Henry  184,  200, 
Jam.  270,  John  294,  372,  Luke  208, 
Morgan  248,  380,  Richd.  141,  Susan 
269,  479. 

Hayney,  John  18,  45. 

Haynie,  John  462,  463. 

Haynott,  Robt.  379. 

Hays,  Tho.  455. 

Haytree,  Richard   390. 

Hayward,  Ann  89,  Ellen  87,  Ellin  137, 
Elianor  273,  Francis  114,  Howell  34, 
Hugh  102,  John  114,  370,  381,  508, 
515,  548,  Mathew  89,  Rich.  513, 
Samll.  496,  Silas  543,  Susan  102, 
Thomas  324,  William  60,  81,  87, 
136,  273,  421,  473,  485. 

Haywood,  Jno.  334,  /Robert  97,  Wm.  148. 

Hayworth,  Henry  101. 

Hazard,  Sarah  232,  Wm.  390. 

Hazleton,   Symon  323. 

Hazleward,  Walter  62. 

Hazlewood,  Bryan  422,  John  296,  Wm. 
428. 

Heabeard,  John  377,  Rich.  471. 

Heaberd,  John  469,  470,  473,  560, 
Richard  360,  432,  473,  Wm.  377, 
469,  470,  473,  481,  560. 

Head,  Grace  315,  James  43,  121,  John 
466,  Rich.  455,  Tho.  93. 

Header,  Richard  99. 

Headry,  John  55. 

Heakley,  Henry  171,  Mary  171. 

Heale,  Francis  481,  Geo.  256,  290, 
Nathl.  561,  Nicho.  272,  346,  561, 
Richard  16,  Samson  390,  Symon  370, 
Wm.  561. 

Heanes,  Phillip  132. 

Hearberd,  Richd.  473. 

Heard,  Ann  520,  Henry  518,  James 
209,  Nathl.  408,  Walter  192,  229, 
525,  561,  Xpher.  363. 

Heardes,  Henry  140. 

Hearne,  Jon.  54,  John  120,  Robt.  267, 
Tho.  120,  204. 


660 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Hearny,  Wm.  400. 

Heasell,  Robert  22. 

Heashew,  Tho.  245. 

Heate,  Wm.  561. 

Heath,  Abm.  288,  Amey  194,  199,  288, 
Ann  429,  456,  Edw.  456,  Eliz.  329, 
Ferdinand  138,  George  541,  Isabel! 
291,  405,  Jane  148,  196,  Joane  525, 
John  194,  199,  241,  288,  350,  448, 
Jon.  29,  Margt.  210,  Mary  169, 
Nicho.  242,  Peter  349,  Richd.  351, 
452,  Robt.  455,  Thomas  51,  61,  125, 
161,  162,  169,  Wm.  164,  194,  199, 
275,  491,  492. 

Heather,  Richd.  173. 

Heaward,  John  493. 

Hebden,  John  222. 

Hebditch,  Wm.  501. 

Hecher,  Jon.  45. 

Hector,  Kath.  324. 

Hed,  Henry  178. 

Hedge,  Nich.  386,  Wm.  41,  508. 

Hedges,  Tho.  250,  Walter  479. 

Hedlen,  Jon.  31. 

Hedrington,  Jno.  452. 

Heed,  Tho.  462. 

Heede,  Francis  193. 

Heeding,  Robt.  304. 

Heele,  Georg  22. 

Heeley,  Walter  14  . 

Hegge,  Lawrence  356. 

Hegginson,  Mrs.  298. 

Hegnone,  Ann  349,  Antho.  254. 

Heifer,  John  301. 

Heigham,  Geo.  212,  306. 

Heily,  Ewin  145. 

Heines,  Eliz.  338,  Lancelott  351,  Marg. 
352. 

Heire,  Jane  369. 

Heires,  Wm.  24. 

Heiward,  Charles  316,  Mary  291. 

Hele,  Nicho.  280. 

Heleme,  Sara  196. 

Heler,  Richd.  304. 

Heley,  Walter  12,  Willis  36. 

Helier,  Sar.  426. 

Helin,  Mary  242. 

Helliard,  Thomas  416. 

Hellier,  Jon.  78. 

Helson,  John  431. 

Helter,  Kath.  322. 

Hely,  John  152,  Jon.  60,  Terin  378, 
Walter  156,  Willis  30,  36,  Willi.  76. 

Hemecegga,  Hugh  327. 

Hemence,  Tho.  533. 

Hemington,  New  place  called  439. 

Hemlocke,  Jane  204. 


Hemmings,  Wm.  479. 

Hemseley,  Wm.  405. 

Hemsley,  Francis  258,  Wm.  291. 

Hemstead,  Richd.  260. 

Hemy,  John  11. 

Henborne,  Kath.  75. 

Henchley,  Sarah  86. 

Hencill,  Wm.  273. 

Hencing,  Jon.  51. 

Henderson,  Alex.  197,  Edw.  562,  Gil- 
bert 277,  419,  517,  Henrick  355, 
Hona  287,  James  552,  Mathew  332, 
Robt.  558,  Wm.  530. 

Hendly,  Rob.  260. 

Hendry,  Richd.  284. 

Hendrye,  John  43. 

Hendworth,  Eliza.  222. 

Hendy,  Jno.  450. 

Henes,  Wm.  140. 

Henesty,  Jno.  441. 

Henfeild,  Robt.  297,  335,  421,  520. 

Hengan,  Roger  185. 

Hening,  Jno.  525. 

Henland,  Jno.  358. 

Henley,  Edward  333,  Jno.  369. 

Henly,  Edward  365,  375,  376,  John 
207,  398,  Tho.  383,  488. 

Henman,  Jno.  172. 

Henning,  Wm.  479,  538. 

Henre,  Hen.  427. 

Henrick,  Jno.  440,  Samll.  427. 

Henrill,  Wm.  395. 

Henry,  Andrew  217,  David  299,  John 
11,  326,  Richd.  309,  Samll.  428. 

Hensett,  Tho.  208. 

Henshawe,  Benj.  468,  Thomas  83. 

Hensly,  Robt.  293. 

Henson,  Rich.  344,  Tho.  334. 

Hensseley,  "Vc  m.  405. 

Hentlands,  Jon.  81. 

Henton,  John  277. 

Henwath,  Richd.   188. 

Heors,  Jane  349. 

Hepworth,  Edw.  430. 

Herbert,  Clemence  358,  Clement  346, 
348,  350,  440,  442,  519,  526,  528, 
Edm.  345,  Hen.  467,  476,  James  552, 
John  113,  479,  Lewis  430, "Mary  527, 
Oliver  482,  Rich.  468,  Wm.  442. 

Herd,  James  311. 

Heresa,   Finla  291. 

Herick,  Ann  154,  John  151. 

Heritick,  Jno.  538. 

Herle,  Randall  185. 

Herman,  Thomas  377,  418. 

Hermanson,  Tho.  294. 

Hermy,  Kath.  352. 


General  Index 


661 


Heme,  Robert  375,  425,  Thomas  428. 

Herning,  Robt.  489. 

Heron,  Jno.  554. 

Herrick,  Henry  154,  John  151,  Tho.  44. 

Herriman,  Daniell  378. 

Herring,    Alex.    352,    John    129,     134, 

Thomas  453. 
Herry,  Lawrence  143. 
Herryfold,  James  395. 
Herse,  Henry  441. 
Hersoll,  A.  305. 
Herst,  John  119. 
Hestin,  Eliza.   114. 
Hether,  Jon.  31. 
Hetherson,   Jos.   222. 

Heughes,  371. 

Heward,    Robt.    199,    Tho.    510,    Wm. 

313,    422. 
Hewe,  Wm.  157. 
Heweat,  Mathew  512. 
Hewes,    Eliz.    269,    Francis    60,    Garrett 

40,     109,    508,    George    359,    Henry 

182,  James  87,  273,  Jeffry  472,  John 

8,    306,   434,   444,   Jon.   234,  Margtt. 

566,  Mary  370,  395,  460,  Math.  425, 

Nich.  373,  Ralph  23,  66,  Richard  52, 

86,    138,    190,    276,    279,    288,    Tho. 

94,  263,  264,  Wm.  169. 
Hewett,  Antho.  49,  Fra.  275,  Geo.  445, 

Gyles    152,    John    54,    371,    Randall 

289,  Rich.  84,  Wm.  263. 
Hewis,  Joane  331. 
Hewitt,    Alice    267,    James    210,    John 

175,  Kath.  196,  Rich.  73,   172,  Robt. 

433. 
Hewelett,  John  475. 
Hewson,  Tho.  104. 
Hexon,  Ralph  130. 
Hey,  Mary  288,  Robt.  288. 
Heyden,  Jane  202. 
Heyes,  Peter  25. 
Heyly,  Elianor  36,  Robt.  36,  Walter  12, 

19,  Wm.  29,  Willis  36. 
Heyman,  Mrs.  138,  167,  Peter  454. 
Heymore,  Francis  476. 
Heynes,    Anthony   369,    Fra.    283,   John 

389,    Mary    60,    Margan    248,    Richd. 

168,  Robt.  294,  Tho.  294,  Wm.  3. 
Heytens,   Hester   186. 
Heyward,  Ann  110,  Hugh  15,  Humph- 
rey 23,  Jon.  25,  437,  440,  454,  Nich. 

449,  Rand.  60,  Roger  375,  Wm.  144. 
Heyware,  James  367. 
Heywood,  John  199,  Richd.  262,  Roger 

429. 
Hibit,  Jno.  544. 
Hibs,  Nohan  327. 


Hibton,  Margaret  336. 

Hicker,  Henry  461. 

Hickes,  Edward  394,  John  130,  Richard 

281,   Samuell   59,  Thomas  542,  Wm. 

432. 
Hickhocke,  Tho.  285. 
Hickins,   Francis    131. 
Hicklett,  Wm.   395. 
Hickman,  Eliz.  517,  Hen.  29,  65,  James 

513,    Nathl.    228,    Sarah     130,     390, 

Tho.   272,   314,   379,   394,   530,  Wm. 

193,  326,  409,  502,  505. 

Hickmore,  Sarah  31. 

Hickocke,  Rich.   377. 

Hicton,  James  396. 

Hicks,    James    73,    411,    Jeremy    296, 

Mary   466,    Richd.    192,    Samuell    59, 

Wm.  185,  394. 
Hickson,  Geo.  350. 
Hickton,  James   516. 
Hide,  Edw.  220,  Eliz.  516,  Richard  40, 

238,    501,    Roger    367,    Samuel    146, 

Susan  475,  528,  Susannah  525,  Wm. 

448. 
Hiden,  Jno.  462. 
Higate,  John  255. 
Higbie,  Edmd.   160. 
Higby,    Jonathan    281,    542,    John    467, 

501. 
Higdon,  Jno.  388. 
Higeson,  Aaam  468. 
Higgenson,     Col.     247,     Elizabeth     80, 

Ellenor  326,  Humphry  80,   136,  294, 

298,  317,   354,  466,  Robt.  288,  Tho. 

298,  Wm.  91. 
Higgens,  Hump.  248,  Mrs.  467. 
Higgeson,  Joane  65. 
Higgin,  Robt.  205. 
Higginbottom,  Wm.   358. 
Higgings,  George  333. 
Higgins,   Ann   362,   Charles    320,   Dan. 

316,  Fra.  214,   278,  Georg  102,   108, 

205,    Humph.    263,    John    108,    117, 

525,  Jone  88,  Lodowick  515. 
Higginson,  Christo.  141,  Eliza.  80,  141, 

Humph.    112,     159,    160,    178,    375, 

Peter  130,  171,  Robt.  349. 
Higgison,  Adam   391,  Peter  46,  Robert 

390. 
Hig^s,   Jno.  555. 
High,  Tho.  426. 
Highland,  Jno.  362. 
Highlander,  a  251,  362. 
High  Peake,  the  228,  268,  503. 
High  Wav,  the  2,  4,  8,   12,  56. 
Higinson,  Hugh  182. 
Highley,  Johna.  424,  Susan  404. 


662 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Highlie,  Jonathan  542. 

Highly,  Jonathan  281,  475,  542,  549. 

Higsden,  Rich.  449. 

Higson,  Ralph  105. 

Hill,  Abram  400,  Abraham  38,  94, 
Andrew  455,  Ann  176,  279,  Anthony 
70,  289,  Barbery  176,  Benja.  221, 
450,  Chas.  156,  258,  313,  378,  382, 
389,  437,  501,  Daniell  105,  Edward  6, 

93,  140,  175,  324,  382,  405,  457,  460, 
497,  Elianor  59,  Eliza.  200,  249, 
558,  Fra.  195,  353,  Gabriell  467, 
541,  Geo.  171,  255,  302,  353,  Grace 
438,  444,  546,  547,  512,  Henry  18, 
23,  176,  268,  Isaack  359,  Jacob  208, 
James  267,  268,  295,  340,  382,  389, 
402,  404,  410,  455,  Jarrett  463,  Joane 
367,  John  21,  65,  112,  114,  153, 
172,  175,  181,  226,  260,  263,  276, 
287,  291,  322,  324,  330,  353,  355, 
362,  424,  Jon.  23,  Joseph  249,  393, 
426,  Katherine  92,  Margtt.  553,  Marke 
531,  Martha  252,  453,  491,  Mary  23, 
140,  195,  261,  262,  353,  Mathew 
357,  467,  Moses  358,  Nicholas  38, 
77,  115,  118,  175,  199,  444,  Peter 
79,  104,  107,  Richd.  54,   59,  68,  92, 

94,  97,  120,  188,  245,  260,  261,  271, 
369,  413,  446,  449,  466,  482,  483, 
507,  516,  549,  Robt.  140,  181,  245, 
392,  454,  545,  555,  Rose  41,  91,  109, 
Silvester  444,  558,  Susan  260,  Thomas 

95,  104,  108,  114,  131,  137,  143, 
145,  159,  172,  175,  195,  198,  208, 
277,  353,  Timothy  382,  385,  388, 
426,  449,  479,  Wm,  49,  88,  120, 
153,  204,  206,  294,  359,  371,  392, 
396,  447. 

Hill's  Choyce  455,  482,  554. 

Hill's  Thickett  260. 

Hill,  the  Tower  281. 

Hill,  Shorne  brook  322. 

Hillard,  Wm.  315. 

Hillary  Susan  263,  313. 

Hiller,  Martha  351. 

Hillery,  Susan  248. 

Hilliar,  Geo.  300,  Jno.  538. 

Hilliard,  Geo.  86,  John  213,  558,  Robt. 

377,  427. 

Hillier,  Isaak  555,  John  253,  288,  475, 

487,  501. 
Hillyer,  Lawrence  327. 
Hilman,  Ed.  476. 
Hilson,  Wm.  452. 
Hilton,   Ann   180,  Margaret   336,   Wm. 

315. 
Hinam,  Wm.  198. 


Hincastle,  Jeles  201. 

Hichman,  Benj.  454. 

Hinckly,  Tho.  25. 

Hincks,  Arthur  455. 

Hind,  Alexander  316,  Jno.  513. 

Hinde,  Alex.  291,  Eliz.  244,  James  260, 

Rich.  86,  Tho.   332,   369,  Wm.   131, 

174. 
Hinderson,  Mathew  216,  Wm.  508. 
Hindes,  Tho.  378. 

Hine,  Antho.  256,  Jno.  513,  Tho.  281. 
Hines,  William  22. 
Hiniman,  Tho.  418. 
Hinkes,  Tho.  404. 
Hinly,  Phillip  528. 
Hinman,    John    322,    407,    Richd.    407, 

463,  Thomas  554. 
Hinsha,  Teague  493. 
Hinshaw,    Ann    231,    Mary    231,    Tho. 

167. 
Hinson,  Paule  351,  Tho.  162,  245,  246, 

253. 
Hint,  James  297. 
Hinton,    Dorcas    460,    Geo.    513,    John 

139,  479,  Palmer  210,  235,  Tho.  61, 

210,  255,  309,  451,  Wm.  54. 
Hiorn,  Eliz.  443. 
Hird,  Henry  140. 
Hitchcock,  Ed.  237,  Hen.  138. 
Hitchcox,  John  116,  Richd.  35,  42,  80, 

248. 
Hitchman,    Wm.    335,    392,    411,    464, 

472,  507. 
Hitley,  Phillip  454. 
Hitton,  Henry  149. 
Hive,  Tho.  281. 
Hives,  Margtt.  535. 
Hix,    Edw.    345,    Eliz.    512,    Mary   374, 

Thomas  548,  Wm.  97. 
Hixams,  Robt.  172. 
Hixon,  Joan  239. 
Hoane,  Mr.  254,  Theophilus  322,   380, 

Tho.  275. 
Hoard,  Elias  232. 
Hoare,  Mich.  481. 
Hobbart,  Eliz.  531. 
Hobbs,    Alice    369,    Francis    196,    251, 

364,   Geo.   209,   Isaac  220,  John  93, 

191,  404,  Jone  150,  Miles  431,  Tho. 

132,  Wm.  476,  567. 
Hobeane,  Rich.  245. 
Hoben,  Joane  492. 
Hobert,  Bertram  135,  Jeremy  384,  Sarah 

135. 
Hobkins,   Mr.    332,   Thomas    313,    315, 

469,  491,  521. 
Hoble,  Wm.  373. 


General  Index 


663 


Hobson,  Eliz.  296,  338,  356,  512,  559, 
jane  466,  John  54,  119,  166,  245, 
Richd.  250,  Robt.  164,  Roger  275, 
Timothy  557,  568,  Tho.  192,  469, 
523. 

Hoccadie,  Wm.  276. 

Hoccaday,  Darby  371,  Major  409,  Mr. 
208,  367,  Wm.  181,  210,  220,  257, 
303,  311,  318,  338,  342,  376,  532. 

Hockadav,  Wm.  131,  133,  167,  243, 
.398,  424,  456,  458,  511,  563,  566. 

Hockadayes  Harbour  133. 

Hockett,  Eliz.  250,  Mary  250. 

Hockinge,  Ann  362. 

Hockins,  Georg  57. 

Hockly,  Rowld.  244. 

Hocksteed,  Sam.  378. 

Howell,  Katherine  58,  328. 

Hoddin,  Christian   148,  John  148,   150. 

Hoddon,  Michaell   193. 

Hodge,  Edw.  257,  John  425,  467,  Wm. 
109. 

Hodges,  Charles  332,  Eliza.  63,  Jane 
299,  Joane  125,  322,  John  83,  150, 
Jon.  61,  Margt.  269,  Richd.  229, 
Robert  50,  58,  100,  447,  Tho.  202. 

Hodgen,  John  101. 

Hodgkin,  Thomas  425. 

Hodgkins,  Jesper  101,  Mary  93,  Wm. 
468. 

Hodgkinson,  Jasper  327,  Wm.  182. 

Hodgskins,  Walter  48. 

Hodgson,  Onah  524,  Wm.  194,  359, 
524. 

Hodin,  John  148,  272. 

Hodkins,  Tho.  430. 

Hodskins,  Tho.  200. 

Hodson,  John  310,  Jon.  64,  Rich.  504. 

Hoe,  Cur.  331,  Rice  86,  87,  110,  119, 
145,  148,  543,  Richd.  323. 

Hoell,  Chas.  253,  Hopkin  479,  Tho. 
450,  Walter  525. 

Hoeman,  Jno.  349. 

Hoer,  Andrew  58. 

Hoes,  Margtt.  535,  Owen  344,  Walter 
397. 

Hofe,  Fra.  167. 

Hofer,  Jane  528. 

Hoffeild,  Henry  325. 

Hogan,  Mohan  427. 

Hogard,  Peter  315. 

Hogdson,  Oran  523,  Wm.  523. 

Hogg,  Andrew  288,  John  346,  451,  564, 
Rob.  353,  Thomas  327,  Will.  206. 

Hogge,  Lawrence  356. 

Hogges,  Mary  207. 

Hogg's  land,  222,  341. 


Hogines,  John  205. 

Hogkinson,  Jasper  243,  286. 

Hogsden,  Rich.  482. 

Hogskin,  Mr.  358. 

Hogskins,  John  4. 

Hogson,  Mathew  465,  Rich.  358,  Wm. 
;308. 

Holbar,  Rich.  298. 

Holberton,  Walter  133. 

Hold,  Christopher  94. 

Holden,  Arth.  324,  Joane  259,  John 
107,  Jon.  81,  Marg.  498,  Mr.  208, 
Peter  381,  Richd.  235,  333,  352,  463, 
518,  Tho.  322,  Wm.  417,  428. 

Holder,  Arth.  428,  450,  Eliz.  107,  John 
107,  Mary  266,  Richd.  317,  400,  487, 
500,  Sath.  463,  Tho.  350,  427,  Wm. 
175,  193,  194,  196,  234,  253. 

Holdich,  Richd.  200. 

Holdin,  John  28,  Richard  319,  Sarah 
383. 

Holding,  Geo.  228,  253,  Grace  198, 
Isaac  311,  James  90,  231,  248,  318, 
508,  Joane  504,  John  190,  249,  254, 
296,  366,  422,  Mary  541,  Nath.  264, 
Richd.  198,  235,  354,  356,  532,  Robt. 
235,  Tho.  458,  Wm.  468. 

Holdings,  Richd.  355,  502. 

Hole,  Edward  89,  Tho.  262. 

Holeman,  Tho.  30,  Wm.  351. 

Holford,  Margtt.  546. 

Holgate,  Martha  515. 

Holladay,  Eliz.  390,  Walter  562. 

Hollaman,  Judith  227. 

Holland,  Adam  280,  Danll.  339,  Edward 
40,  41,  59,  60,  Francis  146,  216, 
Gabriel  3,  8,  Geo.  526,  Hen.  28,  Jno. 
444,  Mary  3,  8,  56,  326,  Mr.  335, 
350,  Sam.  385,  Tho.  214,  Wat.  485, 
Wm.  40,  69,  107. 

Holland,_295. 

Hollar,  Eliz.  451. 

Hollaway,  Jno.  309,  Precilla  391,  Robt. 
349,  376. 

HollefTe,  Jon.  134. 

Holleman,  Xtopr.  193. 

Hollenby,  Dyan   136. 

Hollick,  Alice  506. 

Holliday,  Eliz.  326,  Geo.  107,  199, 
John  118,  Tho.  208,  336,  386,  Walter 
558,  Wm.  62,  389. 

Hollier,  Julian  17. 

Holliman,  Christopher  251,  Judith  251. 

Hollingford,  Jane  455,  James  455. 

Hollingham,  Tho.   114. 

Hollingworth,  Chas.  344. 

Hollingsworth,  John  94,  Sarah  94. 


664 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Holliock,  Roger  36. 

Hollirosse,  Ja.   376. 

Hollis,  Edw.  452,  John  37,  88,  127, 
333,  449,  546,  Jon.  133,  Lucy  546, 
Mr.  315,  Rich.  453,  513,  Tho.  173, 
382,  Wm.  286. 

Holliway,  Oliver  182. 

Holliwell,  Thos.  269. 

Hollman,  John  386,  Wm.  377. 

Hollom,  Robert  41,  73. 

Holloman,  Judeth   193,  201. 

Holloway,  Chas.  456,  John  41,  123, 
135,  Peter  31,  Tho.  497. 

Hollowell,  Edw.  193,  Tho.  180,  497. 

Hollowes,  John  189,  207,  252,  389, 
Restitute  207. 

Hollum,  Eliz.  52,  Jno.  427,  Robt.  52. 

Holley,  John  336,  Lyonell  136. 

Holly,  John  195,  476,  Tho.  557. 

Hollyday,  Thomas  364. 

Hollyman,  Wm.  328. 

Holman,  Eliz.  450,  Judeth  400,  Robert 
93,  Tho.  30,  Wm.  107,  475. 

Holmden,  Richard  524. 

Holmes,  And.  195,  David  149,  172, 
Eliz.  176,  Fran.  177,  Georg  30,  47, 
68,  70,  103,  137,  231,  281,  283,  294, 
Jane  281,  516,  John  13,  99,  151,  166, 
299,  324,  348,  453,  518,  Jon.  50, 
Marg.  179,  Martha  479,  Mary  563, 
Mathew  84,  Mr.  401,  Rebecca  30,  47, 
68,  Richd.  182,  Rob.  351,  Tho.  120, 
169,  241,  242,  243,  270,  278,  285, 
349,  367,  394,  401,  471,  484,  515, 
520,  525,  536,  542,  546,  Wm.  401, 
Xtopr.  430. 

Holmsly,  Mary  349. 

Holmewood,  Edward  556. 

Holmwood,  Henry  467,  Jno.  365. 

Holmswood,  John  203. 

Holse,  Wm.  179. 

Holston,  Susan  249. 

Holt,  Ailce  215,  Edw.  176,  213,  285, 
286,  Eliz.  349,  Francis  111,  Geo. 
269,  Henry  195,  Ismaell  453,  Jno. 
525,  Major  289,  347,  350,  356,  389, 
Matt.  157,  Randolph  15,  Randall  48, 

111,  120,  143,  197,  249,  Red.  557, 
Richard     146,     553,568,     Robt.     103, 

112,  123,  151,  192,  196,  202,  205,  215, 
231,  234,  320,  487,  524,  Susan  165, 
Thomas  57,  302,  354,  478,  556, 
Tymothy  528,  Wm.  265. 

Holter,  Mathew  444. 
Holton,  Jon.  23,  Wm.  23. 
Holwell,   Tho.   237. 
Holyday,  Mary  434. 


Home,  Ben.  215,  John  12. 

Homes,  Henry  476,  John  499,  Martha 
364,  Peter  60,  Tho.  243,  276,  285. 

Horns,  Anthony  543. 

Homwood,  John  365. 

Hond,  Dorcas  307. 

Hone,  John  131,  Feter  557,  Theophilis 
380,  540. 

Hones,  Eliz.  479,  Mathew  274. 

Honine,  Jane  87. 

Honnebrooke,  Arthur  131. 

Honnett,  Rich.  294. 

Honnywood,  Phillip  187,  Robert  86,  93. 

Honyborne,  Robt.  34,  185. 

Hoock,  Eliz.  479. 

Hoocks,  Samll.  393. 

Hooe,  And.  79. 

Hoofe,  Francis  48,  51. 

Hooke,  Luwd.  60,  Francis  27,  62,  70, 
72,  108,  305,  John  346,  Joseph  309, 
Nathl.  28,  Richd.  194,  Samll.  468, 
Wm.  146. 

Hooker,  Lawr.  404,  Robt.  237,  Thomas 
104,  148,  Wm.  347. 

Hookes,John  312,  Lawrence  524,  Samll. 
444,  Wm.  22,  78. 

Hooks,  John  315. 

Hoomes,  Mary  535. 

Hooper,  Andrew  530,  Arthur  237,  450, 
Eliz.  358,  Francis  557,  568,  Henry 
35,  116,  341,  Jon.  145,  Peter  33, 
Tho.  35, Richd.  149,  Robt.  433,  Tho.  345. 

Hoopes,  Hen.  301. 

Hoord,  Aotan  194. 

Hoote,  Joan  290. 

Hooton,  Christo.   146,  Mich.   291,  405. 

Hope,  Arthur  444,  Giles  397,  John  236, 
348,  Jon.  229,  Mr.  451,  Thomas  431, 
Wm.  404. 

Hopes,  Wm.  464. 

Hoper,  Henry  499. 

Hopewell,  Ma.  430. 

Hopham,   Richard  434. 

Hopkin,  Wm.   127,   185. 

Hopkins,  Ann  459,  Danll.  520,  David 
75,  363,  Ed.  377,  558,  Eliza  197, 
343,  362,  Italy  545,  Jane  452,  James 
457,  Joane  362,  John  133,  338,  359, 
454,  Judith  459,  Mar.  557,  Mary 
451,  460,  523,  Math.  265,  Owen 
482,  Peter  264,  Phoebus  4,  Ralph 
523,  Richd.  169,  198,  459,  Robert  27, 
133,  430,  545,  567,  Tho.  148,  359, 
Wm.  275,  456. 

Hopkinson,  Daniell  78. 

Hoppards,  Moyses  208. 

Hopper,  John  429. 


General  Index 


665 


Hopps,  Robt.  138. 

Hopswood,  Jno.  287,  376. 

Hopton,  Wm.  131. 

Hord,  Francis  456. 

Hordwell,  John  267,  286. 

Hore,  And.  79,  James  268. 

Horim,  Hugh  281. 

Horlson,  Wm.   189. 

Hormebrooke,  Arthur   131. 

Hormer,  James  41. 

Home,  Adam  266,  Ben.  215,  Jon.  37, 
40,  63,  65,  237,  514,  Mary  479, 
Richard  433,  Tho.  226,  428,  540, 
Wm.  212,  230,  282,  387. 

Home  Harbour  263,  275. 

Horner,  Mary  345,  Roger  86,  Tho.  136. 

Hornesby,  Jane  493. 

Hornett,  Adam  246,  Richd.  294. 

Horning,  Robt.  489. 

Hornshey,  Jane  369. 

Horrod,  Mary  486. 

Horse,  Step.  225. 

Horsely,  Ralph  185,  Steph.  259,  414. 

Horsey,  Howard  99,  164,  Stephen  170, 
297,  325,  339. 

Horsidens,  John  472. 

Horsington,  Dorothy  479,  Hen.  524, 
Hugh  453,  John  422,  478,  479,  Robt. 
399,  479,  Tho.  479. 

Horsing,  Judith  464. 

Horsley,  Jane  266,  Joseph  266,  Ralph 
266,  397,  495,  Robt.  122,  Steph.  411, 
Wm.  378. 

Horsly,  Ralph  185,  251,  442,  Robt.  293, 
319,  Steph.  264. 

Horsman,  Jno.  475,  Wm.  385. 

Horsmanden,  Mr.  564. 

Horsmandine,  Mr.  314,  388,  469,  Sus- 
anna 388,  Warham  323. 

Hon,  John  336. 

Horth,  Augustine  423. 

Horton,  Anth.  510,  Barth.  86,  194, 
Henry  431,  Isaac  54,  120,  Mary  382, 
Rich.  298,  Robt.  171,  553,  Tobias 
89,  263,  437,  441,  Toby  289,  316, 
343,  399,  400,  436,  Walter  249,  459, 
Wm.  481,   483,   517,   538,   547,   560. 

Hoser,  Damiell  355. 

Hosier,  Mary  548. 

Hoskins,  Alice  264,  Amy  372,  Antho. 
233,  264,  272,  294,  321,  401,  413, 
513,    Bartholomew    7,    15,    16,    135, 

178,  182,  219,  259,  268,  282,  287, 
293,  298,  332,  347,  441,  442,  500, 
David  404,  John  182,  280,  353,  464, 
492,  Maudlin  3 31,. Nicholas  9,  Richd. 

179,  Tho.  523,  Wrn.  530. 


Hosman,  Tho.   512. 

Hosnard,  Dorothy   183. 

Hosnell,  Jno.  528. 

Hosnett,  Jno.  528. 

Hossier,  Fra.  326. 

Hothersall,  Francis  2,  Mary  2,  Richd. 
2,  Thomas  2. 

Hott  Water,  465. 

Hotton,  Rich.  459. 

Houfgh,  Francis  55,  56. 

Hough,  Francis  19,  33,  66,  70,  82,  84, 
85,  96,  197. 

Houghton,  Christo.  258,  George  535, 
Jno.  484,  Leonard  65,  Robt.  35,  Tho. 
543. 

Hould,  Christo.   38. 

Houlder,  John  175,  Wm.  275. 

Houlding,  John  489. 

Houlsworth,   Benjamin   369. 

Hound,  Dorias  26. 

House,  Ann  455,  557,  Dorothy  483, 
Edw.  195,  Jane  270,  Theo.  483,  Tho. 
323,  326,  Wm.  264. 

House,  Block  the  232,  338,  Common 
Garden  159,  of  Entertainment  18, 
Gate  70,  Glasse  240,  313,  Goose  Hill 
319,  347,  469,  the  Great  18,  76,  the 
Middle  161,  the  State  126,  127,  151, 
154,  338. 

Houstone,  Robt.  552. 

Housward,  Fra.   260. 

Hoveller,  Jerimiah  78. 

How— Howe:  Abigail  325,  383,  Edward 
369,  Jane  171,  John  12,  35,  46,  72, 
77,  104,  106,  114,  131,  147,  252, 
301,  316,  352,  434,  499,  532,  533, 
539,  Jones  386,  Lawrence  446,  Lyddy 
393,  Lydia  426,  444,  468,  Mr.  313, 
Rice  37,  342,  Richd.  119,  552,  Robt. 
463,  Wm.  42. 

Howard,  Benj.  370,  Chas.  352,  Edm. 
454,  553,  Eliz.  366,  Francis  162, 
Hannah  348,  Hen.  517,  James  334, 
Jane  512,  John  251,  292,  402,  408, 
474,  553,  Mary  397,  Mathew  79, 
Richd.  184,  Samll.  404,  Sarah  467, 
Stephen  528,  Tho.  289,  366,  Wm. 
129,  428. 

Howden,  Rich.  483,  Robt.  240. 

Howed,  Wm.  228. 

Howell,  Alice  252,  484,  Andrew  49, 
112,  Charts  59,  316,  Cob  23,  90,  92, 
288,  489,  Edw.  485,  Henry  60,  Hop- 
kin  282,  492,  Isa.  438,  John  60,  112, 
200,  252,  298,  466,  482,  Jone  246, 
Mary  252,  Owen  25,  69,  Richd.  242, 


666 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


299,  Thomas  8,  184,  203,  334,  359, 
Villy  Volly  386,  Walter  34,  Watkin 
125. 

Hower,  Henry  208. 

Howes,  Wm.   184. 

Howett,  John  247,  252,  264,  372,  

280,  423. 

Howgate,  Jon.  43,  Tho.  127. 

Howgrave,  Edward   391. 

Howitt,  John   175. 

Howkett,  Geo.  404. 

Howler,  Tho.  120. 

Howlet,  Tho.  324. 

Howlton,  a  place  called  100. 

Howman,  Elizabeth  334,  Jon.  60. 

Hownson,  Wm.  195. 

Howranley,  Darby  332. 

Howsden,  Edmond  363. 

Howse,  Robert  94,  Wm.  234. 

Howsing,  Robt.  446. 

Howson,  Eliz.  428,  Jno.  465,  Rich.  431. 

Howtree,  Mary  138. 

Hoyle,  Chas.  422. 

Hoyles,  Jno.  507,  Tho.  198. 

Hoyley,  Tho.  198. 

Hoyte,  Edwd.  548. 

Hubard,  Robt.  300. 

Hubbard,  Benj.  117,  Rich.  133,  Robt. 
340,  474,  Tho.  374. 

Hubberd,  Ann  561,  Eliz.  448,  Henry 
184,  396,  John  133,  Mr.  479,  Rebecca 
490,  Robt.  254,  269,  340,  400,  476, 
483. 

Huberd,  Henry  329,  416,  Izable  324, 
Jno.  553,  Mathew  186,  224,  311, 
377,  R.  180,  186,  207,  221,  277, 
Robt.  186,  194,  224,  272,  315,  340, 
373. 

Hubert,  Henry  312,  329. 

Hublard,  Rich.  133. 

Huby,  Samll.  146,  326. 

Huchenson,  Jno.  558. 

Hucheson,  Wm.  462. 

Huckett,  Samuell  430. 

Huchins,  Jno.  220,  492. 

Huchison,  James   55. 

Huck,  John  225. 

Huckle,  Andrew  147,  Jno.  352. 

Huckley,  John  156. 

Hucks,  John  64. 

Hucock,  Jon.  58. 

Hud,  Robt.  451. 

Hudd,  Robt.  568. 

Hudge,  Ellen  262. 

Hudgson,  Robert  366. 

Hudleston,  John  44. 

Hudnall,  John  372,  373,  461,  463,  507. 


Hudnell,  John  372. 

Hudsale,  Henry  254. 

Hudsey,  Peter  65. 

Hudsoll,  Henry  436. 

Hudson,  Anth.  431,  Danll.  567,  Edw. 
81,  366,  443,  568,  Eliz.  33,  258, 
Geo.  178,  Henry  185,  James  567, 
John  118,  208,  251,  381,  382,  410, 
413,  Jon.  228,  Mary  190,  371,  Mathew 
176,  Nicholas  456,  Richd.  262,  538, 
Robt.  25,  108,  208,  283,  499,  Samuell 
94,  Tho.  156,  186,  218,  Wm.  231, 
141. 

Hues,  Ann  443,  Atlanta  425,  David 
315,  Eliz.  246,  304,  Fra.  190,  205, 
George  509,  Jon.  60,  John  101,  248, 
Margtt.  535,  Mary  393,  526,  Owen 
62,  Richd.  73,  140,  202,  439,  Robt. 
562,  Stephen  517,  Tho.  201. 

Huett,  Francis  136,  John  120,  Morgan 
36,  Rich.  31,  Robt.  37,  106,  182, 
350. 

Huey,  Mich.  198. 

Huff,  Richd.  447. 

Huffe,  Abr.  236,  Mary  54,  466,  Ro. 
361. 

Huffer,  John  108. 

Huffes,  Henry  376. 

Huffey,  Peter  454. 

Huft,  Henry  339. 

Hugell,  Michael  443,  545. 

Huger,  Jno.  404,  Ri.  562. 

Huges,  Maugeby  213,  Ri.  562. 

Hugeson,  Wm.  455. 

Huggesson,  James  30,  Joane  50. 

Huggett,  Cesar  169. 

Hughes,  Ann  372,  Aron,  382,  Arthur 
110,  Eliz.  214,  Francis  524,  Geo.  160, 
James  362,  Jane  367,  Jeffery  331, 
John  193,  487,  Jon.  228,  Marg.  384, 
Math.  375,  Peeter  351,  382,  Rees 
342,  349,  369,  371,  386,  421,  Rice 
271,  397,  Richd.  82,  102,  115,  152, 
354,  Robt.  427,  Tho.  130,  137,  144, 
147,  274,  284,  Villemile  249,  Wm. 
293,  386,  426,  468,  Xtopr.  208,  269. 

Hugill,  Mihill  466,  Miles  511,  Mich. 
467,  468,  481. 

Hughlett,  Jno.  382,  395,  396,  402,  460, 
461,  463,  Tho.  483,  Wm.  429. 

Hughs,  Anne  352,  Eliz.  241,  Owen  180, 
Wm.  220. 

Huitt,  Catherine  254,  Joseph  393,  Sarah 
393. 

Huis,  Geo.  459. 

Hukes,  James  323,  Richd.  281. 

Hulbunt,  Anth.  335. 


General  Index 


667 


Hulett,  John  322,  James  359,  Lawr. 
113,   226,   259,   349,   544,   Sarah  475. 

Hull,  Augustine  537,  Daniell  522, 
David  149,  172,  Edw.  149,  363, 
Edm.  172,  Eliz.  149,  172,  264,  359, 
468,  530,  Fra.  355,  Georg  24,  32,  62, 
79,  102,  110,  149,  172,  175,  JefTerie 
17,  John  206,  214,  289,  316,  339, 
361,  382,  383,  384,  395,  423,  430, 
442,  443,  460,  467,  468,  527,  530, 
556,  Mary  337,  530,  Nich.  472,  Peter 
119,  183,  261,  509,  Richd.  195,  204, 
223,  232,  319,  320,  416,  504,  Robt. 
384,  548,  Sarah  206,  Tho.  300. 

Hull  de,  Cornelius  138. 

Hullett,  337. 

Humber,  Danll.  501. 

Humberstone,  place  called  125,  151. 

Humberton,  place  called  155. 

Humble,  Roger  80. 

Hume,  James   184. 

Humphrey,  Amey  61,  Wm.  148. 

Humphreyes,  Tho.  297,  Wm.  211. 

Humphries,  Abram  545,  Eliz.  548,  Edw. 
501,  Fra.  366,  465,  Geo.  432,  Jo.  156, 
Tho.  437,  465,  470,  Wm.  465. 

Humphryes,  David  355,  Jon.  240,  Jno. 
341,  Wm.  195. 

Humphry,  James  233,  John  50,  Jon.  86, 
Jone  259,  Tho.  303,  Wm.  279. 

Humphrys,  Jno.   180. 

Huncer,  Robt.  183. 

Hunckle,  Tho.  209. 

Hundred:  Berkeley  53,  79,  Bermuda 
130,  157,  202,  262,  317,  458,  561, 
Charles  68,  226,  Dig's  33,  Florida 
543,  Martin's  4,  14,  17,  21,  29,  30, 
50,  76,  79,  84,  97,  106,  114,  116, 
137,  168,  224,  283,  499,  Shirley  405, 
561,  Stanley  373,  507. 

Hundrex,  Brown  429. 

Hungerford,  Joane  193,  Sarah  193. 

Hungerton,  John  180,  221. 

Huniford,   Phillip   562. 

Huningford,  Jno.  218. 

Huniwood,  Phil.  271. 

Hunley,  Phillip  217,   289,  416. 

Hunly,  Eliz.  218,  Phillip  218,  274, 
Robt.  218. 

Hunnywood,  Phil.  271. 

Hunt,  Alice  555,  Antho.  198,  Christo. 
47,  Edw.  41,  109,  508,  Eliza.  63, 
345,  Godfrey,  492,  Henry  245,  321, 
429,  454,  475,  484,  546,  James  47, 
106,  180,  304,  348,  349,  Jane  351, 
Jon. 34,  John  178,  193,  197,  207, 
259,  363,  396,  506,  548,  Joseph  200, 


Margt.  220,  Martha  309,  Martin  431, 
476,  Mary  404,  429,  Mr.  465,  Peter 

517,  Radulph  159,  Ralph  44,  164, 
175,    269,    432,    Richd.     199,    Susan 

402,  440,  546,  547,  548,  558,  Symon 
227,  Thomas  46,  80,  149,  313,  360, 
456,  Wm.  90,  183,  188,  210,  238, 
510,  516,  545,  559,  Winfred  267. 

Hunter,  Archiball  332,  Dan.  384,  James 

243,    255,    275,   Jon.    134,   John   348, 

Mary    167,    Richd.    170,    274,    Wm. 

214,  430. 
Huntey,   Phill.   266. 
Hunting  Dale,  placed  called  182. 
Huntington,     Andrew     77,     132,     156, 

Lydia  132. 
Huntless,  Edwd.  218. 
Huntley,    Edw.    224,    Hen.     134,    John 

327,  Robt.  288,  405. 
Huntly,   Edw.   298,   Hannah   297,   Wm. 

350. 
Hunstone,  Edw.  348. 
Hup,  Hen.  292. 
Hurd,  Ann  209,  Capt.  366,  383,  Chris. 

267,  Fra.  264,  Henry  301,  James  209, 

403,  404,  566,  Mr.  347,  388,  390, 
458,  Nathl.  242,  274,  471,  476,  495, 

518,  Walter  301. 
Hurden,  Wm.  358. 
Hurdis,  Wm.  27. 
Hurim,  Nowell  130. 
Hurisatt,  Natha.  252. 
Hurle,  James  453. 
Hurman,  Jane  56. 
Hurpe,  Wm.  325. 
Hurrs,  Eliza.  219. 

Hurst,    Gilbert    193,    John    390,    James 

250,  Tobias  67. 
Hurstwell,     Benj.     369     (Note:     Given 

name  omitted  in  abstract). 
Hurt,    Edward    190,    Tho.    252,    Wm. 

203,  334. 
Husband,  Tho.  187. 
Huse,    Abigail    190,    John    177,    Kath. 

277,   525. 
Huses,  Mary  214. 
Husey,  David   176. 
Hushly,  Rich.  388. 
Husley,  Eliz.  23,  66. 
Husly,  James  315. 
Husman,  Tho.   289. 
Huson,    Elizabeth    89,    Geo.    462,    John 

116,   328,  Robt.  450,  Tho.  83. 
Husquamps,  called  by  Indians,  53. 
Huss,  Hen.  292. 

Hussey,  David   176,  Milkey  268. 
Hust,  Edw.  265,  Henry  211,  John  390. 


668 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Huston,  Robt.  273,  472. 

Hutchenson,  John  313,  562,  Robt.  449, 
534,  535. 

Hutcheson,  Jane  280,  Rice  271,  Robt. 
449,  Wm.  264,  435. 

Hutchings,  Isacke  333,  334. 

Hutchins,  Jbliz.  131,  Fra.  297,  327,  480, 
Isaac  80,  84,  Lewis  194,  Robt.  13, 
44,   Sarah   315,  Wm.   352,   436,   530. 

Hutchinson,  Andre.  275,  Edward  89, 
124,  Eliz.  95,  198,  Enoch  324,  Francis 
51,  Hector  275,  James  43,  John  218, 
224,  293,  Richard  110,  Robt.  97,  126, 
128,  138,  139,  145,  151,  168,  177, 
Tho.  510,  Wm.  47,  316. 

Hutchison,  Jane  354,  William  56. 

Hutfeild,  Wm.  566. 

Hutmore,  Sarah  84 

Hutson,  Edw.  205,  Matt.  403,  568, 
Robt.  211,  461. 

Hutt,  Ann  547,  563,  Danll.  492,  499, 
500,  522,  546,  547,  563,  Jno.  556, 
Joseph  275,  Nathaniel  3,  Tho.  61, 
273,  Wm.  190. 

Hutter,  James  201. 

Huttey,  John  205. 

Huttibell,  Eliz.  287. 

Huttman,  Henry  512. 

Hutton,  rmtho.  192,  Danielll  22,  240, 
Eliz.  240,  298,  Fra.  198,  James  283, 
Joane  214,  Mary  369,  Wm.  369,  426. 

Huttons,  Georg  389,  Wm.  184. 

Hux,  Alexr.  176. 

Hyam,  George  539. 

Hyde,  Phillipp  139,  Richard  40,  94. 

Hye,  Tho.  393. 

Hyer,  Temperance  195. 

Hyett,  Tho.  275,  474. 

Hygate,  Christian  309. 

Hynde,  Wm.  244. 

Hyne,  Ann  436. 

Hynes,  Francis  387,  Marinus  130,  Richd. 
130,  Sarah  130,  Thomas  77. 

Hyre,  John   110. 

Hyupp,  Thomas  316. 

Hyves,  Henry  99. 

I 

Ibbison,  Percivall  4,  39. 

Ibsam,  Margt.  386. 

Icory  Edm.  346. 

Idam,  Robert  81. 

Iden,  Hen.  148. 

lego,  Nicho.   164. 

Iken,  Thomas  390. 

lies,  Thomas  96,  122,  468. 

Iliffe,  Richd.  488. 


Illes,  John  455. 
Illey,  Undell  328. 
Ilsam,  Margt.  386. 
Inarnold,  Tho.   181. 
Ince,  John  266,  Wm.  521. 

INDIANS:     96,    107,    139,    179,    199, 
210,    259,    264,    282,    353,    362,    407, 
408,   505,   522,   553,   566,  Corotomen 
343,  Rappahannock  251,  495. 
Bridge,  173,  204,  214,  233,  401,  474. 
Cabins,  76,  259,  437. 
Creeks,  (  See  Creeks ) . 
Feilds,    15,    21,    26,    34,    47,    51,    56, 
57,   71,   76,   86,   91,  92,    120,   138, 
152,  153,   171,   183,  199,  205,  211, 
222,  273,  276,  277,  282,  306,  311, 
319,  366,  371,  376,  378,  386,  387, 
396,  404,  408,  427,  433,  435,  441, 
457,  479,  480,  485,  494,  497,  502, 
505,  508,  510,  513,  523,  543,  545, 
547. 
Ferry,  229,  240,  276,  295,  328,  337. 
Habitation,   272,  445,   504. 
Patent  to,  566. 
Paths,   99,   241,   246,   303,   342,   345, 

369,  394,  409,  417,  490,  567. 
Point,  280,  415. 
Snares:   76,   108. 

Springs,l6, 131,159,167,212,457,481. 
Stone,  37,  50,  63,  333. 
Thicketts,  8,  9,  12,  19,  115. 
Towes,    26,    27,    77,    105,    153,    173, 
181,  244,  279,  289,  298,  324,  373, 
381,  384,  398,  400,  404,  415,  428, 
457,  462,  490. 
Ingam,  Peter  300. 
Ingan,  Eliz.  338,  Tho.  338. 
Ingerbanke,  Batt.   368. 
Ingersell,  Robt.  508. 
Inges,  Michael  253,  257. 
Inghram,  Sarah  263. 
Ingland,  Jesse  261. 
Ingle,  Jane  458. 
Ingleston,  Edw.  40. 
Ingleton,    Ann    216,    Edward    109,    508, 

Jacob  164,  Jno.  396. 
Ingobrickson,   Barth.   513. 
Ingoll,  Danl.  349. 

Ingram,  John  175,  214,   276,  400,  442, 
443,  Joseph  267,  Rich.  141,  280,  328, 
Stephen  463,  Toby  282. 
Ingrame,  John  159,  333. 
Ingrum,  John  337. 
Inkersell,  Sarah  508. 
Inkins,  Sam.  427. 
Inman,  Hugh  194. 


General  Index 


669 


Innervald,  Tho.  273. 

Ipley,  Tho.  483. 

Ire,  Wm.  354. 

Ireland,   Euz.    352,    356,   John   92,    123, 

Jon.    146,    Martha    92,    Mathew    92, 

Wm.   133. 
Iriby,  Jno.  459. 

Irish,Jno.431,Margarett356,Maudlin507. 
Irishmen,  543. 
Irish  servants,  385. 
Irnest,  Richard  10. 
Iron,  Jno.  479,  Symon,  244. 
Iron,  Mine  an  291. 
Iron  Mine  mill  meadow,  389. 
Ironmonger,   Eliza.   211,    278,   Fra.   211, 

278,   477,  Wm.   211,    278,   435,   437, 

514,  561. 
Irons,  Symon  490,  510. 
Isaac,  Christ.  148. 
Isam,  Arthur  508,  Roger  454. 
Isar,  Timothy  513. 
Isbell,  Jno.  532. 

Isham,  Roger  183,  335,  404,  453. 
Island,  Richard  402,  Susan  542. 

ISLANDS: 

103,  154,  373,  433,  463,  494,  (un- 
named ) . 

Anacosta,  351,  388,  Butchers  121, 
466,  Bennetts  Park  301,  Burrowes 
180,    Cedall    115,   Cedar   8,    17,    119, 

142,  149,  159,  250,  322,  402,  416, 
Colston  8,  13,  159,  533,  Coxes  227, 
400,  Coxendale  11,  Craney  179,  244, 
402,  Crane  Poynt  22,  Doegs  218, 
255,  299,  301,  350,  352,  362,  363, 
1371,  405,  411,  442,  474,  490,  531, 
Dumpling  42,  51,  74,  174,  Flea  255, 
411,  Gabriells  261,  419,  Goates  265, 
281,  457,  the  Great  423,  Gwins  263, 
Gwynns  417,  Henericus  11,  Henrico 
80,  Heme  388,  Hogg  3,  20,  40,  109, 

143,  156,  166,  168,  183,  187,  197, 
302,  341,  342,  518,  Home  432,  House 
451,  James  16,  57,  68,  81,  97,  98, 
105,  123,  124,  143,  160,  169,  241, 
338,  James  City  3,  8,  10,  12,  13,  56, 
97,  109,  118,  145,  151,  231,  270, 
347,  356,  388,  503,  James  Towne  31, 
83,  Kennedyes  83,  Lawsons  394,  495, 
Lewis  379,  Long  Pond  74,  Lord  78, 
,Merry  Bayle  368,  Miompses,  253, 
442,  Mockon  344,  Morgans  101,  205, 
Myampses  405,  Mulberry  14,  30,  123, 
149,  406,  Mussell  358,  Oaken  250, 
Papacoone  336,  Point  Comfort  10,  11, 
13,  18,  90,  Phillips  256,  457,  541,  Ra- 


coune  568,  Ragged  24,  111,  135,  139, 
156,  Raming  155,  Rich  156,  Ritch 
83,  Round  287,  Sandy  134,  Sedar 
219,  Smiths  43,  54,  55,  80,  134,  225, 
344,  Sumer  3,  4,  Turkie  120,  War- 
rannucock  187,  190. 

Islea,  Henry  259. 

Isles,  Thomas   108. 

Isom,  Margaret  336. 

Ison,  Edw.  131,  444,  556,  559,  Nicholas 
89. 

Issabell,  Isham  260,  Sandie  309. 

Issall,  Timothy  336. 

Isum,  Math.  144. 

Ivell,  John  79. 

Ivery,  Edmd.  562,  563,  Wm.  561. 

Ives,  525,  Johanna  508,  Margaret  332, 
Robert  144,  Timothy  332,  Wm.  399. 

Iveson,  Abr.  50,  208,  217,  328,  403, 
Ann  289,  Edwd.  566. 

Ivesson,  Abraham  548. 

Ivey,  Robt.  492. 

Ivory  Ed.  564,  Geo.  244. 

Ivy,  Wm.  449. 

J 

Jache,  Wm.  388. 

Jack,  Wm.  260,  296. 

Jacke,  Black  355. 

Jackgive,  John  121. 

Jackman,  Antho.  191,  194,  195,  237, 
391,  432,  438,  441,  477,  Phill.  455, 
Saml.  431,  Wm.  258. 

Jacksall,  Rich.   326. 

Jackson,  Ann  170,  233,  238,  Antho. 
199,  314,  548,  557,  Eliza.  138,  316, 
533,  Ellinor  483,  Francis  348,  Hen. 
43,  134,  158,  Jane  152,  260,  Jarves 
285,  Jonah  152,  429,  Jonas  217,  306, 
412,  Josiah  391,  John  27,  65,  97, 
114,  124,  125,  146,  181,  191,  199, 
263,  301,  327,  342,  384,  401,  438, 
457,  458,  524,  548,  556,  Jon.  236, 
Laur.  49,  88,  Martha  380,  Mary  108, 
111,  303,  391,  466,  Nicho.  348,  388, 
Patriack  129,  534,  544,  Peeter  323, 
Petronella  353,  Phillip  217,  Ralph 
265,  Randall  63,  351,  Rebecca  496, 
Rich.  25,  34,  69,  125,  128,  147,  150, 
166,  241,  243,  261,  285,  484,  Robert 
43,  71,  152,  252,  350,  Saml.  115, 
125,  142,  291,  301,  405,  440,  482, 
Sarah  378,  554,  Tho.  30,  181,  195, 
244,  339,  422,  500,  536,  548,  Timo- 
thy 517,  Ursula  307,  Walter  144, 
Wm.  35,  100,  142,  160,  171,  275, 
328,  335,  380,  401v  475,  531,  532,  543. 


670 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Jacob,  Andrew  32,  103,  Fra.  250,  Lawr. 
406,  Martha  130,  Marv  546,  Richd. 
139,  164,  170,  203,  233,  294,  520, 
Susan  297,  492,  559,  Wm.  46,  58, 
141,  148,  149,  164,  168,  259,  371, 
415. 

Jacobs,  Richd.  233,  286,  330,  414,  415, 
482,  Wm.  297,  415,  449,  484. 

Jacobs  Well  14,  19,  101,  242,  493,  495. 

Jacobson,  Jacob  200,  James  217. 

Jacobus,  Angelo  475,  525,  528. 

Jadwinn,  Jeremy  381,  John  383,  411, 
422,  439,  Jonathan  381,  Robt.  381, 
420,  Sisly  381. 

Jaggins,  Robert  356. 

Jakes,  John  264. 

Jakues,  John  264. 

James,  Andrew  208,  561,  Ann  197,  307, 
393,  514,  Antho.  167,  463,  Bryan 
263,  Christo.  450,  Daniel  334,  545, 
David  276,  Edw.  192,  206,  268, 
397,  403,  466,  524,  525,  564,  565, 
566,  Eliz.  292,  355,  359,  454,  508, 
Francis  180,  253,  404,  Geo.  275, 
Henry  181,  369,  Hugh  31,  84,  Jon. 
36,  80,  John  113,  207,  208,  265,  275, 
297,  300,  378,  400,  414,  482,  512, 
524,  525,  536,  541,  546,  554,  558, 
559,  564,  565,  Lucretia  196,  Margtt. 
559,  Mary  70,  267,  351,  376,  404, 
480,  551,  Michael  156,  Mr  .207,  338, 
364,  394,  Patr.  266,  Peter  559,  Renoll 
304,  Rice  483,  Richard  48,  56,  72, 
119,  194,  248,  272,  292,  304,  314, 
340,  356,  362,  428,  442,  Robt.  42, 
80,  133,  148,  Susan  562,  568,  Tho. 
113,  403,  525,  Vernitt  286,  Walter 
236,  Watkin  265,  431,  Wm.  50,  132, 
192,  202,  219,  251,  272,  292,  297, 
304,  313,  385,  486,  563,  566,  Wini- 
fred 349. 

Jamson,  Richd.  352. 

Jancy,  Jno.  561. 

Jannaway,  Susanna  108. 

Janson,  Peter  427,  428. 

Jarnew,  Mr.  122,  550,  Nicholas  85,  92, 
122,  235,  236,  432,  474,  532. 

Jarnew's  Journey  85. 

Jarney,  Mr.  421. 

Jarman,  Henry  384,  526,  Jno.  423. 

Jarratt,  Robt.  475. 

Jarre,  John  131. 

Jarrell,  Thomas  367,  Richd.  231. 

Jarrett,  John  131,  290,  469,  Ralph  180, 
231,  Robt.  429,  Wm.  130. 

Jarsey,  Nicho.  342. 

Jarvis,  Ed.  553,  Francis  53,  Sarah  255, 


Tho.  208,  272,  396,  492,  Wm.  398, 

469,  470,  513,  520. 
Jason,  Abell  393,  426,  444,  468. 
Jasper,  John  129. 
Jax,  Eliz.  59. 

Jaxon,  2. 

Jayes,  Joane  433,  Joyce  433. 

Jea,  Joseph  449. 

Jeakin,  Ann  428. 

Jeakins,  Alice  367. 

Jealy,  Avis  281. 

Jeames,  Jno.  459. 

Jeckleston,  Hum.  290. 

Jede,  John  188. 

Jeeves,  John  293. 

Jefferies,  Jobe  70,  Tho.  45,  66. 

Jeffers,  Hugh  324,  352,  John  122,  Saml. 

349,  Tho.   135. 
Jefferson,  Alice  178,  James  93,  John  4, 

25,    67,    168,    178,,   Mary   229,   Robt. 

116,  Wm.  190. 
JefTery,  Saml.  151. 
Jefferyes,    John    445,    Mary    209,    Tho. 

106,  135. 
Jefferys,   Fran.   217,   Hen.    50,  Job.    51, 

112,  John  113,  284,  Wm.  253,  264. 
Jeffreys,  Arthur  249,  Ann  313. 
Jeffries,  Tho.  427.      : 
Jeffry,  Alice  426. 
Jeffs,  Francis  403. 
Jeffurd,  Martha  525,  Mar.  563. 
Jeggins,  Ann  33. 
J  ego,  Richard  22. 
Jelfe,  Edwd.  290. 
Jellett,  Snalter  (or  Walter)   102. 
Jelly,  James  557,  Tho.  333. 
Jemer,  Eliz.  428. 
Jemmison,  Alexander  358. 
Jemons,  Peter  203. 
Jenckin,  Jno.  345. 
Jenckinson,  Robt.  341. 
Jeneck,  Edmond  353. 
Jenerie,  Rich.  22. 
Jenerles,  Jno.   180. 
Jenman,  Abra.  373,  449,  Jacob  470. 
Jening,  Wm.  34. 
Jenings,    Edw.    145,    442,    488,    Ellinor 

493,  Henrv  381,   388,  John  72,   150, 

334,  386,  406,  480,  Jon.  83,  104,  Mr. 

428,  Peter  405,  Richard  50,  86,  215, 

Thomas  50,  430,  William  326. 
Jenison,  Antho.  293,  Wm.  293. 
Jenken,  Jno.  453. 
Jenkenson,  Fra.  293. 
Jenker,  Robt.   201. 
Jenkin,  Ann  428,  David  141,  280,  383, 


General  Index 


671 


Geo.  428,  John  119,  171,  255,  256, 
303,  Thomas  99. 

Jenkins,  Alexr.  526,  Alice  134,  And. 
556,  Ann  388,  Charity  338,  Danll. 
153,  Edw.  118,  556,  Edmond  545, 
Eliz.  292,  514,  Fra.  253,  George  526, 
Ja.  270,  James  456,  John  43,  74,  280, 
287,  299,  322,  331,  392,  406,  407, 
413,  450,  490,  558,  Jone  544,  Jon. 
72,  Katherine  149,  Nich.  388,  Ri. 
558,  Robt.  266,  Sabina  149,  Samll. 
524,  Sibella  172,  Tho.  82,  136,  339, 
367,  448,  Wm.  142,  248,  313,  348. 

Jenkinson,  Fred.  241,  Richd.  77,  217. 

Jenkle,  Tho.  453. 

Jenks,  Wm.  326. 

Jenney,  Richard  109. 

Jennings,  Capt.  541,  Ed.  516,  John  179, 
335,  345,  431,  458,  485,  511,  563, 
Jon.  33,  Mary  480,  Mathew  133,  Mr. 
427,  Nath.  144,  Peter  372,  392,  411, 
Richard  39,  236,  241,  Symon  148, 
Tho.  87,  430,  Wm.  356,  427. 

Jennis,  Edw.  119. 

Jennison,  Alexr.  358. 

Jenny,  John  376,  500. 

Jenuer,  Eliz.  427. 

Jent,  Tho.  87,  Wm.  422. 

Jeremie,  Wm.  434. 

Jereman,  Abra.  449, David  162. 

Jermin,  Robert  338. 

Jernew,  Francis  199,  Mr.  174,  187,  350, 
364,  380,  509,  Nicholas  85,  166,  169, 
182,  184,  190,  199,  206,  210,  220, 
257,  260,  295,  362,  398,  409,  411, 
424,  456,  487. 

Jerrell,  John  295. 

Jerrey,  Glannell  328. 

Jervis,  Tho.  132,  259. 

Jess,  Mary  363. 

Jessurd,  Martha  535. 

Jewell,  Robt.  78. 

Jewett,  Fra.  284. 

Jewitt,  Olliver  348. 

Jills,  Jeffery  200. 

Jinkins,  Robert  390. 

Joane,  Tymothy  31. 

Joanes,  Ann  427,  David  86,  148,  Eliz. 
63,  Farmer  356,  James  286,  John 
203,  255,  283,  284,  285,  Leonard 
361,  Madg.  284,  Marv  338,  363,  430, 
Mrs.  467,  Richd.  332,  Robt.  366,  Roger 
285,  Thomas  130,  365,  426,  Wm.  57. 

Jobb,  Joane  57. 

Jobson,  Jno.  449. 

John,  Donio  328,  Geo.  513,  Hills  178, 
James  43,  Tho.  213. 


Johannes,  Evan  389. 

Johnes,  John  94,  Wm.  93. 

Johns,  Jacob  164,  James  448,  Mary  278, 
Richard  327,  Roger  164,  216,  286, 
357,  412,  Robert  96. 

Johnsey,  Steph.  427. 

Johnsie,  John  494. 

Johnson,  Abra.  166,  375,  Adolph  349, 
Alice  42,  91,  126,  Angle  186,  Ann 
289,  296,  Antho.  195,  216,  260,  296, 
299,  338,  413,  419,  525,  532,  Barnaby 
322,  Benjamin  314,  Choyce  36,  80, 
Christo.  164,  Cornelius  293,  Danl. 
167,  281,  317,  David  195,  Dennis 
293,  Der.  293,  294,  389,  Diana  351, 
Edward  11,  108,  146,  359,  375,  557, 
Ellinor  455,  Elizabeth  28,  42,  91, 
112,  244,  264,  291,  301,  310,  322, 
330,  353,  375,  410,  Evan  28,  Francis 
112,  228,  Gab.  332,  Georg  53,  77, 
304,  337,  390,  394,  Gerrard  394, 
Gilbert  285,  Goodman  461,  Grace  23, 
66,  Hen.  23,  28,  66,  134,  254,  548, 
Israeli  40,  68,  264,  475,  476,  297, 
543,  Jacob  345,  404,  James  101,  203, 
207,  241,  253,  256,  278,  284,  292, 
316,  342,  358,  373,  390,  392,  426, 
449,  468,  475,  476,  526,  541,  558, 
Jane  257,  John  4,  8,  17,  30,  54,  59, 
83,  92,  104,  116,  118,  121,  152,  177, 
187,  188,  192,  196,  205,  212,  216, 
241,  260,  282,  296,  309,  313,  316, 
327,  338,  353,  354,  356,  357,  378, 
383,  389,  390,  398,  409,  413,  415, 
444,  449,  472,  483,  495,  508,  512, 
524,  526,  532,  537,  554,  558,  559, 
561,562,  563,  564,  566,  Jon.  35,  104, 
134,  142,  565,  Joseph  28,  56,  137, 
183,  232,  429,  456,  Margt.  384,  485, 
553,  Marke  115,  157,  278,  Martin 
367,  530,  557,  568,  Mary  25,  69,  99, 
134,  260,  291,  345,  387,  405,  457, 
546,  Mr.  158,  432,  Nicholas  403, 
Obedience  413,  535,  Peter  41,  103, 
128,  236,  282,  379,  547,  558,  Richd. 
22,  26,  60,  95,  112,  113,  216,  262, 
296,  305,  312,  314,  321,  350,  414, 
452,  509,  532,  Robt.  23,  291,  324, 
546,  553,  554,  Saml.  225,  441,  487, 
523,  Sarah  388,  506,  532,  Robt.  23, 
291,  324,  546,  553,  554,  Saml.  225, 
441,  487,  523,  Sarah  388,  506,  Sence 
429,  Stephen  160,  309,  488,  Susan 
428,  Svmon  367,  Thomas  22,  29,  35, 
94,  100,  163,  164,  169,  171,  189, 
264,  277,  329,  384,  394,  404,  413, 
418,   464,    513,    535,    546,    568,    569, 


672 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Tymothy  116,  523,  Wm.  53,  74,  83, 
93,  120,  121,  132,  148,  152,  167, 
177,  227,  233,  234,  237,  242,  248, 
255,  281,  285,  296,  303,  309,  310, 
325,  334,  366,  381,  398,  400,  404, 
443,  444  ,447,  457,  463,  480,  506, 
559,  Walter  83,  104,  127,  294, 
Xpian.   199,  314. 

Joice,  Hen.  352,  John  66,  Peter  239. 

Joiner,  Marv  286. 

Joines,  John  94,  Thomas  370. 

Jolis,  David  558. 

Joll,  Tho.  367. 

Joliffe,  John   237. 

Jolliffe  John  243,  401,  Tho.  525. 

Jollity,  Tho.  388. 

Jolly,  Fra.  177,  Jam.  228,  James  351, 
425,  557,  Jane  443,  John  66,  111, 
514,  Jon.  45,  140,  238,  Joseph  26, 
49,  69,  78,  144,  Licha  177,  Margery 
49,  69,  Tho.  133,  161,  228,  Wm. 
338,  492. 

Jonas,  Tho.  322. 

Jones,  Abra.  268,  345,  Alice  43,  110, 
204,  Amy  308,  Andrew  401,  402, 
527,  528,  536,  537,  540,  544,  545, 
549,  554,  556,  Ann  67,  173,  297, 
306,  328,  365,  382,  392,  444,  523, 
527,  530,  536,  554,  559,  562,  Anthony 
27,  51,  143,  158,  275,  329,  381,  478, 
509,  530,  543,  548,  550,  556,  Arthur 
524,  Ben.  291,  393,  405,  Ch.  479, 
Charles  69,  Chri.  60,  270,  272,  Daniell 
446,  509,  David  25,  32,  37,  63,  110, 
167,  220,  292,  316,  323,  342,  345, 
366,  429,  484,  490,  535,  542,  548, 
566,  Dorathy  359,  Dorcas  388,  Ed. 
565,  Edmond  246,  Edward  22,  45,  65, 
117,  229,  289,  358,  399,  510,  517, 
554,  557,  558,  559,  563,  566,  Elias 
30,  Elinor  198,  Eliz.  10,  90,  123, 
127,  316,  370,  385,  386,  424,  427, 
473,  481,  515,  Emll.  510,  Evan  108, 
140,  279,  425,  453,  525,  559,  Farmer 
110,  307,  353,  Foulke  139,  Flor.  218, 
Fra.  233,  252,  352,  395,  404,  418, 
472,  474,  525,  Gabriell  381,  480, 
Geo.  510,  557,  568,  Gilbert  513, 
Giles  10,  12,  90,  175,  Goodman  402, 
Griffith  342,  Hamon  115,  Hannah 
103,  Henry  90,  114,  133,  166,  218, 
220,  313,  319,  277,  382,  397,  433, 
Hersy  502,  Hester  156,  Honour  201, 
Howell  133,  446,  Hugh  35,  57,  59, 
78,  181,  236,  249,  349,  Humphry  40, 
68,  201,  359,  437,  Isaac  153,  172, 
214,  Jaco  391,  James   129,   144,   171, 


233,  295,  343,  380,  389,  394,  400, 
409,  412,  413,  448,  461,  504,  Jane 
493,    Jenkin    394,    446,    453,    Joane 

195,  464,  John  96,  114,  120,  132, 
133,  171,  173,  252,  286,  292,  295, 
312,  338,  348,  393,  396,  397,  425, 
441,  444,  449,  450,  454,  455,  458, 
460,  468,  482,  485,  530,  535,  546, 
548,  549,  555,  556,  557,  558,  559, 
561,  562,  565,  Jon.  35,  54,  93,  100, 
133,  150,  236,  242,  Judeth  473, 
Kath.  115,  196,  341,  430,  436,  477, 
Leon.  190,  Leonard  392,  441,  443, 
505,  514,  Lewis  45,  65,  Mabell  370, 
Mabill  291,  Magdalin  458,  Manell 
395,  Mara.  455,  Marg.  199,  201, 
Margarett  315,  394,  453,  473,  524, 
■527,  530,  551,  554,  555,  556,  559, 
Martha  548,  Martyn  430,  Mary  201, 
261,,  268,  286,  305,  351,  389,  400, 
401,  402,  412,  426,  441,  442,  462, 
463,  467,  475,  481,  500,  509,  510, 
517,  520,  526,  527,  528,  530,  537, 
541,  544,  546,  548,  549,  553,  554, 
555,  556,  559,  562,  564,  Maudlin 
65,  313,  444,  481,  Maurice  394, 
Mavell  395,  May  480,  Michael  448, 
485,  Morgan  117,  186,  194,  266, 
332,  460,  517,  523,  534,  Morian  167, 
Morris  64,  Murell  328,  Mr.  243, 
438,  475,  542,  Mrs.  200,  279,  Nathan 
554,  Nath.  315,  322,  325,  449,  486, 
490,  Nathl.  207,  373,  474,  Nicho. 
141,  325,  460,  Norton  527,  Owen 
118,  Peter  386,  Phillip  127,  530, 
Rachell    544,   Rey  248,   Reynold    135, 

137,  Rice  10,  11,  81,  191,  199,  213, 
279,  372,  376,  382,  383,  391,  410, 
438,  448,  477,  480,  487,  510,  Rich. 
25,  32,  33,  69,  72,  82,  101,  103,  162, 
179,  189,  190,  194,  202,  210,  214, 
216,    217,    225,    234,    24-1,    246,    257, 

267,  269,  284,  289,  292,  315,  316, 
318,  332,  345,  360,  378,  385,  424, 
445,  456,  474,  480,  481,  493,  497, 
509,  516,  562,  Robt.  61,  160,  295, 
322,  350,  357,  367,  370,  373,  383, 
388,  435,  447,  448,  480,  501,  520,  525, 
543,  Roger  233,  312,  4l4,  450,  517, 
Rowland    250,    Samuell    64,    99,    181, 

268,  378,    492,    552,    Sarah    49,    69, 

196,  307,  483,  484,  486,  Silvester 
248,  Stephen  203,  Susan  256,  396, 
400,  555,  556,  Theo.  194,  Tho.  23, 
25,  27,  33,  49,  66,  68,  93,  131,  133, 

138,  177,  183,  206,  218,  262,  270, 
297,    304,    313,    327,    331,    342,    348, 


General  Index 


673 


359,  369,  370,  377,  378,  385,  391, 
398,  420,  427,  432,  438,  440,  450, 
454,   456,   458,   462,   482,   486,   496, 

506,  513,  557,  567,  Tymothy  358, 
393,  Vincent  248,  Walter  108,  138, 
401,  554,  Wm.  3,  7,  33,  67,  80,  82, 
101,  120,  122,  123,  131,  135,  136, 
146,  157,  172,  175,  181,  184,  190, 
207,  208,  210,  211,  213,  214,  242, 
249,  253,  256,  257,  267,  272,  275, 
279,  294,  304,  326,  330,  335,  345, 
358,  392,  394,  397,  401,  403,  412, 
414,  419,  423,  427,  438,  444,  455, 
464,  466,  468,  475,  482,  483,  484, 
492,  493,  497,  499,  502,  506,  514, 
530,  532,  543,  544,  546,  559,  560, 
565,  Wilmott  282,  Winifrid  166, 
Yarmer  200. 

Jonley,  Tho.  394. 

Jopson,  Jno.  509. 

Jordain,  Eliz.  216. 

Jordaine,  Jacob  187,  Marg.  205. 

Jordaines,  Eliza.  205. 

Jordan,  Alex.  520,  Ann  331,  472,  513, 
Anth.  32,  Arthur  244,  Capt.  326,  334, 
335,  386,  Cecily  226,  Col.  457, 
Danll.  513,  Dorothy  296,  452,  Edwd. 
231,  Francis  276,  Georg  61,  133, 
Hen.  236,  459,  John  26,  512,  Mr. 
297,  Nath.  451,Nich.  31,  513,  Patrick 
307,    Robt.    513,    Samuell    68,    226, 

507,  Thomas  25,  27,  31,  39,  42,  52, 
!59,  76,  91,  145,  162,  163,  173,  329, 
518,  520,  Wm.  296,  357,  389,  412, 
413,  452,  499,  562. 

Jordan's  93,  130. 

Jordan's  Journey  21. 

Jorden,  Abbigall  176,  Ann  294,  Francis 
326,  Saml.  130,  Thomas  39,  63,  76, 
127,  156,  William  357. 

Jordin,  Anne  286,  Saml.  157. 

Jornew,  Nicholas  532. 

Jornian,  Nicho.   134. 

Jorniau,  Nicho.   134. 

Jory,  Edw.  442. 

Joseph,  Evan  115. 

Joules,  Tho.  260. 

Jouley,  Tho.  394. 

Jourdan,  Samuel  226. 

Joy,  Antho.  559,  Asher  31,  Geo.  454, 
Mary  369,  Richard  330,  369,  386, 
401,  Tho.   260,  453,   552,  Wm.   260. 

Joyce,  Abraham  257,  Alex.  455,  Crowder 
113,  Gyles  304,  John  27,  80,  198, 
Jon.  24,  31,  84,  Mart  201,  Mary  263, 
Richard  528,  Robert  75,  Wm.  525. 

Joyes,  Abraham  364. 


Joyner,  Ambrose  83,  Andrew  527, 
Edmond  329,  Edw.  451,  James  335, 
Mary  261,  298,  305,  325,  Raphaell 
107,  124,  126,  295,  Tho.  167,  399, 
448,   458,   475,   482,  Wm.   391,   540. 

Joyner,  a  13. 

Jouarnold,  Tho.   181. 

Juce,  John  266,  Wm.  521. 

Juche,  Oliver  102. 

Judd,  Christ.  138,  Eliz.  138,  Harbert 
214,  Herbert  231. 

Jude,  Peter  568. 

Judson,  John  75,  114,  117,  174,  178, 
344. 

Jue,  Elias  86. 

Juell,  Tho.  454. 

Juett,  Francis  252. 

Jugam,  Peter  300. 

Julian,  Wm.  5,  48,  68,  130,  275. 

Jumper,  Tho.  362. 

Junior,  Wm.  125. 

Juory,  Geo.  244. 

Jurden,  Tho.  173. 

Jurne,  James  300. 

Jury,  Easter  373,  Eliz.  298,  Wm.   190. 

Just,  Robert  300,  Tho.  444. 

Justice,  William  329,  566,  567. 

Justion,  Charles   180. 

Juston,  Tho.  199. 

Jux,  Eliz.  59. 

Juxon,  Alice  355. 

Jyllings,  Geo.  258. 

K 
Kaas,  Robert  314. 
Kaddle,  Richd.  283. 
Kadlin,  Kat.  427. 
Kadon,  John  20. 
Kaemo  of  Camena,  57. 
Kahan,  Phillip  307. 
Kaiton,  James  247. 
Kale,  Margt.  462. 
Kalin,  Kath.  451. 
Kallaway,  Kath.  140. 
Kamp,  Tho.  341. 
Kannaday,  Patrick  118,  119. 
Karp,  Mary  427. 
Kasey,  Hester  101. 
Kason,  Tho.  500. 
Kate,  James  144. 
Katherine,  John  119. 
Katon,  James  277. 
Kayne,  Wm.  294. 
Kayupp,  Kath.   148. 
Keach,  Christ.  148. 
Keane,  Tho.  33. 
Keateley,  Andrew  348. 


674 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Keath,  Christ.  148. 

Keator,  Tho.  197. 

Kebble,  Peter  524. 

Kecotanke,  482. 

Kedate,  John  204. 

Kedbey,  Tho.  122. 

Kedby,  Tho.  212,  316,  324,  325,  337, 
382,  409,  461. 

Kedd,  Wm.  304. 

Keeble,  Toby  559. 

Keeding,  Ann  112. 

Keelding,  Tho.   174. 

Keele,  Thomas  426,  427,  428,  Xpher. 
313. 

Keelin,  Sarah  93. 

Keeling,  Adam  528,  Jno.  528,  Thomas 
22,  34,  124,  151,  174,  220,  288. 

Keely,  Elias  78,  Har.  559,  Thomas  426. 

Keene,  Abraham  62,  John  433,  Mary 
251,  Susan  256,  Tho.  245,  251,  495, 
Wm.  251. 

Keeting,  Adam  528,  Jno.  528. 

Kegg,  Edie  472. 

Kegs,  Sarah  316. 

Keggs,  Sarah  363. 

Keible,  Geo.  466,  467,  488,  555,  557. 

Keibler,  Marmaduk  367. 

Keile,  Thomas  543. 

Keiton,  Tho.  404. 

Kelbye,  Jno.  485. 

Kelderkin,  Henry  528. 

Kelderman,  Harman  560. 

Keling,  An  530. 

Kellam,  Richd.  233,  296,  412,  413. 

Kellester,  Dungue  197. 

Kellin,  David  291. 

Kellum,  Jno.  454,  Peter  554,  Richard 
183,  217,  406,  419,  425,  454,  551, 
Wm.  557. 

Kelly,  Abraham  152,  Alice  221,  232, 
Bryan  43,  101,  Danll.  451,  Darby 
371,  Eliz.  256,  Henry  316,  Jno.  548, 
Owen  343,  Patrick,  464,  Tho.  273. 

Kelman,  Geo.  198,  Jno.  197. 

Kelridge,  William  54. 

Kelson,  An  547,  Jno.  547,  Richd.  471. 

Kelway,  Tho.  314. 

Kely,  Tho.  541. 

Kembell,  Tho.  134. 

Kemerley,  Dor.  266. 

Kemp,  Barnabe  520,  Edmd.  180,  200, 
256,  416,  Edward  398,  Ed.  441,  Eliza- 
beth 392,  417,  Evans  60,  Geo.  239, 
415,  James  185,  John  271,  441,  460, 
523,  Mary  499,  549,  Mathew  405, 
411,  416,  541,  Mr.  405,  Rich.  27, 
28,  31,  45,  67,  75,  87,  95,  104,  105, 


110,  143,  154,  157,  160,  182,  204, 
212,  219,  222,  384,  437,  448,  Secre- 
tary 151,  159,  162,  406,  486,  Thomas 
101,  142,  243,  Wm.  274. 

Kempe,  Edmond  337,  Geo.  284,  328, 
355,  John  115,  374,  Kath.  281,  Mary 
284,  Robert  334,  363,  Wm.  23. 

Kempton,  Wm.  250. 

Ken,  Edwd.  232,  Hen.  232,  Richd.  232. 

Kendal,  Wm.  236. 

Kendall,  Cha.  236,  Herbert  455,  John 
87,  192,  273,  552,  Lt.  Col.  507,  Mr. 
419,  Mary  236,  267,  434,  Robt.  45, 
Tho.  245,  441,  Wm.  284,  321,  410, 
434,  435,  482,  532,  533,  551,  553. 

Kendrick,  Edwd.  153. 

Kene,  Owen  433. 

Kened,  Jno.  516. 

Keneis,  William  316. 

Kenin,  Robt.  143. 

Keniston,  Rich.  311. 

Kenland,  Darby  433. 

Kenler,  Roger  375. 

Kenede,  Patrick  55. 

Kennedye,  Patrick  55. 

Kenned ey,  Patrick  78. 

Kennell,  Hareo  328. 

Kennersbye,  Phillip  99. 

Kennersly,  Phillipp  25,  69. 

Kennett,  Martin  118,  Peter  308. 

Kenney,  James  136,  Roger  88. 

Kennicke,  Hugh  336. 

Kennings,  Xtopher.  452. 

Kennon,  Geo.  120,  John  120. 

Kenny,  fcdm.  306,  Edw.  309,  Horly 
328,  Richard  78. 

Kenscott,  Rich.  29. 

Kensick,  Edw.  255. 

Kenston,  Anth.  411. 

Kent,  Eliz.  312,  Hen.  426,  James  229, 
396,  John  292,  333,  357,  423,  460, 
519,  Joseph  335,  Nicho.  248,  Rich. 
349,  390,  ,Robt.  116^366,  Thomas  552. 

Kenter,  Roger  375. 

Kequotan,   175. 

Kerby,  Joseph  363,  Richd.  214,  Robert 
355,  Symon  536,  Tho.  136,  198,  517. 

Kerfoote,  Eliz.  73. 

Kerle,  Joane  260. 

Kerne,  Jon.  32. 

Kerny,  David  280. 

Kerton,  John  257. 

Kesh,  John  192. 

Ketchin,  Nicho.  207. 

Keth,  Barbara  202,  Barbery  254,  Georg 
29,  100,  148,  149,  164,  269,  371, 
415,  John  30,  Marg.  202,  Martha  30. 


General  Index 


675 


Ketle,  Tho.  26. 

Kett,  Wm.  526. 

Ketthin,  Nicholas   207. 

Kettle,  Hugh  562. 

Kew,  Dorothy  326. 

Key,  Adam  120,  An  548,  Kath.  184 
Martha  10,  Peter  276,  548,  Richard 
58,  Robt.  199,  Sarah  190,  Thomas 
10,  179,  183,  Walter  403,  Wm.  198. 

Keye,  John  294,  Tho.  130. 

Keyes,  Daniell  85,  Richard  370,  Tho. 
103,  123,  Walter  191. 

Keys,  Tho.  231. 

Keytin,  Nicho.  113. 

Kibble,  George  318,  Thomas  369. 

Kibe,  Wm.  524. 

Kible,  George  313,  Joane  248,  Richd. 
116. 

Kiccoughtan,  a  place  called  2,  4,  5,  6, 
7,  19,  175. 

Kichley,  Tho.  133. 

Kicke,  Wm.  146. 

Kicker  ley,  Jacob  347. 

Kickett,  Christ.  136. 

Kid,  Wm.  423. 

Kidby,  Tho.  192,  235,  292,  376. 

Kidd,  Tho.  178,  242,  253,  357,  384, 
433. 

Kiddington,  James  388. 

Kiffe,  Morris  328. 

Kiffin,  David  47,  56,  346,  348,  390, 
395,  419. 

Kigan,  Kath.  129. 

Kiggan,  Char.  216. 

Kiggens,  Chas.  254. 

Kiggs,  Robert  371. 

Kilbourne,  Rich.  382. 

Kilbye,  Henry  78. 

Killagrew,  Fra.  484  . 

Killicke,  Jane  175. 

Killingell,  Mary  348. 

Killman,  George  392,  472,  420,  Jno. 
392,  420,  472,  Wm.  392. 

Killman's  Devident  511. 

Kilman,  John  368. 

Kilving,  Jno.  524. 

Kimberlin,  Jon.  140. 

Kimrose,  Alex.  231. 

Kinastone,  Edward  435. 

Kincott,  Richard  76. 

Kinder,  Francis  356,  Thomas  356. 

Kine,  James  414,  Mary  454. 

Kinford,  Nicho.  128. 

King,  Alex.  299,  Alice  29,  126,  444, 
Ann  140,  190,  345,  424,  Chas.  200, 
510,  559,  Edw.  190,  411,  436,  441, 
Eliz.    24,    69,    131,    166,    411,    562, 


Hanah  488,  Henry  24,  164,  251,  299, 
309,  James  157,  534,  Jon.  74,  79, 
John  140,  144,  148,  154,  164,  166, 
175,  186,  196,  211,  214,  221,  261, 
272,  283,  299,  305,  315,  325,  337, 
399,  423,  437,  449,  457,  509,  520, 
550,  562,  Kath.  141,  235,  Mary  207, 
217,  499,  Mathew  144,  Mathias  129, 
Richard  194,  196,  253,  273,  380,  425, 

457,  488,  493,  526,  537,  Robert  61, 
183,  285,  286,  307,  395,  407,  419, 
429,  488,  518,  Sarah  169,  446, 
Thomas  425,  432,  Walter  191,  Wm. 
133,  453,  517. 

Kings,  James  1,  of  Eastern  Shore  30, 
Chiskyacke  220,  239,  Potomack  434. 

Kinge,  Alice  391,  Anne  250,  355, 
Arthur  358,  Charles  354,  Edward 
364,  Fra.  276,  Giles  355,  Henry  382, 
James  369,  Jane  362,  John  380, 
Oliver  372,  Robt.  273,  Tho.  391, 
Wm.   336. 

Kingington,  Ann  443. 

Kingle,  Pable  236. 

Kingman,  Leo.  207. 

Kingsbury,  Jon.  134,  Robt.  132. 

Kingsland,  Nathan  179. 

Kingsland,  place  called  36,  82,  87,  97, 
99,  471,  549. 

Kingsley,  Wm.  133  . 

Kingsmell,  Elizabeth  97,  125,  Richard 
109,  536. 

Kingsmill,  Elizabeth  97,  Richard  394. 

Kingston,  John  78,  Tho.  452. 

Kingstone,  Ann  442,  An.  557,  Tho.  30. 

Kingswell,  Antho.  171,  Edw.  171,  Tho. 
132. 

Kinkee,  Kath.  276. 

Kinnygam,  James  381. 

Kinse,  Abigail  123,  Barthol.  249,  Edw. 
123,  Elianor  123,  Eliz.  123. 

Kinseed,  Nicho.  128. 

Kinsey,    Danll.    458,    Edward    81,    Eliz. 

458,  Hugh    325,    Margt.    458,    Mary 

459,  Mr.  374,  Paul  458,  Richd.  161, 
Sarah  459,  Wm.  250,  515. 

Kinsey,  Paule  325. 

Kinsman,  Alex.  454,  Hen.  236. 

Kintly,  Tho.  425. 

Kinver,  Robt.  213. 

Kippin,  Jno.  403,   565. 

Kiquotan,  place  called  70,  71,  110,  (See 

Kiccoughtan). 
Kirby,  Alice  223,  Ann  309,  James  223, 

Hump.  223,  Richd.   141,  Samuell  70, 

Tho.  348,  487,  Wm.  198. 
Kirbye,  Tho.  113,   156. 


676 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Kirchey,  Jno.  482. 

Kirkcome,  James  444. 

Kirke,  Bridget!  205,  Christo.  101,  119, 
139,  152,  418,  James  335,  John  220, 
332,  Martha  342,  Mary  252,  Randolph 
546,  563,  Richd.  214,  Tho.  57,  84, 
148,  377,  490. 

Kirkman,  Francis  47,  326,  334,  410, 
486,  511,  519. 

Kirkkum,  James  451. 

Kirky,  Robert  375. 

Kirtam,  James   218. 

Kiskeyacke,  placed  called  14,  15,  18, 
25,  29,  30,  82. 

Kisson,  Daniell  432. 

Kitchen,  Hugh  458. 

Kitchenman,  Jone  369. 

Kitchin,  Eliz.  275,  427,  Jon.  78,  83. 

Kite,  Jno.  329,  Win.  524. 

Kithley,  Tho.  133. 

Kitson,  Marmaduke  109,  Merma.  40. 

Kittson,  Marm.  508. 

Kittenue,  James  218. 

Kleene,  Susan  256. 

Kleg,  Edis  272,  273. 

Knap,  Tho.  254. 

Knapp,  Wm.  130. 

Knapton,  Jane  261. 

Knatchpoole,  Jno.  299. 

Knibb,  Samll.  513. 

Knight,  Christobell  112,  Edw.  202,  229, 
240,  313,  364,  Edmund  106,  130, 
Fra.  264,  286,  288,  405,  412,  Geo. 
178,  Guy  368,  564,  Jon.  141,  240, 
John  177,  246,  261,  291,  322,  330, 
364,  370,  375,  395,  Joseph  202,  229, 
240,  262,  295,  311,  313,  512,  540, 
Joshua  159,  Marv  155,  240,  246, 
434,   Mr.    329,   416,   461,   494,    545, 

373,  393,  Old  306,  Peter  83,  85, 

104,  148,  340,  184,  235,  248,  252, 
258,  275,  277,  282,  295,  330,  343, 
346,  389,  390,  391,  394,  419,  422, 
460,  462,  470,  488,  494,  519,  533, 
545,  Richd.  169,  296,  Robt.  103, 
176,  Sarah  551,  Tho.  155,  240,  342, 
441,  514,  Tomasin  144,  Wm.  137, 
176,  212,  284,  389,  540. 

Knighthill,  John  259. 

Knighton,  Geo.  198,  John  144. 

Knipe,  Bartholomew  130,  159,  268, 
305,  328,  Christo.  305,  Mr.  323. 

Knise,  Barthol.  249. 
Kniteley,  Tho.  375. 
Knocks,  Wm.  309  . 
Knoles,  Tristram  512. 
Knollinge,  Mary  370. 


Knotchbull,  Tho.  525. 

Knot,  Nath.  469. 

Knots,  James  27. 

Knott,  Anthony  537,  Elianor  37,  65, 
Geo.  246,  252,  355,  379,  501,  James 
18,  37,  46,  56,  65,  66,  162,  177, 
206,  476,  John  207,  279,  315,  501, 
510,  Mary  530,  Richd.  137,  212, 
Robt.  282,  Richard  545,  Susan  338, 
554,  Susanna  457,  Wm.  283,  287, 
366,  549. 

Knotts,  Wm.  261. 

Knowell,  Hannnah  545. 

Knowells,  Henry  171. 

Knowler,  Thomas  4. 

Knowles,  Abra.  479,  Ann  199,  James 
425,  John  450,  451,  537.  565,  Nich. 
134,  Peeter  340,  Rob.  324,  Sands 
264,  Tho.  336,  Tristrum  559,  Wm. 
179,  456. 

Knox,  Wm.  403. 

Knuckly,  James  363. 

Kogan,  Harbor  160. 

Koggan,  Robt.  198. 

Korman,   Roger  447. 

Krimy,  Edm.   290. 

Kuoyard,  Rich.  307. 

Kunnogh,  Mor.   307. 

Kyffin,  David  333,  494. 

Kygan,  Dorman  379. 

Kyrnes,  Edw.   127. 

Kytt,  Wm.  457. 


Labor,  Wm.  262. 

Labor  in  Vaine  216,  415. 

Labour,  Jacob  506. 

Labourer  a  70,  88. 

Lacashire,  fienry  532. 

Lace,  Jno.  342. 

Lacey,  Eliz.  234,  Jno.  526,  Wm.  342. 

Lacie,  Sarah  355. 

Lacher,  Man  us  119. 

Lacke,  John  210,  Wm.  293. 

Lackham,  Jno.  369. 

Lackly,  Josias  223. 

Lacoom,  Nich.  323. 

Lactins,  Giles  195. 

Lacy,  David  456,  Eliza.  184,  George 
354,  James  247,  Joane  383,  John 
477,  526,  Rich.  24,  80,  349,  Thomas 
354,  Wm.  342,  351. 

Lacye,  Robt.  485,  Wm.  258. 

Ladbrooke,  John  390. 

Ladd,  Jon.  228,  Marma.  348. 

Ladmore,  Jno.  436,  Wm.  459. 

Laeton,  Anthony  549. 


General  Index 


677 


Laffe,  Hugh  307. 

Lafland,  Wm.  228. 

Lafly,  Jasper  73. 

Laflyn,  Jasper  117. 

Lagon,  Jacob  510. 

Lahay,  Arthur  182. 

Laighton,  Eliz.  124,  Wm.  124,  125. 

Laine,  Henry  282,  Walter  183. 

Laith,  Jon.   140. 

Lake,  Geo.  143,  160,  161,  272,  316, 
Gilbert  166,  Jno.  455,  Richd.  230, 
359,  Robt.  245,  Tho.  250,  Wm.  311. 

Lallifmore,  John  268. 

Lamb,  Dorothv  455,  John  435,  Robt. 
131,  234,  302,  Samll.  546,  Wm.  160, 
204,  282. 

Lambard,  Thomas  549. 

Lambe,  Abra.  241,  Jno.  558. 

Lambden,  Robt.  309. 

Lambdin,  Martha  90,  Robert  90,  Wil- 
liam 90. 

Lambert,  Anne  275,  Fra.  283,  Henry 
269,  276,  334,  Hum.  205,  466,  Jos. 
411,  Paul  465,  483,  Richd.  257, 
Thomas  22,  173,  221,  269. 

Lamberton,  Lambert  399,  438,  459. 

Lambertson,  Lambert  317. 

Lambeth,  Thomas  52,  84. 

Lambettson,  Lam.  265,  270,  273. 

Lambsen,  Nich.   315. 

Lambsdon,  Nich.   368. 

Lambstone,  James  263  . 

Lamden,  Robert  357. 

Lamkin,  David  299. 

Lammore,  Marsey  138. 

Lampert,  Wm.  528. 

Lancaster,  Antho.  526,  Gawen  243, 
/Owen  107,  Wm.  375. 

Lanceford,  Phil.  234. 

Lancelott,  John  351,  Nicho.  185. 

Lancht,  Jno.  325. 

Lanclott,  John  218. 

Lancton,  Tho.  121. 

Land,  Abraham  356,  Anne  383,  Edw. 
475,  Edm.  281,  Fran.  151,  174,  188, 
288,  332,  489,  Ja.  220,  James  278, 
Margt.  396,  399,  Mary  308,  Phillip 
182,  Renatus  489,  Robt.  248,  298, 
Salisbury  513,  Symon  201,  Tho.  296, 
463. 

Land,  the  Common,  70,  My  Ladies  521. 

Landall,  Robt.  528,  Wm.  521. 

Landell,  Timothy  507. 

Landers,  Wm.  551  . 

Landing,  the  Deep  378. 

Landing  Place  98,  269. 

Landford,  Phill.  184. 


Landman,    John    162,    197,    237,    501, 

Wm.  501. 
Landon,  David  504. 
Lands,  Kat.   171. 
Landson,  Robt.  284 
Landwood,  Ja.  155. 
Landye,   Francis   228   . 
Lane,    Daniell    25,    30,    36,   Dennis   43, 

Edw.  301,  Eliz.  459,  Geo.  431,  Henry 

149,  543,  Jasper  451,  Job.  443,  John 

23,   146,   192,  Rachell  22,  Robt.  248, 

272,   276,   293,   326,   Tho.    184,   250, 

459,  463,  Tob.  443,  Walter  288,  405, 

Wm.  290,  391,   396,  442,  446,  523, 

567. 
Laner,  Temp.  258. 
Lanere,  Marke  266. 
Lanett,  Wm.  263. 
Lang,  Peter  412. 
Langaster,  Wm.  538. 
Langdale,  Wm.  523. 
Langdall,  Robt.   283. 
Langdaule,  Wm.  491. 
Langestone,  Antho.   279. 
Langfeild,  John   110,   136,  Phillipp  43. 
Langford,  Edward  91,  Eliz.  246,  Kath. 

558,   Mary   265,    513,   Meredith   266, 

Tho.  211,  Walter   144. 
Langfree,  Eliz.  506. 
Langham,  Phillip  367. 
Langingham,  Mary  310. 
Langleigh,  Peter  444. 
Langle,  Wm.  373. 
Langley,   Henry   194,  Jane  510,   Joseph 

510,    Mathew    100,    456,    Sarah    510, 

Richard  74,  Tho.  506. 
Langlin,  Tho.  304. 
Langly,  Agnes  510,  Andrew  543,  James 

453,  543,  Jane  510,  John  131,  Ralph 

510,    Richard    354,    Wm.    284,    472, 

Zach.  468. 
Langman,  Robt.  268. 
Langridge,  Margaret   363. 
Langsden,  Nicholas  373,  490. 
Langston,  An.  556,  312,   393,  John  26, 

Mr.   342. 
Langstone,  Anthony  305  335,  360,  399, 

407,  509,  510,  Mr.  371,  421,  Phillip 

556. 
Langworth,    James    271,    Jonathan    55, 

78,  81,  92,  99,  111,  299. 
Lankson,  John  450. 
Lannaman,  Wm.  462. 
Lannum,  Rich.   569. 
Lansdall,  William  79. 
Lansdell,   Richard    379. 
Lansden,  Nicholas  448,  William  6,  71. 


678 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Lansey,  Joseph  318. 

Lanson,  Edw.  460,  Jon.  236. 

Lanstone,  Elady  129. 

Lant,  Win.  240. 

Lanton,  James  510  . 

Lanvell,  Penelope  127. 

Lany,  Peter  294. 

Laper,  Peter  531. 

Lapham,  Richd.   197. 

Lapworth,  Michaell  148  . 

Laquire,  Christo.  492. 

Laramore,   Jacob   466,   Tho.    189,   

447,  Walter  501. 
Lareington,  Jno.   342. 
Large,  Robt.  148,  Roger  364,  Tho.  404, 

Wm.  24,  54,  152,  210. 
Larke,  Wm.  152. 
Larker,  Robt.  554. 
Larkin,   Edmd.   291,   Eliz.   25,   69,   291, 

Mattum  227,  Wm.  194. 
Laroch,  Step.  177. 
Larramore,  Henry  119. 
Larrat,  Jno.  366. 
Larrett,  Wm.  248. 
Larriner,  Roger  559. 
Larthroppe,  Bridgett  43,  John  43. 
Larton,  Anthony  549. 
Lary,  John  477. 
Lase,  Wm.  184. 
Lasey,  Hester  101,  Joane  252. 
Lashberry,  Ellinor  356. 
Lashby,  Robt.  274. 
Lasher,  Jno.  450,  Wm.  165. 
Lashley,  Walter  355  . 

Lasley,  Fran.  452,  Roger  404,  148. 

Lasling,  Wm.  122. 

Lasly,  Edward  358. 

Laster  Peter  558. 

Lasting,  Jessy  144. 

Lastly,  John  259. 

Latch ett,  Robert  16,  Robert  81. 

Latham,  Jane  220,  John  271,  Wm.  290. 

Lathberry  Elinor  353,  Richd.   155,  240, 

277. 
Lather,  Peter  82. 

Lathropp,  John  101,  Jon.  144,  301. 
Lamer,  Frances  58. 
Laton,  Judith  250  . 
Latrop,  Jno.  499. 

Lattimore,  Clement  140,  Hugh  259. 
Lattur,  Fran.  353. 
Latturd,  Hen.  243. 
Latuer,  Frances  58. 
Lauc,  Wm.  245. 
Laugher,  Francis  49,  75. 
Laughson,  Edward  85. 
Laughton,  Leon.  45,  556,  Robert  59. 


Laur,  Gowin  106. 

Laurell,  Penelope  127. 

Laurence,  James  542,  John  426,  Wm. 
542,  567. 

Laurwell,  John  65. 

Law,  Abra.  396. 

Lawcon,  Eliza.  36,  80. 

Lawdeare,  Henry  69. 

Lawes,  Jeremy  351  . 

Lawley,  Thomas  50. 

Lawly,  Tho.  86. 

Lawmor,  Jonn  199. 

Lawne,  Richard  527. 

Lawnes,  Susan  527. 

Lawrance,  Benj.  136,  Geo.  129,  131, 
Melchesidec  91,  Robt.  130,  131,  146, 
Wm.  146. 

Lawren,  Jno.  209,  288. 

Lawrence,  Alexr.  319,  Anne  329,  Arthur 
329,  Benj.  552,  Daniell  569,  Eliz. 
131,  282,  Giles  221,  479,  Henry  348, 
James  265,  293,  542,  Joane  144,  John 
102,  192,  194,  271,  335,  442,  Jon. 
86,  233,  Mary  329,  Nich.  349,  Rich. 
367,  441,  467,  472,  478,  527,  530, 
545,  Robt.  131,  155,  156,  232,  236, 
291,  312,  426,  Sarah  329,  Tho.  548, 
Tim.  351,  Wm.  143,  144,  168,  183, 
193,  329,  385,  542. 

Lawrenson,  Fra.  299. 

Lawrey,  Nicho.  197. 

Lawry,  Robt.  427. 

Lawson,  Alice  29,  Apha.  153,  Christo. 
58,  89,  176,  George  308,  Edw.  460, 
Eliz.  423,  Epaphroditus  27,  35,  53, 
74,  75,  82,  84,  95,  96,  106,  111,  112, 
116,  123,  135,  150,  151,  153,  154, 
170,  177,  184,  196,  198,  217,  281, 
318,  349,  374,  431,  516,  Hugh  50, 
Jon.  236,  John  325,  Lettice  135,  R. 
297,  Richard  312,  318,  341,  344,  Wil- 
liam 109,  134,  135,  304,  Xpher.  153. 

Lawson,  Mount,  place  called  135. 

Lawtheat,  Robt.   123. 

Lawton,  Eliza.  36. 

Lawyer,  Jos.  175. 

Lay,  Edw.  347. 

Layden,  John  12,  21,  62,  127,  218,  396. 

Laydon,  John  38,  51,  79,  102,  108,  175, 
Virginia  39. 

Layerton,  Tho.  565. 

Layler,  Nicholas  554. 

Layne,  Henry  349,  John  176,  Robt.  149, 
172. 

Layter,  Nicholas  552,  554. 

Layton,  Elizabeth  50,  John  382,  William 
50,  51,  61. 


General  Index 


679 


Layward,  Jno.   384. 

Lazenby,  Tho.  456. 

Lazingby,  Tho.  429. 

Lea,  Jno.  341,  Mr.  303,  Wm.  303,  329. 

Leach,  Charles  318,  James  562,  John 
338,  Peter  318,  Rebecca  108,  Roger 
35,  Wm.  204,  318,  463. 

Leaderd,  Robert  75. 

Leading,  James  22. 

Leads,  Tho.  538. 

Leager,  Tho.  38. 

Leake,  Andrew  136,  Christo.  195,  Fra. 
252,  Jon.  22,  132,  Mary  233,  Richard 
47,  56,  112,  145,  198. 

Leamin,  Roger  180. 

Leamore,  Mary  358. 

Leanord,  Hen.  426. 

Leaper,  Jno.  386. 

Lear,  John  332,  333,  Mart.  189. 

Leas,  Wm.  503. 

Lease,  for  100  yrs.,  20. 

Leassure,  Poare  342. 

Leatcher,  Richd.  322. 

Leather,  Andrew  520,  Richd.  322. 

Leatherberry,  Ellynor  324,  Thomas  324. 

Leatherbury,  Thomas  405,  407,  418. 

Leatherland,  Jno.  523. 

Leathermore,  Wm.  417. 

Leathott,  Marga.  272. 

Leaves,  John  531. 

Lech,  Wm.  462. 

Lecke,  Jno.  485. 

Leddall,  Geo.  297. 

Ledrick,  John  294. 

Lee,  Alice  561,  Ann  131,  343,  344, 
Anthony  75,  105,  Bridges  332,  Col. 
306,  332,  383,  409,  432,  448,  490, 
512,  518,  556,  David  263,  Eliz.  279, 
Francis  217,  381,  Georg  46,  56,  178, 
366,  Gilbert  23,  66,  Grace  67,  Han- 
nah 351,  Hancock  306,  330,  Henry 
43,  68,  83,  189,  196,  201,  218,  237, 
259,  311,  320,  337,  456,  528,  530, 
Hugh  205,  221,  242,  292,  319,  333, 
350,  351,  357,  364,  382,  420,  423, 
487,  501,  510,  Humph.  261,  Jon.  23, 
66,  John  189,  210,  258,  261,  288,  290, 
346,  378,  501,  Kath.  256,  Mathew  178, 
218,  Nich.  27,  Peter  289,  334,  450, 
451,  Richard  52,  92,  96,  122,  126, 
131,  149,  154,  155,  162,  178,  199, 
213,  219,  230,  235,  241,  250,  258, 
276,  278,  284,  306,  314,  323,  329, 
330,  336,  343,  344,  346,  377,  390, 
404,  417,  424,  432,  436,  468,  473, 
474,  484,  502,  522,  534,  Ralph  357, 
Robt.    502,    545,    Sarah    348,    Simon 


492,      Su.   357,  Tho.   172,   260,   267, 

350,    502,    Wm.    48,    78,    254,    283, 

306,    330,    351,   423,   431,   492,    511. 
Leech,  An.  461,  Chas.  204,  334,  Jacob 

432,  Jane  339,  Jenkin  255,  Jon.  44, 

Jno.  247,  377,  Mark  121,  Peeter  204, 

334,    Stephen    120,    Tho.    259,    Wm. 

257,  403. 
Leechman,    Tho.    204,    272,    277,    315, 

337,  380,  474,  520. 
Leeke,  Jno.  485,  Mary  213,  Wm.  382. 
Leeman,  Sarah  211. 
Leere  de,  Gill  506. 
Lees,  Ann  386,  Eliz.  476. 
Leess,  Eliz.  445. 
Lefebur,  Ab.  362,  Isaack  362,  Jacob  362, 

Margaret  362,  Peter  362. 
Leflore,  Mary  338. 
Leftwich,  Ralph  369,  370. 
Lefrwick,  Ralph  369. 
Legar,  Jno.  499. 
Legat,  Ja.  29. 
Legee,  James  558. 
Legerton,  Thomas  546. 
Legg,  Edy.  280,  Grace  263,  Jone  499, 

Margt.  314,  Wm.  511. 
Leggatt,  John  422. 
Legge,  Edwd.  358. 
Leguard,  Elias  90. 
Legume,  David  272. 
Leiby,  Mundeff  339. 
Leichfeild,  Eliz.  340. 
Leidge,  John  274. 
Leige,  Wm.  256. 
Leigh,  Georg  63,  James  247,  Jon.  146, 

John  166,  Mary  132,  Rich.  455,  Tho. 

114,  171,  William  15,  132,  181,  236, 

256. 
Leighe,  Wm.  154. 
Leighton,  Robt.  452. 
Leitch,  Ann  393. 
Leithe,  Wm.  154. 
Lellett,  Eliz.  558,  Tho.  562. 
Leman,  Sar.  313. 

Lemon,  Perce    88,  Wm.  172,  274,  331. 
Lemond,  Geo.  294,  John  294,  Mary  294. 
Lenards,  Leonard  23. 
Lenawell,  Wm.   537. 
Lendall,    Richd.    199,    385,    Robt.    273, 

416,  Wm.   253. 
Lending,  James  71. 
Lendy,  Richard   368. 
Lenn,  Math.  248. 
Lennalls,  Roger  564. 
Lennarts,  Richard  317. 
Lennon,    Edmund    15£r-4>eirce    32,    86, 

152,  Rebecca  32,  152,  Wm.  166. 


680 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Lennull,  Wm.  537. 

Lenor,  Ralph   509,   550. 

Lenox,  Ma.  427,  Wm.  389. 

Lentall,  Geo.  61,  Tho.  233. 

Lenthall,  Rich.  454,  553. 

Lentill,  Bart.  200. 

Lento,  Geo.  51. 

Lenton,  Ann  384,  Antho.  80,  228,  363, 

;364,  421,  484,  501,  Wm.  293. 
Leonard,  James   23,   66,  Kath.   37,   63, 

Peter    384,    Richard   471,    Tho.    109, 

403. 
Lepeat,  Wm.  246. 
Lepord,  John  304. 
Leprack,  Wm.  381. 
Lerer,  Jeremiah  387. 
Lerry,  Ann  371. 
Leshley,  Alex.   195. 
Lesley,  Nico.  208. 
Leson,  Ann  353. 
Lessell,  James  352. 
Lessford,  Mary  349. 
Lest,  Walter  48. 
Lester,  Ed.  513,  James  77,  Ralph   148, 

186,  Tho.  245. 
Lesting,  Angell  151. 
Letchey,  Nicholas  393. 
Lether,  John  108,  131. 
Letherberry,  Thomas  324,  413. 
Letherbury,   Tho.    324,    400,    407,    418, 

534. 
Letherland,  Jno.  472. 
Lethermore,  Elinor  156,  Wm.  94,  Wm. 

156,  267. 
Lethrington,  Tho.  269. 
Lett,    Leonard   211,    278,   Mathew    158, 

Wm.  435. 
Lettett,  Eliz.  562. 

Letts,  Eliza.  172,  John  222,  Mary  222. 
Leullin,  Danll.  561. 
Leur,  Wm.  166. 
Levar,  Jerimiah  387. 
Level,  Geo.  243. 
Levell,  Richard  203. 
Lever,  Ann  369,  Wm.  470. 
Levereman,  Luke  220. 
Leverick,  Sarah  49. 
Levet,  Lancaster  168. 
Levett,  Geo.  136. 
Levin,  Tho.  290,  300. 
Leviston,  Jno.  204,  507. 
Levistone,  John  282. 
Levite,  Lancaster  188. 
Leviton,  Ann  444,  512,  546. 
Levitt,  Alice  150,  Eliza.  150,  Geo.  141, 

150,    217,    534,    Lancaster    162,    288, 

Robt.  150,  301,  499. 


Lewcas,  Jno.  548. 

Lewd,  Rich.  60. 

Lewellin,  Daniell  78,  82,  95,  130,  138, 
493,  David  359,  561,  Jon.  79,  307, 
Margt.  316,  Wm.  194,  405. 

Lewen,  John  42. 

Lewer,  Wm.  470. 

Lewes,  Gilbert  434,  Rich.  444,  Wm. 
356. 

Lewin,  John  91,  113,  135,  154,  Mary 
91,  Tho.  154,  Wm.  425,  559. 

Lewis,  Andrew  560,  Ann  499,  559, 
Anth.  465,  Ar.  243,  Bartho.  211, 
Christo.  25,  69,  99,  183,  261,  278, 
468,  Danl.  263,  David  103,  Dorothy 
218,  224,  298,  Edw.  229,  440,  468, 
470,  486,  545,  552,  Eliz.  29,  76,  492, 
Evan  294,  Fran.  435,  546,  Gilbert 
445,  Godfrey  80,  Grace  329,  James 
257,  300,  312,  351,  Jacob  487,  Jane 
209,  257,  John  28,  43,  89,  110,  166, 
169,  196,  323,  326,  367,  369,  378, 
379,  389,  422,  430,  451,  453,  482, 
483,  484,  491,  508,  Jon.  81,  133, 
143,  144,  229,  Jonathan  119,  Kath- 
erine  95,  142,  157,  Lidia  229,  Major 
335,  368,  502,  Margt.  238,  500,  Mary 
247,  328,  388,  425,  458,  515,  555, 
Mathew  446,  Michaell  455,  Morgan 
375,  Mr.  521,  Richard  99,   181,   182, 

247,  264,  277,  284,  313,  329,  370, 
384,  422,  438,  496,  517,  Robert  54, 
192,  278,  433,  Roger  54,  Tho.  25, 
40,  59,  61,  118,  164,  292,  312,  443, 
Wm.   110,   207,   208,   229,   235,   241, 

248,  251,  263,  284,  299,  307,  308, 
311,  316,  322,  335,  336,  340,  368, 
379,  393,  401,  426,  444,  467,  468, 
483,  519,  559,  Xtopher.  525. 

Lewkner,  Robt.  455. 

Lewre,   Edw.  496. 

Ley,  John  30. 

Leyden,  John  11,  146. 

Leyes,  Ann  205,  Amy  206,  Hecton  205, 

Peter  205. 
Libb,  Anto.  456. 

Libertty's,  Keeper  of  the  276,  340,  451. 
Licermore,   John   254. 
Licheston,  Jon.  60. 
Lick,  Robt.  460. 
Liddle,  Tho.  202. 
Liddell,  Thomas  363. 
Lide,  Richd.  137. 
Lidell,  Jon.   238. 
Lidgitt,  Tho.  373. 
Lidmy,  Susan  562. 
Lidney,  Mr.  173. 


General  Index 


681 


Lidwith,   Garratt  309. 

Light,  Elias  51,  61,  Geo.  178,  270,  277, 

401,    Margtt.    556,    Mary    253,    257, 

Richard  51,  61,  Thomas  543. 
Lightfoole,  Anne  359. 
Lightfoot,  John  199. 
Lightfoote,  Ann  28. 
Lighthollier,  Wm.  61. 
Lightoll,  Tho.  301. 
Liggon,  Thomas  440,  516. 
Ligon,  Tho.  516. 
Ligsby,  Wm.  499. 
Lilborne,  Richd.  344. 
Lile,  Danl.  112,  351. 
Lilley,  George  443,  Henry  89,  139,  Jno. 

502. 
Lillies,   John  227. 
Lilly,   Edward   73,   Henry   253,   Mursin 

548,  Robert  314,  Tho.  482. 
Lilley  Valley,  the  84,  138. 
Limbson,  Nich.  298. 
Limicar,  John   181. 
Limpson,  Wm.  23,  66. 
Lina,  Mary  324. 
Lincey,  James  220. 
Linch,    Blanch    202,   Capt.    365,    Ichiell 

202,  Jere.   181,  John  171. 
Lincolne,  Edw.  113,  Jno.  514. 
Lincolnshire,  Jno.  403. 
Lindsey,  David  374,  375. 
Line,  Dary  314,  Hen.  142. 
Line,  the  Dimension  563. 
Lineer,  Marke  134. 
Lineing,   Denwood   91. 
Linell,   Edw.   391. 
Linfield,  Nicho.  260,  Richd.  260. 
Linford,  Ann  209. 
Ling,   Chas.   568,   John   309,   336,    506, 

513. 
Linge,  John  263,  326,  378,  387. 
Lingford,  Nich.  133. 
Lingsly,  Michll.  551. 
Linlesse,  Samll.  490. 
Linn,  John  253. 
Linnee,  Robt.  384. 
Linny,  Anne  245,  Henry  397. 
Linsey,     Alexander     317,     David     351, 

Joane    512,    Mary    359,    Onoris    336, 

Wm.  506,  514. 
Linton,  Antho.  234,  372,  Barthol.  385, 

392,  John  448,  Mary  351,  383,  Moses 

331,  Wm.  438. 
Linuse,  Tho.  255. 
Lipp,  Robt.  344. 
Lippeate,  Wm.  355. 
Lippett,  Jon.  85,   106,   140. 
Lirgson,  Jno.  338. 


Lisbourne,  Henry  311. 

Lisburne,  James  493. 

Liscott,  Jon.  40. 

Lisle,  Tho.  128. 

Lisman,  Mary  218. 

Liss,  Daniell  447. 

List,   Henry  121. 

Lister,  Mr.  201,  Rich.  456. 

Liston,  Daniell  380,  446,  473. 

Litchcum,  Barnaby  243. 

Litchfeild,  Rich.  31,  84. 

Litchman,  Tho.  211,  221. 

Litefoot,  Joane  314. 

Litler,  Richd.  171. 

Little,  Alice  267,  Antho.  192,  209, 
Barnaby  382,  Fra.  192,  Jane  123, 
John  170,  443,  546,  Lach.  209, 
Margery  249,  Mr.  348,  Wm.  82,  308, 
372,  373. 

Littleberry,  Tho.  413. 

Littleboy,  Lawr.   103,   115. 

Littlefield,  251. 

Littlejohn,   James   23. 

Littlepage,  Mr.  558,  Richd.  509,  510, 
Tho.  253. 

Littleton,  Anne  276,  458,  Edwd.  327, 
331,  344,  413,  414,  Geo.  186,  283, 
Nathl.    155,    331,   Southey   327,   414, 

452,  454,  555. 
Littlewood,  Eliz.  143,  Wm.  182. 
Littor,  Nicho.  199. 

Liveing,  Denwood  91. 

Liver,  Silvester  289. 

Loady,  Henry  189. 

Lobb,    Georg   99,    123,    262,    311,    352, 

387,  507,  512,  William  548. 
Lobbins,  Peter  184. 
Lobdell,   David  448. 
Lock,  Andrew  294,  Geo.  66,  216,  Jervis 

453,  John  22,  388,  Tho.  28,  83,  233, 
283,  Wm.  136. 

Locke,  Geo.  220,  John  7,  Wm.  114. 
Locker,  Eliz.  247,  Georg  23,  Tho.  452. 
Lockey,  Ann  498,  Edw.  385,  421,  515, 

Jno.  410,  Mr.  466,  565. 
Lockington,  Elmer  315. 
Lockley,    Ann    180,    Charles    103,    107, 

115,  Tho.  107. 
Lockram,   Wm.   520. 
Lockson,  Jno.  455. 
Locus,  Geo.  255. 
Lodall,  Timothy  271. 
Lodell,  Tymothy  189,  190. 
Lodey,  Wm.  188. 
Lodge,  Georg  94,  Thomas  70. 
Lodwell,  Henry  272,  James  281. 
Loe,  Phill.  235,  Richard  52,  Wm.  208 


682 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Loes,  Edw.   188. 

Loen,  James  210. 

Loftis,  Joane  453,  Rich.  525,  Willi.  136, 
Wm.  164. 

Logg,  John  377. 

Loganell,  John  263. 

Loid,  James  284. 

Lloyd,  Amy  205,  Cor.  157,  Donell  307, 
James  295,  John  154,  201,  Richd. 
255,  Robert  76,  Lt.  Col.  302. 

Lluellin,  Danl.   165,   167. 

Lolland,  James  452. 

Lomans,  Tho.  186. 

London,  1,  11,  25,  53,  55,  56,  100,  105, 
122,  147,  160,  215,  334,  445,  462, 
523. 

London,  Humph.  120,  378,  John  50,  58, 
Tho.  422,  479. 

Loneden,  Wm.  540. 

Lonell,  Tho.   305. 

Loneseta,  Arth.  389. 

Long,  Ann  22,  Arthur  540,  Daniell  439, 
Edw.  188,  553,  Humph.  403,  James 
31,  130,  492,  Jammay  312,  Jane  84, 
545,  Jon.  31,  79,  84,  John  31,  86, 
148,  326,  452,  552,  Laurence  562, 
Law.  216,  Lewis  108,  Marg.  341, 
Mararee  375,  Mary  482,  Michaell 
335,  Ralph  93,  Richd.  128,  227,  248, 
251,  337,  421,  454,  564,  Robt.  148, 
312,  Sarah  453,  Teny  390,  Tho.  102, 
183,    304,   453,   Wm.    78,    152,    177, 

208,  211,  248,  297,  300,  392. 
Longdale,  Abigale  220. 

Longe,  Arthur  381,  James  272,  Jon.  238, 
Lawr.  293,  Richd.  267,  363,  Teague 
339,  Tho.  236,  Wm.  263,   272,  375. 

Longee,  Teague  394. 

Long  Feild,  the  36,  37,  60,  64,  99,  101, 
138. 

Long  Ponds,  the  43,   64,   74,   83,   139, 

209,  510. 
Longford,  John  213. 
Longland,  Wm.  198. 

Longman,  An.  556,  Antho.  556,  Wm.  376. 

Longnan,  Margery  367. 

Longoe,  Anthony  380,  Teage  394. 

Longrave,  Winifrid  43. 

Longworthy,  Jon.  73. 

Lonsell,  Jno.   387. 

Looker,  Xpian.  339. 

Look  Out  Tree,  the  173. 

Loppham,  John  184. 

Loram,  Symon  24. 

Lord,  Jonah  452,  John  483,   538,   540, 

547,    Mary    382,    513,    Robert    333, 

362,  411,  518. 


Lore,  George  552. 

Loring,  Robt.  452. 

Lome,  Tho.  199. 

Lors,  Ri.  463. 

Lorum,  Symon  54. 

Lorymore,   Tho.    162. 

Losh,  Stephen  99. 

Losse,  Eliz.  559. 

Los  way,  John  182. 

Loth,  Edwin  453. 

Lott,  Mary  559,  Wm.  475. 

Loueden,  Wm.  228. 

Louesta,  Anth.  389. 

Louch,  Roger  35. 

Loude,  Richard  263. 

Louder,  James  176,  Rich.  73,  Wm.  185. 

Lour,  Wm.  166. 

Lousell,  Jno.  387. 

Love,    Eliz.   261,    James    460,    Jon.    68, 

Patriack  460,   523,  Richd.   136,  Rose 

297,  Tho.  54,  71,  Wm.  558. 
Lovas,  Geo.  305. 
Loveday,  Fr.  232,  Tho.  391. 
Loveden,  Wm.  228,  496,  540. 
Loveing,    Ann   401,   Mr.    471,    Thomas 

89,   106,  118,  137,  294. 
Lovell,  Ann  222,   247,   An.   556,  Giles 

548,  Grace  219,  Mary  252,  516,  Robt. 

33,  72,  494,  Thomas   62,  Wm.  484, 

Winifred  74. 
Loveless,  Tho.  566. 
Lover,  Jno.  509. 
Loverton,  Tho.  196. 
Lovett,   Lancaster   220,  415,   489,  Mary 

196,  Michaell  342,  Wm.  427. 
Lovewell,  Mary  448. 
Loving,  Mr.  317,  Tho.  224. 
Low,    Fra.    352,    Mary    149,    Peter    79, 

Robert  95,  Wm.  35. 
Lowden,  James  119,  John  100. 
Lowder,  Henry  107,  Wm.  97,  358,  513. 
Lowdwell,  Timothy  484. 
Lowdy,  Rich.  431. 
Lowe,  Barnaby  382,  Harry  441,  Jon.  29, 

Mary  172,  Peter  382,  Prudence  365, 

/Ralph    269,     383,    Rich.    333,     388, 

Robert  76,  382,  Tho.  120,  247. 
Lowell,   Antho.   459,   Hugh   339,   Mary 

248,  Tho.  30,  255. 
Lowedan,  Wm.  496. 
Lowen,  Richd.  275. 
Lownd,  Alex.  67. 
Lowne,  Henry  247,  465. 
Lownee,  Henry   157. 
Lownes,  Bartholomew  443,  Edward  61, 

Jno.   269,   379. 
Lowrey,  Elinor  179,  Ema.  179. 


General  Index 


683 


Lowther,  Bridget*  18. 

Lowton,  Tho.  221. 

Loyd,  Ann  290,  Cornelius  27,  42,  50, 
52,  53,  100,  166,  170,  172,  332,  507, 
David  102,  Dorothy  327,  Edw.  42, 
233,  239,  472,  507,  513,  George  512, 
Henry  429,  456,  Hugh  107,  233, 
Humphry  38,  58,  81,  453,  James  190, 
340,  John  141,  144,  265,  388,  Jon. 
244,  Joseph  116,  Mr.  445,  Marg.  243, 
Mary  114,  388,  459,  Morris  133, 
Nathl.  34,  Owen  179,  Ralph  568, 
Richd.  171,  Ri.  479,  Theod.  34,  Wm. 
141. 

Loyder,  Charles  382. 

Loyer,  Brasenburne  105. 

Loyse,  John  99. 

Loyton,  John  25. 

Lozen,  Jno.  453. 

Luas,  Rich.  561. 

Luc,  Edward  393. 

Lucas,  Cloyther  265,  David  551,  Edw. 
262,  290,  310,  376,  389,  501,  Eliz.  297, 
Ellinor  455,  Henrick  523,  527,  Henry 
530,  Jane  439,  Joane  565,  Jno.  353, 
Jone  60,  220,  546,  Joseph  370,  John 
414,  Martha  262,  Mary  262,  Richd. 
80,  114,  205,  Robt.  39,  42,  49,  67, 
73,  109,  Roger  39,  220,  323,  Samll. 
28,  103,  327,  475,  Tho.  161,  167, 
172,  178,  186,  224,  240,  261,  262, 
312,  345,  362,  365,  381,  420,  431, 
497,  511,  518,  521,  523,  Wm.  122, 
169,  191,  242,  263,  271,  Xtopher. 
439. 

Lucham,  Eliz.  316. 

Luck,  Thomas  453,  Wm.  370. 

Lucke,  Richd.  385. 

Luckett,  Edwd.  393,  Richard  359. 

Luckin,  Georg  23. 

Luckins,  Eliz.  110. 

Luckston,  Edward  94. 

Luco,  Antho.  103,  123. 

Lucuse,  Tho.  255. 

Lucy,  Joane  284,  Thomas  354,  394, 
Wm.  388. 

Lucye,   Hester  301. 

Luddington,  Allen  141,  Saml.  201. 

Ludford,  Wm.  466. 

Ludgford,  Martha  358. 

Ludices,  David  240. 

Ludicres,  David  240. 

Ludicus,  Da.  273,  Eliz.  273. 

Ludloe,  Eliz.  444,  Geo.  456. 

Ludlow,  Col.  229,  298,  306,  339,  346, 
490,  Edward  555,  Gabriell  262,  Georg 
127,    134,   177,   201,   210,    214,   239, 


243,   246,   250,    262,    295,   296,    337, 

402,  424,  532,  555,  Squire  250,  Tho. 

262,  Wm.  301,  409. 

Ludlowe,  Georg  96,  161,  327,  383,  Mr. 

496,  Richard   389. 
Ludson,  John  301,  499. 
Ludwell,  James   332,   Phillip  429,   548, 

Tho.   145,   165,   178,  203,  429. 
Lurks,  Nicho.  219. 
Lue,  Tho.  282. 
Luelin,  Wm.  514. 
Luell,  Edw.  391,  465,  Mary  391. 
Luellin,    Daniel    203,    240,    317,    561, 

James  555,  Jenkin  286,  Rt.  220,  Tho. 

453,  462. 
Luevell,  Peter  452. 
Lues,  Michaell  425. 
LufTe,  Mary  120. 
Lufurrier,  Anthony  59, 
Lugg,  Peter  559. 
Luggett,  Geo.  134,  Susan  508. 
Luich,  Capt.  365. 
Luke,  Paul  462,  Wm.  299. 
Lullifild,  Mich.  482. 
Lullaman,  Thomas  381. 
Lulow,  Ann  422. 
Lully,  Thomas  41. 
Lum,  Christo.  543. 
Lumbers,  Wm.  260. 
Lumbrey,  Domnick  143. 
Lumby,  Dom.  195. 
Lumpton,  Wm.  436. 
Lun,  Marke  427,  Xpher.  544,  546. 
Lund,  Edm.  281,  Thomas  447,  Xpher. 

447. 
Lunley,  Sam.  484. 
Lunly,  Sam.  429. 
Lunn,    Christo.    543,    John    290,    Luke 

427,  Xpher.  549. 
Lunmore,  Mercy  127. 
Lunsford,  Eliz.  229,  235,  282,  288,  332, 

Lady  294,   298,  428,  465,  473,  Tho- 
mas 273,  378,  389,  473. 
Luntsford,   Eliz.    200,   Lady   200,   Mary 

200,  Phillippa  200,  Thos.  200,  Wm. 

200. 
Lupo,  Albiano  5,  6,  156,  Elizabeth  5,  6, 

Wm.  148. 
Lupton,  John  87,   268. 
Lurensoe,  John  386. 
Lurs,  Rowland  476. 
Lurtin,  Jenkin  260. 
Lusby,  Robt.  479. 
Lushby,  Robt.  274. 
Lustcomb,  Tho.   166. 
Luscome,  Tho.  274. 
Lustle,  Mary  366. 


684 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Luter,  Tho.  23,  66. 

Luther,  Tho.  158. 

Luty,  Tho.  394. 

Lux,  Thomasin  31. 

Lyall,  Dennis  181. 

Lydall,  Geo.   232,   310,   359,  403,  422. 

Lyddall,  Capt.  475,  Geo.  542. 

Lyddeatt,  Rich.  307. 

Lyell,  Danl.  177,  Dennis  271. 

Lyelle,  Fran.  388. 

Lyke,  Anne  134. 

Lyle,  Daniell  145,  228,  305. 

Lylley,  John  132. 

Lylls,  Martha  166. 

Lylly,  John  179,  377. 

Lyman,  John  539. 

Lymon,  Amy  312. 

Lyna,  Arthur  324,  James  321,  Rose  324, 

Lynar,  John  256. 

Lynard,  Roger  160,  Tho.  353. 

Lynas,  John  208. 

Lynch,  Jerimiah  99. 

Lyne,    Fra.    217,   John    178,   Tho.    313, 

352,  378. 
Lyner,  Silvester  293. 
Lynge,  John  306,  326,  Mich.  324. 
Lynhall,  Wm.  526. 
Lynhaven  51,  61,  90,  92,  98,  106,  107, 

111,   151,  288. 
Lynnee,  Robert  363. 
Lynny,  Richard  556. 
Lynsey,  Robt.  261. 
Lynton,  Antho.  450,  Moses  331. 
Lyon,  Calet  558,  562,  John  336,  Moore 

344,  Tho.  411. 
Lyons,  Geo.  242. 
Lyonel,  Step.  231. 
Lyres,  Danl.  255. 
Lysemy,  Sus.  293. 
Lyster,  Humph.  196,  Morris  233. 
Lytefoote,  John  3. 
Lyving,  Mathew   13. 

M 
Mabb,  Tho.  148. 
Mabbett,  Jane  355,  John  375. 
Mabor,  Giles   220. 
Maborne  Hills,  a  place  called  493. 
McCloyden,   Rose  233. 
Macalster,  Gowry  290,  300,  Hector  290, 

John  290. 
Macar,  Owin  387. 
Macargoe,   John   266. 
Macartee,  Elisia  253. 
Macconey,  Maccum  305. 
MacCraw,  Archebell  355. 
MacDonnell,  James  350. 


Macduell,  John  191. 

Mace,  Ann  526,  Gilbert  203,  Jon.  78, 

Wm.  341. 
Macey,  John  93. 
Macgrigory,  James  349. 
Macham,  John  36,  Jon.  87. 
Machan,   Edmund   393. 
Machany,  Jno.  377. 
Machary,  Jno.  547. 
Machen,  Edmund  393,  Jno.  456. 
Machezan  Caves  402,  470. 
Machill,   John  405,   Margt.   405,   Sarah 

405. 
Machin,  Edm.  342,  Eliza.  36,  119,  Tho. 

214. 
Machir,  Tho.  345. 
Machoone,  Derreman   338. 
Machotick  Dam,  446. 
MacLenny,  Jno.  341. 
MacLery,  Jno.  341. 
Machone,  Teage  464. 
Macogery,  James  204. 
Macoms,  Jno.  561. 
Maconn,  Elias  455. 
Macoome,  Jno.  237. 
Macoter,  Alex.  422,  Roaree  503. 
Macoughan,  Kath.  348. 
Macoy,  Dan.  424,  James  355. 
Macragh,  Denis  433. 
MacRoury,  Roury  256. 
Macubins,  Richard  398. 
Mackall,   Danl.   250. 
Mackan,  John  278. 
Mackane,  Danl.  388. 
Mackarle,  Alexr.  267. 
Mackay,  James  253. 
Mackbett,  Allen  192. 
Mackdaniel,  Tho.  253. 
Mackdaniell,  Jno.  386. 
Mackdanna,  Lahawn  253. 
Mackdanell,   Dan.   253. 
Mackdayne,  Wendy  327. 
Mackdoneal,  Oneath  308. 
Mackdull,  Gilbert  266. 
Mackdunah,  Hugh  491. 
Mackee,  Neale  270. 
Mackeneckhogah,  Ellis  368. 
Mackenly,  Wm.  236. 
Mackell,  Sanders  229. 
Mackenny,  Alex.  388,  Wm.  416. 
Macker,  Joane  315,  Owen  79,  Roger  10. 
Mackerell,  Peter  386. 
Mackernall,  Dennis  290. 
Mackerrall,  Dennis  290. 
Mackero,  Mary  322. 
Mackert,  John  322. 
Mackery,  Ja.  199,  Wm.  229,  322. 


General  Index 


685 


Mackerye,  Mich.  238. 

Mackfassum,  John  196. 

Mackgahye,  Wm.  257. 

Mackiney,  James  335. 

Mackinny,  Wm.  431. 

Mackland,  Dan.  314,  Doc.  305,  Mor- 
gan 296,  388. 

Macklatt,  Jane  256. 

Macklayer,  Jno.  341. 

Macklayne,  John  197,  Wently  327. 

Macklesby,  Daniell  199. 

Mackloyd,   Mackin   368. 

MackLoyd,  Wm.  368. 

Mackman,  Eliz.  517,  Judith  441. 

MackManor,   Pat.   248. 

Mackmaroe,  John  322. 

Mackmell,  James  253. 

Mackmum,  James  249. 

Mackneal,  Danll.  457. 

Macknee,  Edmond  376. 

Macknill,  James  264. 

Mackomack,  Jno.  352. 

Mackonack,  Sander  368. 

Mackore,  Sara  378. 

MackPerson,   Langham  242. 

Mackreall,  Jno.   172. 

Mackrell,  Eliz.  307,  Tho.  553. 

Mackrery,  Robt.  494. 

Mackro,  Peter  401. 

Mackroe,  Patrick  252. 

Mackton,  John  482. 

Mackwilliam,  Fenlaw  481,  Jno.  328. 

Mackwilliams,  David  91. 

Mackworth,  Arthur  144,  Charles  393, 
Fran.  435,  Jno.  454. 

MacWilliams,  Fenla  183,  430. 

Macy,  Cha.  391. 

Madavile,  Robt.  557. 

Madby,  John  200. 

Madd,  Joane  422. 

Madden,  Ann  508,  Edward  130. 

Maddin,  Edw.  240,  317,  561,  Henry 
146,  Tho.  347. 

Maddison,  Jon.  139,  John  280,  350, 
369,  389,  466,  469,  496,  515,  542, 
565,  566,  Marg.  353,  Rich.  32,  103, 
Tho.  458. 

Maddock,  Rice  367. 

Maddocks,  Alexr.  413,  Rice  228,  319, 
441. 

Maddox,  Alice  318,  Edw.  258,  Mary 
253,  Ri.  292,  Rice  292. 

Made,  Mar  mad.  258. 

Mader,  Ambrose  41,  Jno.  248,  560. 

Madero,  Tomasin  257. 

Maders,   Tomasin   257. 

Madgnell,  Edmund  273. 


Madison,  Edw.  204,  317,  John  280. 

Madix,  Kath.  266,  314. 

Madlock,  Robert  99. 

Madocks,  Alexr.  233. 

Madory,  John  378. 

Madoxs,  Ann  294. 

Madrin,  Owin  123,  Tho.  351. 

Madsly,  James  528. 

Madwell,  Wm.  77,  115. 

Madworth,  Wm.  78. 

Mafield,  Wm.  254. 

Magdawell,  Jno.  514. 

Maggon,  Allen  134. 

Magnor,  Charles  60,  81,  82,  137. 

MagrafTe,  Patrick  280. 

Magregor,  James  339. 

Magregorie,  James  422. 

Magregory,  James  211,  236,  255,  350, 
362,   367,   382,   395,   411,   422,   423. 

Magson,  Jon.  143. 

Maguiry,  Chas.  255. 

Mahaw,  Jno.  542. 

Mahew,  John  513. 

Mahitt,  Wm.  493. 

Mahoone,  David  330,  John  150. 

Mahue,  James  376. 

Maidstone,  Isabell  200,  Tho.  200. 

Maie,  David  254. 

Maine,  Ann  427,  Grigory  199,  Mary 
462. 

Mainshaw,  Diana  491. 

Mainson,  Jon.  144. 

Mainyard,  Jno.  490. 

Maior,  Edw.  115,  Eliz.  134,  350,  Geo. 
148,  Henry  119,  Jane  119,  John  119, 
357,  427,  Rebecca  367,  Richard  90, 
107,  117,  122,  133,  142,  388,  Robt. 
138,  Wm.  146,  399. 

Major,  Edward  55,  66,  81,  111,  155, 
159,  167,  170,  178,  559,  Eliz.  170, 
Fra.  170,  Herman  184,  John  114,  152, 
170,  203,  231,  285,  291,  318,  357, 
418,  508,  554,  Mr.  484,  Peter  559, 
Phi.  79,  Rebecca  367,  Richd.  114, 
166,  179,  188,  204,  231,  311,  317, 
388,  508,  Tho.  170,  267,  286. 

Makefashion,  Jno.  332. 

Ma  ken,  Jone  491. 

Makeny,  Dunkin  388. 

Makepeace,  Jno.   359. 

Maker,   Owen   214. 

Makerland,  John  451,  452,  453,  Tho. 
470,  Wm.   517. 

Makerly,  Owen  453. 

Makester,  Rich.  61. 

Maketrone,  Jno.  455. 

Makew,  Jone  491. 


686 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Makey,  Danll.  239. 

Makin,  Tho.   253. 

Makinney,  Jno.  388. 

Makins,  Dunkin  302,  Tho.  516. 

Malam,  Eliza.  172. 

Maland,  Fra.  260. 

Malaton,  A.  433. 

Malbone,  Peter  447. 

Malborne,  Peter  548. 

Malby,  Jno.  536. 

Maiden,    Francis    168,    174,    177,    189, 

John  276. 
Maldin,  Francis  155. 
Male,  James  376,  Martin  245. 
Malen,  Geo.  116,  151. 
Males,   Edwin   552. 
Maley,   Danl.    169. 
Malford,  Joane  429,  Tho.  237. 
Malin,  Edw.  430,  Morgan  425. 
Malladine,  John  307. 
Mallam,  Geo.  159. 
Mallard,    Eliz.    529,    Fra.    302,    Henry 

453,  Tho.  160,  460,  491,  483. 
Mallcase,  Edw.  265. 
Mallen,  Geo.  116,  162. 
Mallerd,  Tho.  236,  237. 
Mallerns,  Peter  495. 
Mallerus,  Peter  317,  495. 
Mallery,  Richd.  189,  Rose  306. 
Mallett,  Robt.  347,  Wm.  32. 
Mallew,  Jacob  512. 
Malliase,  Edw.  265. 
Mallin,  Clemt.  388. 
Mallinge,  James  404. 
Mallory,  Phill.  505. 

Mallowes,  Jno.  482,  524,  Tho.  482,  524. 
Mallry,  Cormack  310. 
Malton,  Ja.   242. 
Malum,  Geo.  486. 
Mamburne  Hills,  120. 
MaMa  Sheement,  308. 
Man,  Bath.  525,  Edw.  459,  James  404, 

459,  500,  Nich.  47,  John  417,  Robert 

43,  68,  Tho.  106,  390,  393,  440,  449. 
Manahan,  William  316. 
Mancell,  David  29. 
Manchest,  John  157. 
Mander,  Wells  221,  Wilkes  373. 
Mandergan,  Jno.  373. 
Manditt,   Shirly  541. 
Mandrose,   Sanders   253. 
Manet,  Wal.  78. 
Manger,  Eliz.  216,  John  191. 
Mangor,  John  191,  196,  200. 
Maning,  Jane  258,  Joane  273,  John  268, 

274,  558,  Lazorus  28,  Mr.  389,  Wm. 

391. 


Manington,  Wm.  454. 

Manker,  Robt.   195. 

Manley,  Roger  517. 

Manly,  John  43,  77,  Rich.  554. 

Mann,  Anth.  441,  Benja.  258,  Christian 

180,     James     462,     Jno.     444,     536, 

Nicholas  64,   143,  Samuell  381,  529, 

Thomas  10,  195,  205,  426,  468. 
Manner,  Marg.  291. 
Mannering,   Henry  411,   Rich.  462. 
Manners,  Jos.  32. 
Manning,    Edw.    566,    Eliz.    445,    Giles 

551,  John  180,  Tho.  209,   356,   357, 

Wm.  180. 
Mannings,  Mr.  515,  Robt.  506. 
Mannor,  Tho.  257,  352. 
Manny,  Jno.  557,  Wm.  557. 
Manoakin,  place  called  456. 
Manough,   Patrick   247. 
Mansell,  David  29,  76,   106,   117,   140, 

158,   161,  266,   297,   330,  364,  John 

197,  230. 
Mansens,  Luke  558. 
Manser,  Tho.   230. 
Mansfeild,   David   232,   485,   Eliz.   297, 

Hen.  430,  Jane  297,  Jno.  485,  Robt. 

267,   Thos.    186,   Vincent   245,   Wm. 

304. 
Manshipp,  Richard  94. 
Manson,  Wm.  486. 
Manton,    Luke,   431. 
Mantone,  Will.  255. 
Mantpoyick,  place  called  243. 
Many,  Andrew  549,  George  546,  John 

353,  356,  Wm.  173. 
Maphee,  Rob.  290,  Ro.  421. 
Maple,  John  267,  Robt.  496,  Tho.  346, 

393. 
Maples,  Geo.   536. 
Mapp,  John  296. 
Mappin,  Rich.  347. 
Mappine,  John   186. 
Mapps,  Robt.  267. 
Maquillan,  Danll.  455. 
Marall,  Geo.  239. 
Marbery,   Richd.   129. 
Marble,  Geo.  488. 

March,  Ann  551,  Susan  554,  Tho.  268. 
Marchant,  Wm.  493. 
Marchlam,  Tho.  173. 
Marcum,  Wm.  448. 
Marcy,  Tho.   128. 
Mare,  John  210. 
Marecroft,   Sam.   285. 
Mareland,  Tho.  243. 
Mares,  Mary  191. 
Marffe,  Bryan  291. 


General  Index 


687 


Margaret,  Henry  441,  James  312. 

Margaretts,  John  253,  348. 

Margerom,  Herbert  328. 

Margeson,  Rob.  308. 

Margetts,  Jno.  296,  Stephen  527,  Susan 

557. 
Margrand,  Ad.    176. 
Margrett,  Henry  397,  James  292,  Wm. 

206. 
Marigold,  Wm.  452. 
Marington,  Marmaduke  415. 
Maris,  Wm.  401. 
Marish,  Georg  432,  Mr.  438. 
Marin,  Eliz.  327. 
Mark,  Anto.  290. 
Markason,  Robt.   282. 
Marke,  Alexr.  261,  Jane  510,  Jno.  513, 

Sara  199. 
Markedon,  Jon.  97. 
Marken,  Patience  162,   190. 
Markes,  B.  454,  George  402,  Jon.  145, 

Peter  145,  Richd.   164,  Stephen  514. 
Market,  the  great  188. 
Markey,  David  350. 
Markham,  Ed.  352,  430,  John  103,  115, 

376,   Susan  45,  60,  Thomas  45,  60, 

87,  268,  432,  464,  Timothy  547. 
Markinlton,  And.   282. 
Markland,  Wm.   483. 
Marks,  Brice  82,  John  316. 
Marky,  Jno.  426. 
Marland,  Xtian.  526. 
Marlar,  Joseph  448. 
Marie,  John  391,  Wm.  391. 
Marleaw,    Eliza.    221,   Jane   221,    Nico. 

221. 
Marler,  Joseph  486. 
Marlett,  Davy  300,  Geo.  328. 
Marley,  John  385. 

Marlin,  Geo.  116,  Jeffry  482,  John  120. 
Marlington,  Edwd.  554. 
Marloe,  Mary  241,  Wm.  296,  483. 
Marlow,  Edwd.  393,  506,  Fra.  514,  Jno. 

506,  510,  Joseph  476,  500,  Mary  470, 

Wm.  484. 
Marlowe,  Christo.  373. 
Marly,  Jno.  426,  Tho.  536. 
Marmaduke,     Edw.     469,     Jacob     486, 

Richd.  99,  181,  Wm.  513. 
Marmaid,  Tho.  428. 
Marman,  James  497. 
Marmore,  Eliz.  102. 
Mamer,  Adrian  102. 
Marogan,  John  211. 
Mar,  Wm.  391. 
Marr,  Richard  427. 
Marrace,  howse  of  134. 


Marren,  David  441. 

Marrell,  John  183. 

Marrett,  Robt.  183. 

Marrin,  Phill.  490. 

Marriners:  6,  11,  13,  15,  20,  24,  35,  70, 
77,  78,  80,  159,  164,  185,  383,  390, 
445,  459. 

Marrington,  Marma.  288,  268. 

Marriott,  Henry  165,  Robt.  482,  Wm. 
367. 

Marrott,  Dorothy  517. 

Marrow,  Dorithy  351,  Geo.  171,  James 
365,  Jonathan  351,  438,  Mary  351. 

Marr  owe,  Ann  207. 

Marrwood,  Robt.  424. 

Marsam,  Edw.  131. 

Marsey,  Jon.  78. 

Marsh,  Francis  154,  430,  Geo.  350,  361, 
441,  471,  504,  Hugh  208,  James 
206,  Jane  493,  Jeffery  454,  John  154, 
391,  554,  Joseph  86,  194,  Lawr.  452, 
Richd.  253,  Robt.  513,  Thomas  57, 
67,  122,  174,  179,  445,  497. 

Marshes:  Ballase  367,  416,  Cattle  418, 
Coleman's  519,  Felgate's  480,  Goose 
Hill  503,  the  Great  94,  458,  Little 
458,  Lower  Gulfe  327,  Pastoridge 
507,  Pease  Hill  83,  Sumpton  344, 
Tapahanna  323,  Tococomans  359, 
White  280,  434,  457,  478,  Yarrett's 
419. 

Marshall,  Andrew  389,  Ann  142,  243, 
Capt.  212,  Edw.  107,  Edm.  176, 
Henry  99,  102,  182,  455,  Jon.  39, 
John  140,  156,  172,  191,  198,  247, 
248,  285,  306,  310,  329,  332,  379, 
421,  440,  441,  476,  483,  486,  506, 
Robert  12,  226,  Roger  187,  Sarah 
427,  428,  Tho.  200,  428,  436,  500, 
526,  Walter  115,  Wm.  146,  176, 
250,  353,  440,  486. 

Marshall   of  Virginia,    163. 

Marshamp,  Xtoper.  569. 

Marshen,  Wm.  60. 

Marshfeild,  Richd.   301. 

Marshott,  Michaell  49. 

Marson,  Robt.  428. 

Marsten,  W.  60. 

Marston,  John  375,  Richard  479,  Sil. 
218,  Thomas  394,  443,  507. 

Mart,   Gerard    514. 

Martarta,  Teage  454. 

Martaye,  Edw.  253. 

Marteau,  Nicho.  239,  389. 

Marteaw,  Nicho.  210,  Eliza,  221,  Jane 
221,  ,300,  312,  Capt.  271. 

Marter,  Wm.  391. 


688 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Mar  tew,  Ed.  391. 

Martha,  Mary  371. 

Marthas,  Mary  483. 

Martiall,  Jno.  179. 

Martian,  Capt.  120,  Eliza.  121,  Jane 
121,  Nicho.   121. 

Martiau,  Capt.  120,  Eliz.  121,  Jane  121, 
Nicho.  121. 

Martiaw,  Nicholas   378. 

Martin,  Agnis  114,  Alice  445,  Arthur 
23,  66,  Capt.  60,  86,  101,  157,  Danl. 
295,  Dudgill  275,  279,  Edw.  205, 
216,  513,  Eliz.  98,  180,  Emll.  470, 
Francis  118,  123,  170,  217,  549,  550, 
Francisco  385,  Giles  17,  Henry  120, 
242,  372,  567,  James  369,  486,  Jane 
180,  501,  Joan  233,  John  8,  147,  162, 
214,  220,  226,  253,  267,  284,  286, 
298,  299,  313,  346,  382,  412,  415, 
431,  452,  472,  476,  487,  502,  527, 
528,  539,  541,  Mary  178,  197,  294, 
404,  460,  Michael  439,  Nathan  41, 
Nathaniell  62,  Nich.  47,  92,  94,  133, 
180,  389,  Noble  396,  Oliver  453, 
Patience  348,  Phillip  171,  Richd. 
134,  432,  Robert  17,  18,  33,  88,  98, 
148,  171,  200,  439,  Sarah  475,  485, 
Susannan  431,  Tho.  50,  60,  399,  439, 
464,  559,  566,  Wm.  90,  165,  267, 
362,  444,  459,  484,  564. 

Martin  Brandon:  37,  55,  67,  72,  87, 
147,  150,  152,  158,  181,  183. 

Martin's  Hope,  226. 

Martin's  Ship,  Capt.  87. 

Martine,  John  294. 

Marting,  Wm.  464. 

Martinge,  James  383. 

Martledon,   Math.   29. 

Martley,  Roger  394. 

Marton,  Geo.  238,  250,  Jno.  463,  Jos. 
225,  Ralph  218,  Walter  455. 

Martyn,  Eliz.  248,  Francis  152,  Henry 
444,  John  481,  Patience  127,  Robert 
98,    155. 

Mascale,   Jno.    325. 

Mascall,  Wm.   141. 

Masclaken,  Robt.  349. 

Mascoll,  Richd.  33,  101. 

Mascull.  Susan  284. 

Mase,  Tho.  184. 

Masefeild,  Richd.   175. 

Masey,  Ralph  520. 

Masfell,  Rich.  350. 

Masfeild,  Richd.  264. 

Masgarke,  Jaques  128. 

Masgrave,  Tho.  183. 

Mash,  Sam.  455,  Thomas  99,  248,  258. 


Mashfeild,  Edmd.  232. 

Mashy,  Sarah  349,  376. 

Masie,  Ann  208. 

Mask,  Sam,  455. 

Maskall,  Susan  197. 

Maske,  Thomas  493. 

Mason,  Ann  10,  134,  213,  293,  444, 
562,  Capt.  300,  399,  Charles  78, 
Dorathy  355,  Edd.  351,  Edw.  180, 
448,  557,  Eliz.  209,  Francis  34,  49, 
134,  151,  166,  209,  George  332,  333, 
Henry  167,  367,  559,  James  98,  173, 
177,  179,  234,  281,  353,  562,  Joane 
209,  Jon.  40,  68,  John  129,  135,  144, 
209,  382,  408,  419,  448,  457,  468, 
554,  Joye  459,  Maly  446,  Mary  134, 
281,  Mathew  536,  Nich.  374,  Peter 
10,  203,  334,  543,  Robt.  26,  120,  138, 
310,  358,  428,  Ruth  358,  Samll.  523, 
Sarah  209,  Susan  484,  553,  559,  Tho. 
160,  196,  203,  334,  459,  568,  Wm. 
165,  194,  274. 

Masque,  Thomas  359. 

Massacree,  the  first  260. 

Masse,  Alexr.  221. 

Massengall,  Daniell  563. 

Masser,  Tho.  199. 

Massey,  Edw.  447,  Jno.  502,  Peter  547, 
Robt.  289. 

Massinborne,  Wm.  358. 

Massy,  Alex.  482,  Ralph  554,  Wm.  557. 

Master,  Edward  555. 

Masters,  Edward  555,  Fran.  525, 
Michaell  556,  Mihill  273,  Rich.  455, 
554,  Robert  98,  425,  Tho.  117. 

Masterson,  Eliz.  309,  381. 

Mastert,  Michaell   157. 

Maston,  Geo.  250,  Jno.  463,  Wm.  139, 
■554. 

Mastor,  Edward  554. 

Maswello,  Daniell  564. 

Matachepeneck  329. 

Matchepungo:  242,  267,  285,  294,  295, 
296,  330,  344,  350,  353,  356,  361, 
406,   407,   452,   467,    507,    515,    552. 

Matchotanke,   261. 

Match oticks,  398. 

Matham,  Wm.  274. 

Mather,  Henry  551,  John  348,  Tho.  281. 

Matherell,  William  74. 

Mathers,  Margarett  389. 

Mathew,  Jon.  112,  John  211,  310,  330, 
366,  Kath.  562,  Ralph  404,  Robert 
81,  211. 

Mathewes,  Anthony  561,  Benj.  295,  380, 
Barbara  338,  388,  Col.  371,  373,  Edm. 
167,  James  435,  Richd.  205,  Samuell 


General  Index 


689 


8,  133,  134,  144,  167,  348,  373,  389, 
Tho.  128,  168,  Wm.  391. 

Mathews,  Ann  197,  Anth.  85,  106,  444, 
511,  559,  Benj.  290,  294,  412,  418, 
Col.  292,  508,  Edmd.  216,  Edw.  464, 
506,  Ellinor  219,  316,  Henry  454, 
482,  Jacob  170,  James  341,  431,  484, 
488,  524,  557,  Jane  453,  482, 
Johanna  340,  Jon.  28,  81,  John  141, 
176,  196,  401,  428,  Margt.  450,  482, 
Maurice  286,  Mr.  273,  494,  Morras 
482,  Morrice  285,  Morris  217,  455, 
Phill.-  285,  Rich.  80,  151,  Robt.  148, 
299,  Roger  109,  Saml.  4,  13,  270, 
291,  300,  326,  374,  342,  344,  362, 
536,  Thomas  109,  128,  259,  452,  484, 
551,  Winfred  306,  William  90,  219, 
509. 

Mathewson,  James  309. 

Mathin,  Eliz.  119. 

Mathis,  Ann  42,  91. 

Mathias,  Mathew  222. 

Mathone,  Teague  464. 

Mathy,  Eliz.  303. 

Maties,  Alexander  87. 

Matin,  Tho.  289. 

Matlin,   John  202. 

Matocks,  a  place  called  199. 

Maton,  Nicholas  93. 

Matou,  Nicholas  93. 

Matravers,  119. 

Matricks,  Alex.   288. 

Matrom,  Col.  422,  John  122,  462,  463, 
486,  488,  490,  510. 

Matron,  John  299,  337. 

Matrum,  Col.  486,  John  132,  Wm.  28. 

Matson,  Peter  557. 

Mattahunck,  place  called  107,  113,  133, 
217. 

Mattapony:  325,  366,  420,  470,  471. 

Matter,  Wm.  273,  472. 

Matteram,  Jo.  161. 

Matterdy,  Tho.  226. 

Mattershead,  Samll.  474. 

Matthews,  Mary  238,  Saml.  160,  Win- 
fred 234. 

Mattocks,  Alex.  400,  Ann  338,  Joyce 
459. 

Mattro,  John   307. 

Mattrom,  John  308,  319,  350,  360,  364, 
366,  460,  Joseph  206,  Col.  382. 

Mattron,  Col.  362,  460,  John  248,  416. 

Mattrum,  John  252,  Neale  282. 

Mattumsarkin,  place  called  398. 

Maturt,  Owen  324. 

Marvell,  John  267,  286. 

Marwin,  Jno.  453. 


Mary,  John  220,  Tho.  481. 

Maryland,  205. 

Mauckes,   Gilbert  78. 

Mauday,  John  286. 

Maudor,  Randall  173. 

Maues,  Mary  349. 

Maukes,  the  great  198. 

Maulden,  Francis  51,  74,  81,  96,  128, 
134,  148,  160,  Katherine  51,  74,  Wm. 
28. 

Maulin,  Tho.  387. 

Maulson,   Edw.   136. 

Maunce,  Willi.  61. 

Maunder,  Hen.  516,  Wilkes  423,  Wm. 
559. 

Mause,  Alex.  221. 

Maurice,  Ed.  426,  George  336,  Mar- 
garett  526,  Willi.  61,  William  81. 

Mavellis,  Claus  250. 

Mavin,  Eliz.  327. 

Maw,  Tho.  223,  390,  440. 

Maway,  Tho.  307. 

Mawe,  Hanna  98,  Tho.  341. 

Mawfler,  Laves  209. 

Mawgery,  James   204. 

Max,  Rob.  327. 

Maxe,  Robert  37,   66. 

Maxfeild,  John  92. 

Maxney,  Charles  50,  86. 

Maxrell,  Alex.   199. 

Maxwell,  Jane  434. 

May,  Alice  341,  Cornelius  2,  351,  Ed- 
ward 66,  148,  559,  Eliz.  367,  Geo. 
455,  554,  Gilb.  345,  Hannah  61, 
James  351,  John  136,  452,  475,  Jon. 
142,  Margaret  326,  559,  Mildred  481, 
Hihill  499,  Nich.  129,  Robert  85, 
560,  Roger  367,  Richd.  138,  Tho. 
367,  444,  458,  492,  Wm.  162,  351, 
409,  451,  569. 

Mayden,  Jon.  233. 

Maydley,   Peter   157. 

Mayer,   Edw.   163. 

Mayes,   Henry  207. 

Mayhew,  John  545. 

Mayle,  Andrew  402. 

Maylor,  Jone  109. 

Maynard,  Peter  562,  Tobias  341. 

Mayne,  Henry  395,  John  313,  Samll. 
172,   Susanna   208. 

Mayo,  Edw.  23,  Jno.  562. 

Mayson,  Jane  422,  John  451,  528, 
Lemll.  518,  Tho.  457. 

Maze,  Judeth  525,  Robt.  146. 

Mazed,   Toane  425. 

Mazey,  Ralph  530. 

Mazon,  Ralph  441. 


690 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Mead,  Humphry  547,  John  124,  Joane 

558,  Jon.  143,  Robt.  499,  Tho.  489, 

Wm.  513. 
Meadcroft,  Xpr.  336. 
Meade,  John  97,  Sarah  460,  523. 
Meader,  Ambrose  41,  Jon.  86,  Jno.  476, 

Nich.  88,  Saml.  431,  Tho.  467,  478, 

Wm.  476. 
Meades,  Thomas  49,  93,  316. 
Meadowes,  Henry  564. 
Meadows,  Henry  278. 
Meadow,  the  great  465,  the  104,   182, 

475. 
Meadow  Spring,  the  228. 
Meadwell,  Wm.  152,  307. 
Meakes,  John  132,  Roger  558. 
Meal,  Robt.  303. 
Mealy,  Kath.  293. 
Meares,  Ann  209,  255,  288,  Barth.  331, 

419,    516,    551,    Hen.    28,    83,    566, 

Humph.    209,    255,    288,    John    298, 

317,  453,   562,  Tho.   179,   182,   192, 

Walter  283,  Wm.  525. 
Mecane,  Kath.  307. 
Mecannick,  Dan.  282. 
Mecanter,  Alex.  398,  554. 
Meccremore,  Hen.  347. 
Mechell,  Tho.  36. 
Meckworth,  Arthur  124. 
Mecunny,  Mecum  261. 
Medar,  Jno.  523. 
Medcalfe,    Chape.    191,    Christo.     119, 

Georg   11,   Gilbert   368,    523,   Henry 

46,   56,  Jeffery  157,  Jno.   293,  Wm. 

113,  209,  266,  376,  378,  Xtopr.  176. 
Medcap,  Jno.  456. 
Meddars,  Tho.  348. 
Meddows,  Henry  310. 
Meder,  Jno.  523. 
Meders,  Ambrose  104. 
Medlam,  Agnis  46,  56. 
Medland,  Geo.  142. 
Medle,  Robt.  85. 
Medlecoe.  Joseph  147. 
Medley,  Robt.  125,  192,  Wm.  200. 
Medlin,  Geo.  270. 
Medly,  Georg  545,  Nathaniell  397. 
Medmore,  Jno.  421. 
Medraffe,  Chas.  266,  Wm.  266. 
Medralfe,  Wm.  266. 
Medstard,  John  248,  Tho.  248. 
Mee,  Georg  22. 
Meechwell,  Tho.  197. 
Meedgrew,  Jno.  491. 
Meekes,  John  215,  258,  304,  421,  468, 

470. 
Meekins,  Jno.  293,  562,  Tho.  440. 


Meeks,  John  228,  309. 

Meere,  Thos.  183. 

Meeres,  Edwd.  340,  Humph.  112,  John 

157,  405,  Thomas  55,  370. 
Meers,  Henry  514. 
Mees,  William  324. 
Meese,  Henry  534,  559,  560. 
Megen,  Nicholas  366. 
Meggs,  Geo.  265. 
Mekins,  Anne  248. 
Meland,  Mary  169. 
Melclaugh,  Robt.  428. 
Meld,  Henry  517. 
Melder,  John  50. 
Meldron,   Isabell   351. 
Melford,   Thomas  443. 
Melham,  James  145. 
Meling,  Wm.  482. 
Melleger,  John  221. 
Meller,  John  185,  Tho.  213. 
Mellett,  Ellinor  481. 
Mellin,  Wm.  287. 
Melling,  Anne  287,  An  530,  Mary  530, 

Susan  530,  Tho.  486,  William  43,  53, 

68,    286,    287,    414,    435,    534,    539, 

554. 
Mellinge,  William  321,   322,  329,  330. 
Mellingham,  John  512. 
Mellings,  Wm.  406,  407. 
Mellington,  Jone  453. 
Mellock,  Jno.  195. 
Mellon,  Nich.  242. 
Mells,  Menery  385,  Wm.  315,  469. 
Melsworth,  Col.  323. 
Melton,  Hannah  106,  Thomas  22,  106. 
Melvice,  Agnis  316. 
Members.  Jno.  444. 
Memax,  Wm.  473. 
Memux,  Wm.  280. 
Memorish,  Mary  429. 
Mendham,  John  58,  511. 
Menefey,  Georg  2. 
Menefie,  Geo.  160,  164,  168. 
Menefy,  Geo.  184. 
Menefye,  Geo.  3,  161. 
Menifie,  Mr.  134,  Wm.  120. 
Men  if  ye,  Georg  54. 
Menlock,  Jno.  559. 
Menloe,  Nicholas  200,  Thomas  200. 
Menslye,  Geo.  106. 
Meradith,  John  256. 
Merce,  Robt.  440. 
Mercer,  Alice  367,  Barradine  170,  198, 

522,  John  134,  Richd.  154,  Robt.  78, 

523,  Tho.  375,  Will.  434. 
Merchant,  Jeffery  63,  Tho.  446. 
Merchants:  2,  3,  25,  35,  53,  54,  55,  56, 


General  Index 


691 


58,  68,  83,  85,  91,  92,  94,  96,  97, 
132,  143,  159,  160,  167,  169,  171, 
175,  176,  188,  196,  215,  224,  239, 
£43,  251,  252,  277,  278,  279,  297, 
311,  321,  322,  330,  332,  343,  352, 
366,  368,  397,  403,  433,  445,  471, 
499,  513,  522,  523,  527,  560. 

Merchant,  Cape  4,   226. 

Merchants  Hope:  35,  93,  100,  145,  188, 
202,  316,  456. 

Merchants  Land:   137,  456. 

Merchant  Taylor,  a  296. 

Merham,  Robt.  548. 

Meredath,  Wm.  455. 

Mereday,  Rich.  458,  Wm.  217. 

Meredeth,  Ellin  397,  Jno.  504,  530, 
Samson  565,  Thomas  392,  403,  458, 
Wm.   566. 

Meredith,  David  196,  Ellen  441,  John 
257,  530,  Thomas  444,  465. 

Meres,  Jno.  561. 

Merewether,  Mr.  375,  562,  Nich.  312, 
338,  558,  566. 

Merey,  Jno.  205. 

Merriweather,  Mr.  378. 

Merfee,  James  57. 

Merick,  Danll.  393,  426. 

Merideth,  Tho.  198,  408. 

Merifell,  Kath.  328. 

Merifield,  Abra.  171. 

Meriman,  Jno.  345. 

Merin,  Johna.  464. 

Meriweather,  Mr.  377,  Nicholas  350, 
377,  385,  410. 

Meriwether,  Nicholas  252,  257,  341. 

Merler,  Barradine  170,  Jon.  39. 

Merr,  John  262. 

Merradith,  John  260. 

Merrard,  Deborah  27. 

Merrday,  Phillip  412. 

Merradayth,  Phillip  412. 

Merreck,  Wm.  293. 

Merreday,  Tho.  470,  528. 

Merredith,  Charles  369,  John  503,  Mary 
352,  Tho.  347. 

Merrell,  Henry  551. 

Merrett,  William  67. 

Merrick,  Danll.  479,  Eliz.  533,  Hen.  30, 
Howell  290,  Marg.  352,  Tho.  146. 

Merricke,  Danll.  444,  468. 

Merridav,  John  106,  Phillip  306,  Tho. 
357,  Wm.  387. 

Merrideth,  Francis  49,  Jno.  530,  Tho- 
mas 49,  93,  338,  386. 

Merridow,  Jno.   365. 

Merrie,  Savage  25,   69. 

Merriman,  Ann  382,  Edward  382,  James 


32,  John  186,  354,  373,  510,  512, 
526,  459,  Richd.  514,  Sarah  32. 

Merrington,  Mermadicke  180. 

Merrit,  Hugh  355,  Wm.  237. 

Merritt,  George  358,  Henry  221. 

Merriwether,  Nicholas  340,  373,  566. 

Merriot,  James  431. 

Merror,  Nicho.   178. 

Merrott,  James  197. 

Merry,  Isaac  47,  Jon.  143. 

Merryman,  Ann  150,  Audry  186,  James 
86,  150,  152,  169,  John  86,  241,  248, 
306,  341,  393,  563,  567,  Richd.  448, 
458,  526. 

Merrywether,  Mr.  490,  Nicholas  451, 
497. 

Merter,  Barradine  170. 

Merydaies,  Tho.   404. 

Merywether,  Nich.  290,  293,  Nich.  309, 
310,  316,  326,  352,  394,  421. 

Mesell,  Jos.   152. 

Messenger,  Hercules  91,  Thomas  425. 

Messer,  James  254. 

Metcalfe,  Gilbert  523. 

Metchalfe,  Tho.  403. 

Metgrigar,  James  198. 

Methell,  Tho.   36. 

Methoe,  Edmond  358. 

Methold,  Tho.  144. 

Methum,  Paul  524. 

Metkalfe,  Rachell  406. 

Metomkin,   554. 

Metstard,  Thomas  522. 

Mettick,  Jno.  483. 

Mettom,   Geo.   304. 

Mettorn,  Geo.  304. 

Meuslye,  Georg  106. 

Mew,  Ralph  453. 

Mews,  Bartholomew  551. 

Micant,  Danll.  455. 

Michaell,  Alice  517,  Edw.  172,  Francis 
5,  509,  Gabriell  508,  Henry  397,  433, 
558,  Jno.  405,  406,  454,  482,  551, 
Mr.  463,  Margt.  482,  Rich.  164, 
Samll.  517,  Sarah  482,  Thomas  464, 
'485,   Wm.    28,    260,    437,    487,    569. 

Michaells,    Tno.   522. 

Michalla,  Hugh  215. 

Michallen,   Jno.    302. 

Michell,  Ann  344,  509,  George  547, 
Henry  282,  Johanna  58,  John  197, 
419,  Jon.  43.  Margt.  419,  Math.  292, 
Robt.  484,  Sarah  419.  Stephen  558, 
Susan  388,  Tho.  43,  396.  422,  475, 
548,  Walter  261,  Wm.  462. 

Michem,   John   266. 

Mickey,   Jno.    302. 


692 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Middep,  John  42. 

Middle  Plantation,  the  22,  89,  91,  94, 

95,  105,  106,  113,  161,  167,  186, 
224,  266,  267,  272,  316,  428,  480, 
511,  544. 

Middle  Ridge,  the  81,   116. 

Middlemore,  Geo.  292. 

Middleton,  Catherine  164,  Chas.  482, 
Joane  205,  269,  John  279,  444,  Mary 
156,  279,  Owen  166,  201,  Robt.  276, 
565,  Tho.  454,  Wm.  435. 

Middlewood,  Wm.  209. 

Middowes,  Henry  94. 

Midleton,  George  482,  554,  James  65, 

96,  John  121,  339,  377,  Mary  348, 
Nich.  28,  83,  Rich.  355,  Robt.  370, 
384,  385,  391,  Tho.  322,  483,  Wm. 

97,  182,  356. 
Midemore,  Jno.  336,  341. 
Midland,  Geo.  310,  421. 
Midlemore,  Geo.  240. 
Midlux,  Hen.  232. 
Miffomer,   Mary  327. 
Might,  Stephen  559. 
Mihill,  Edw.  209. 
Mike,  Ann  137. 
Milboe,  Joseph  434. 
Milbome,  Rich.  31. 
Milbridge,  Sarah  460,  523. 
Milburn,  Francis  542. 

Milby,  Henry  481,  John  357,  406,  413. 

Milday,  Edw.  200. 

Miles,  Adam  339,  508,  538,  Barbar  133, 
David  350,  Edward  559,  Eliz.  479, 
541,  Hen.  238,  Humph.  266,  513, 
John  164,  260,  263,  311,  Mary  565, 
Patriack  461,  Robt.  124,  133,  177, 
246,  Tho.  171,  174,  207,  430,  Walter 
479,  Wm.  134,  524,  561. 

Milford,  Marth.  482,  Sarah  254. 

Milford  Haven,  place  called:  131,  132, 
133,  135,  136,  227,  251,  267,  272, 
337,  363,  368,  421,  473,  564. 

Mill,  James  312,  Jonn  291,  384. 

Millacha,  Ja.   179. 

Millard,  Richard  103,  Richd.  200. 

Millby,  John  '418. 

Mille,  Luke  105.       ' 

Millen,  Barthol.  138,  Herbert  213. 

Miller,  Alice  441,  Andrew  276,  Doro- 
thv  276,  277,  338,  Edw.  146,  524, 
Eliz.  532,  Fr.  81,  366,  Georg.  93, 
Henry  51,  65,  85,  87,  James  73,  182, 
211,  248,  313,  434,  453,  525,  563, 
Jane  314,  Joan  190,  Jno.  152,  249, 
299,  312,  Joseph  222,  464,  445,  Mar- 
garett   90,   Mary  73,   444,   Pat.    205, 


238,  312,  403,  497,  547,  Richd.  90, 
225,  254,  456,  561,  Robert  390,  Sarah 
329,  Tho.  277,  Wm.  254,  344,  349, 
428,  460,  501,  Xtopr.  194. 

Milles,  David  561,  Dorothy  566,  James 
525,  Mary  525. 

Millett,  Francis  213,  214,  Henry  213, 
Ralph  252,  Wm.  357,  434. 

Millford,  Edw.  453,  Joan  456,  Martha 
524. 

Milliard,  Wm.  433. 

Millicent,  James  286,  549. 

Millington,  An.  561,  Joan  201. 

Millis,  Abigail  336. 

Millisent,  Robt.  355,  Tho.  479. 

Mills,  Alice  61,  And.  319,  Ann  397, 
Cornelius  249,  David  561,  Edw.  457, 
461,  476,  Eliz.  531,  Hannah  396, 
Henry  404,  444,  Humph.  513,  Joan 
296,  452,  482,  John  59,  277,  430, 
431,  516,  517,  Jon.  134,  141,  Lewis 
138,  Miles  209,  Peter  393,  400,  469, 
521,  528,  Richard  425,  454,  Rowland 
453,  Susan  31,  84,  Thomas  444,  Wil- 
diam  61,  153,  173,  370,  469,  521, 
528. 

Mills,  the:  30,  36,  49,  67,  81,  83,  88, 
138,  158,  161,  201,  227,  250,  291, 
344,  Randolph's  556,  the  Round  173, 
Swamp  510,  the  Mill  dam  495,  Mills 
flood  gates  430,  431,   the  Mill   land 

164,  513. 
Milnehowse,  John  17,  18. 
Milner,  Tho.  202. 
Milnes,  Wm.  176,  177. 
Millright,    a    551. 
Milshire,  John  249. 
Milsop,  Jno.  546. 

Milton,  Richard   52,   59,   98,   119,    145, 

165,  Tho.  125,  Wm.  93,  218,  224, 
298. 

Milward,  John  15. 

Mimes,  Ralph  208,  Thomas  465. 

Mims,  Tho.  374. 

Mincher,  Wm.  514. 

Minefrid,  Anne  258. 

Minery,  Geo.  201. 

Mines,   Ralph    208,   Richard   527,   Tho. 

401,  465. 
Minifie,  Chas.  150,  Eliz.  378,  Georg  24, 

123,   128,    143,   378,   Mary  378,   Mr. 

142. 
Minifye,  Georg  104,  105,  120. 
Ministers:    9,   19,  27,   34,   36,   52,    154, 

171,  264,  287,  357,  412. 
Minners,  Geo.  166. 
Minnes,  Tho.  212. 


General  Index 


693 


Minnies,  Tho.  282. 

Minnokes,  Wm.  107. 

Minor,  Humphry  547,  Kath.  149. 

Minson,  Minor  363,  402,  Minred  334, 
Minord  384,  Robr.  562. 

Minshem,  Eliz.  300. 

Minstrell,  Tho.  359,   390. 

Minstrill,  Tho.  223. 

Mint,  John  198. 

Minter,  Ann  29,  David  37,  Edward  29, 
40,  88,  90,  94,  549,  Grace  40,  94, 
John   29,  Jon.   35,    100,  Richard   29. 

Minton,  David  63,  Phillip  356. 

Misen,  Luke  267,  487. 

Mishew,  Henry  79. 

Miskell,  Teage  453. 

Misle,  Luke  31. 

Mison,  Jno.  427. 

Mission,  Jno.   164. 

Mitchell,  Alice  329,  Ann  347,  Edw.  149, 
Hen.  243,  329,  James  102,  Jo.  314, 
Jno.  377,  419,  Margt.  419,  Mr.  234, 
Sarah  419,  Thomas  55,  80,  88,  Wm. 
39,  81,  324,  353,  356. 

Mitchener,  Sanders  296. 

Mithell,  Math.  202. 

Mixon,  John  195. 

Moales,  Eliz.  297. 

Moalson,   Edward   355. 

Moanack,  place  called,  79. 

Moat,  James  453. 

Mobbs,   Jno.   509. 

Moby,  John  220,  Tho.  461. 

Mocellett,  John  307. 

Mockay,  Jno.  301. 

Mocoy,  John  214,  382. 

Modd,  Tho.  475. 

Mode,  Giles  322,  475. 

Mogeredge,  Richd.  301. 

Mohixen,  place  called,  529,  538. 

Mohonney,   Dennis   26. 

Mohunharaga,  Hugh  250. 

Mokezann,  Dennis  338. 

Mokoy,  Daniell  355. 

Molden,  Mary  358. 

Mole,  Saml.  151. 

Molfe,  Tho.  197,  Wm.  197. 

Molletta,  Roro  357. 

Mollineux,  Cuth.  366. 

Moline,  Wm.  257. 

Molson,  Henry  367,  Rebecca  336. 

Molsworth,  Col.  323,  Guy  220. 

Molten,  Tho.  352,  Jasper  53,  73,  Wm. 
383. 

Momford,  Richd.   129. 

Momtapweake,  place  called,  108. 

Momus,  Joseph  103. 


Monack,  place  called  21,  110,  117. 

Moncer,  James  84. 

Monday,  Thomas  58. 

Monder  James  307. 

Mondy,  John  129. 

Mondye,   Symon   38. 

Monford,  Jeffry  301. 

Monfort,  Edwin   524. 

Monger,  John  399. 

Monke,  Eliz.  259,  Thomas  564. 

Monkes,  Frank  263,  Thomas  546. 

Monroe,  Daniell  439. 

Monrow,  Andrew  193,  272,  474,  Wm. 
554. 

Monser,  John  176. 

Monson,  John  222. 

Mont,  Alex.  375,  425,  468. 

Montague,  Lewis  369,  Peter  173,  383, 
385. 

Montegue,  Peter  176. 

Montgomery,  Neale  199,  Robt.  385. 

Montra,  John  311. 

Moodall,  John  389. 

Moode,  Jno.  363. 

Moody,  Mary  118,  Tho.  369. 

Moold,  Francis  144. 

Moon,  Abra.  230,  245,  253,  306,  A.  315, 
Henry  480. 

Moone,  Abraham  113,  135,  210,  211, 
220,  223,  245,  246,  249,  250,  283, 
292,  297,  298,  300,  303,  304,  312, 
313,  330,  350,  354,  368,  377,  378, 
381,  486,  502,  505,  506,  507,  565, 
Arthur  260,  Capt.  305,  Frances  378, 
Hen.  80,  204,  John  17,  32,  77,  101, 
140,  169,  275,  391,  411,  420,  514, 
Joseph  136,  Susan  32,  Prudence  378, 
Martin  510,  Mr.  277,  Tho.  288,  528. 

Moor,  Edw.  268,  Henry  233,  Jno.  157, 
Miles  247,  Richd.  246,  Tho.  231. 

Moore,  Abdala  160,  Ann  153,  278,  282, 

351,  479,  Anth.  370,  Augustine  278, 
384,  Calleat  328,  Capt.  191,  Dan. 
207,  212,  Dorcas  220,  Edw.  214,  285, 
306,  337,  412,  453,  557,  Edmond  355, 
Eliz.  78,  198,  345,  543,  George  191, 
427,  Henry  144,  204,  443,  551,  James 
389,  Jane  64,  115,  Jeffery  252,   316, 

352,  482,  568,  Joane  194,  John  24, 
26,  88,  97,  98,  105,  149,  166,  273, 
281,  345,  347,  382,  395,  438,  453, 
480,  Jon.  144,  Joseph  16,  41,  96,  153, 
331,  513,  Lambath  385,  Lambert  392, 
Leonard  19,  Mary  337,  Miles  277, 
Nath.  33,  101,  198,  Nich.  81,  366, 
Rebecca  204,  216,  269,  475,  513,  555, 
Richard  109,  117,  167,  257,  273,  337, 


694 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Roger  341,  Robt.  23,  66,  Sarah  385, 
Susan  289,  Thomas  68,  97,  167,  184, 
220,  285,  286,  324,  405,  447,  452, 
535,   564,  Wm.  276,   187,   194,  260, 

268,   331,  338,   352,   452,   516,  

467. 

Moorecroft,  Henry  119. 

Mooreland,  Mary  70. 

Moores,  John  157,  Richd.  72,  181,  Robt. 
349. 

Mooreton,  Ralph  212. 

Mooringe,  John  274. 

Moose,  Thomas  389. 

Morane,  Dermot  307  . 

More,  Abram  556,  Ann  212,  Cicely  335, 
Doro.  173,  Edw.  345,  525,  Eliz.  562, 
John  143,  455,  517,  542,  Marmaduke 
454,  Nathl.  178,  Tho.  436,  461,  563, 
564,  Ri.  463,  Robt.  403,  Wm.  173, 
430. 

Morraticon,  place  called,  272,  341,  383, 
445,  504. 

Morecock,  Geo.  268,  Jno.  61,  Tho.  219, 
234. 

Morecraft,  James  482. 

Morecroft,  Edmond  88,  112,  133,  Edw. 
84,  112,  Jno.  564. 

Moreene,  Demetree  473. 

Morefeild,  Jno.  551,  Thomas  456. 

Morenhana,   Edmd.   274. 

Morehead,  John  327,  450. 

Moreland,  Dormett  261,  Edw.  464, 
Richd.  242,  Tho.  132. 

Morely,  Robt.  209,  Fra.  173,  John  342. 

Morepent,  Jno.  472. 

Morethorpe,  Tho.  41. 

Morey,  Geo.  261. 

Morfey,  Mary  199. 

Morfrey,  James  385,  Marg.  341. 

Morgan,  Abra.  185,  Alice  145,  Andrew 
369,  527,  Ann  455,  481,  553,  Capt. 
293,  David  371,  Edw.  50,  58,  78,  92, 
100,  218,  244,  248,  358,  416,  426, 
428,  448,  492,  498,  558,  Eliz.  516, 
541,  Evan  79,  Francis  72,  95,  131, 
132,  171,  214,  229,  237,  253,  259, 
260,  272,  276,  293,  307,  386,  391, 
424,  Griffin  196,  551,  Hannah  481, 
Henry  166,  263,  315,  Hester  428, 
Howell  245,  Isaack  528,  Isabell  481, 
James  253,  454,  Jane  476,  Jenkin  425, 
463,  John  22,  23,  93,  100,  117,  245, 
358,  359,  370,  467,  476,  525,  536, 
548,  Jon.  52,  96,  138,  Jude  525,  553, 
Margarett  48,  94,  455,  Mary  279,  371, 
Mathew  94,  481,  Meredith  125,  452, 
Mr.  373,  Nora  482,  Owen  453,  Richd. 


138,  140,  172,  525,  528,  558,  Robert 
7,  Rowland  221,  Tho.  33,  53,  101, 
106,  138,  233,  251,  326,  376,  416, 
506,  548,  Vallentine  359,  Wm.  34, 
48,  57,  67,  89,  91,  94,  105,  111,  118, 
124,  125,  131,  149,  158,  195,  204, 
223,  232,  241,  262,  264,  311,  338, 
429,  456,  485,  486,  512,  514,  524, 
Walter  339. 

Morganson,  Richd.   275. 

Morgate,  Peter  105. 

Morgen,  Wm.  406. 

Morgin,  Thomas  72,  158. 

Morgon,  Allen  134. 

Morgrave,  Adam  146,  Morcas  178. 

Morian,  Cornelius  455,  Mary  312. 

Morkey,  Edward  374,  Gerrard  483. 

Morksly,  Wm.  258. 

Morland,  Ed.  506,  Kath.  207,  Thomas 
180. 

Morley,  Charles  367,  Eliz.  303,  Jno. 
454,  479,  Joseph  479,  Richd.  466, 
Robt.  255,  288,  309,  Sym.  54,  120, 
Tho.  189,  272,  Wm.  328,  368. 

Morlin,  Jno.  54. 

Morlye,  Richd.  565. 

Morne,  John  188. 

Moroise,  Nicho.  244. 

Moroughen,  Kath.  397. 

Morphew,   Michaell    127. 

Morraine,  John  310  ,Kennet  310. 

Morrall,  Anne  286. 

Morray,  Tho.  525. 

Morrell,  Daniell  332,  Geo.  491,  Tho. 
102. 

Morrey,  Eliz.  125,  Tho.  125,  148,  166. 

Morrice,  Eliza.  282,  James  157,  211, 
315,  Mr.  348,  Nich.  126,  346,  372, 
395,  419,  463,  Peirce  325,  Rice  282, 
Richd.  125,  Tho.  358,  William  110, 
341. 

Morriell,  Da.  281. 

Morrin,  Dan.  281. 

Morris,  Amy  362,  Andrew  537,  Anne 
346,  401,  430,  455,  An  543,  Christian 
429,  Crispian  456,  Dennis  455,  Edw. 
171,  183,  252,  393,  425,  556,  566, 
Eliza.  103,  271,  367,  Evan  149,  172, 
Fra.  260,  520,  Frederick  314,  George 
359,  367,  396,  391,  404,  484,  485, 
541,  542,  Henry  453,  James  51,  65, 
394,  Jenkin  313,  452,  John  38,  131, 
149,  263,  293,  562,  Jon.  39,  Joseph 
196,  386,  Luke  383,  Martha  555, 
Mary  246,  252,  Mathew  392,  Nicho. 
211,  266,  314,  373,  391,  475,  494, 
544,   Owen   538,  Randall  463,   Rich. 


General  Index 


695 


23,  66,  90,  134,  148,  Robt.  31,  335, 
444,  515,  Sam.  383,  Sarah  150,  Simon 
228,  Tho.  60,  227,  263,  267,  300, 
337,  382,  393,  398,  440,  500,  530, 
533,  534,  536,  547,  William  6,  82, 
147,  148,  191,  233,  379,  455,  Xpher. 
242,  427. 

Morrison,  Francis  195,  240,  305,  313, 
Henry  173,  James  382,  Major  188, 
Mrs.  244,  4l6,  Richard  173,  223, 
Wm.  368,  Winifred  173,  195,  223,  319. 

Morry,  Eliz.  459,  Ellianor  359,  Jno. 
457,  Morley  328,  Wm.  426. 

Morryson,  Mary  264,  Mrs.  275. 

Mors,  Tho.  167,  Wm.  187. 

Morse,  Georg  369. 

Morsey,  Tho.  516. 

Morsley,  Mary  283. 

Mort,  Jno.  453,  Richd.  283. 

Morte,  Jesper  134. 

Morter,  Eliz.  396,  Tho.  120. 

Morth,  Edward  85,  James  304. 

Mortimer,  Rowland  113. 

Mortlye,  Jon.  33. 

Morton,  Alice  433,  434,  James  468, 
Jos.  200,  Margaret  194,  Mathew  109, 
Robt.  440,  441,  Thos.  188,  Wm.  43, 
268,  322,  415,  456,  466,  525. 

Mory,  Tho.  426,  Wm.  328. 

Moryow,  Henry  174. 

Moryson,  Francis  92,  391,  394,  411, 
437,  448,  449,  504. 

Mosby,  Edward  429. 

Moseby,   Edw.  482. 

Mosher,  Peter  536. 

Moseley,  Anne  273,  Arthur  275,  Eliz. 
199,  Fra.  195,  Geo.  202,  501,  Henry 
378,  379,  Jos.  78,  194,  John  378, 
Jone  199,  Mr.  335,  Richd.  250,  Robt. 
193,  Saml.  199,  Susanna  275,  Wm. 
191,  246,  275,  431,  468. 

Moseleye,  Mr.  335,  393. 

Moselie,  Mr.  504. 

Mosely,  Arthur  474,  Ed.  482,  Geo.  306, 
Henry  376,  454,  James  475,  Jane  430, 
Jno.  396,  Wm.  431,  Mr.  302,  516, 
Robt.  124,  298,  Wm.  138,  431,  500. 

Moselye,  Mr.  354. 

Moses,  Jane  499,  Jno.  388,  Samll.  427, 
'428,  Xtop.  454. 

Moss,  Andrew  352,  Edw.  307,  Jane  231, 
Robt.  299,  Tho.  299,  558,  Wm.  299. 

Mosse,  Eliz.  115,  Francis  163,  Geo.  347, 
350,  Jeffery  453,  Kath.  388,  Richd. 
214,  Robt.  197,  344,  394,  458,  Tho. 
344,  387,  394,  545,  Wm.  336,  344, 
387,  394,  440,  491,  516,  545. 


Mossey,  Roger  293. 

Mote,  James  358. 

Moteley,  John  373,  395. 

Mothell,  Edw.  281. 

Motheringe,  N.  325. 

Mothershed,  Saml.  312. 

Motis,  Jno.  378. 

Motley,  John  265,  309,  359,  373,  395, 
402,  409,  548,  Thomas  538. 

Motly,  John  72,  368,  371,  395,  531, 
565,  Kath.  441. 

Motram,  John  185. 

Motron,  John  331. 

Motrum,  John  185. 

Mott,  Fra.  282,  John  4,  Jonathan  462, 
Nathaniell   548. 

Motterom,    John    331. 

Mottershead,  Saml.  447,  512. 

Mottershott,  Samll.  541. 

Mottly,  John  398. 

Mottrick,  Alexr.  405. 

Mottrom,  John  230,  242,  252,  260,  331, 
375,  395. 

Mottron,  John  366. 

Mottrum,  John   198. 

Motts,  Wm.  32,  103. 

Moubert,  Eliz.  264. 

Moucrony,  Ardor  385. 

Mouke,  Eliz.  259. 

Mould,  Eliz.  485,  John  222,  255,  Richd. 
548. 

Moulder,  Jon.   143. 

Moule,  Dorathy  355. 

Moulson,  Edward  428,  470,  John  487, 
Wm.  487. 

Moulsworth,  Guy  498. 

Moult,  Mary  453,  Tho.  505,  Wm.  82. 

Moulton,  Eliz.  551,  Jane  529,  Tho.  74, 
463,  529,  531. 

Mouncer,  James  84. 

Mounford,  Margt.  253,  Tho.  168. 

Mounger,  Jno.  441. 

Mount,  Jno.  506,  Tho.  270. 

Mounts:  Folly  249,  489  (Note:  Errone- 
ously written  Holly)  254,  422;  My 
Lady  80,  137,  516,  Malada  516,  Law- 
son  135,  Mordecays  200,  Maries  17, 
Mary's  109,  Matrum's  132. 

Mountford,  Geo.  278,  Jane  351. 

Mountfort,  Edw.  482,  Tho.  428. 

Mountacue,  Peter  479- 

Mountague,  Peter  164. 

Mountegue,  Peter  67,  122,  157,  252, 
297,  329. 

Mountney,  Alexander  6,  357,  359,  Han- 
nah 359,  Jno.  357,  359,  Leonard  357, 


696 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


359,   Roger   357,    359,   Thomas   357, 

355- 
Mourtny,  Gerrard  465. 
Mouse,  Arnoll  209,  Robt.  112,  Thomas 

555. 
Mouson,  John  222. 
Mow,  Tho.  359. 
Mowser,  John  119. 
Moy,  John  312. 
Moye,  Alice  171,  Dorothy  90,  John  62, 

90. 
Moyer,  John  10. 

Moyle,  Edw.  302,  Roger  259,  Wm.  198, 
Moyles,  Nicholas   380. 
Moyner,  Margt.  405. 
Moyse,  Henry  494,  Jon.  22. 
Moyses,  Chri.  82,  John  335,  382,  Theo- 
dore 58,  88,  99,  133,  150,  204,  Wm. 

75. 
Muber,  And.  316. 
Mucer,  El'iz.  300. 
Much,  Edw.  391. 
Muckeford,  Jno.   176. 
Muckully,  Jno.  378. 
Mudd,  Peter  123. 
Mudge,  Tho.  430. 
Mudgett,  Jno.  452,  Tho.  493. 
Muffett,  Francis  64. 
Mugg,  Samll.  220. 
Mukee,  John  309. 
Mule,  Wm.  290. 
Mull,  Tho.  440. 
Mulleines,  Alice  17. 
Mullekin,   Arche  231. 
Mullen,  Tho.  430. 
Mullerd,  Tho.  492. 
Mullett,  Tho.  254,  Wm.  440. 
Mullford,  Tho.  201. 
Mullins,  James  430,  John  264,  558. 
Multis,  Jno.  361. 
Mumford,    Jeff.    428,    John   442,    Wm. 

462. 
Mumpford,  Edw.  475,  Tho.  450. 
Mums,  Wm.  112. 
Mun,  Tho.  525. 
Munck,  John  176,  Math.  512. 
Mundan,  George  566. 
Mundin,  John  286. 
Munday,  Jno.  327,  448,  Margarett  376, 

Mary  191,  Robt.  106,  369,  Wm.  120, 

425. 
Mundy,  Wm.  340,  358. 
Munger,  John  105,   311,   325. 
Munn,  Margt.  491. 
Munns,  Joseph  51*6. 
Munroe,  Andrew    312,    315,    360,    509. 
Munrow,  Andrew   193,   272,   279,   501. 


Muns,  Tho.  235,  Wm.  235. 
Munson,  Jeff.  352,  Tho.  499. 
Munt,  Edward  523,  Rich.  468. 
Munteth,  Wm.  329. 
Mur,  Edw.  391. 
Murbee,  James  284. 
Murbey,  Davey  350. 
Murcocke,  Geo.  137. 
Murdah,  James  426,  Ja.  428. 
Murdure,  Wm.  282. 
Murfeild,  Edward  99. 
Murfery,  Danl.  476. 
Murferry,  Edw.  181. 
Murfin,  Griffin  78. 
Murfrey,  Edwd.  153,   187. 
Murhead,  James  326. 
Murr,  Daniell  69,  Jno.  491. 
Murrah,  Dennis  541. 
Murrall,  Anne  351,  Wm.  286. 
Murally,  Coniers  343. 
Murray,  David  222,  Francis  452,  Tho- 
mas 453. 
Murreen,  Demetre  280. 
Murrey,  Andrew  541,  Daniell  327,  Jno. 

195,  Sanders  148,  Tho.  166. 
Murrie,  Dann  494. 
Murrowes,  David  222. 
Murton,  John  378,  Wm.  399. 
Murry,    Alexr.    261,    Daniell    40,    559, 

Jane  452,  Robert  338,  Tho.  375,  Wm. 

412,  461,  465. 
Musconte,  place  called  387. 
Musgrave,  Tho.  217,  405,  William  99. 
Musgrove,    John    73,    101,    187,    Grace 

2 2 0.  Tho.  146,  288,  Wm.  516. 
Musick,  Geo.  365. 
Muskatina,  Ja.  272,   302. 
Muskowt,  place  called  502. 
Musquoy,  John  176. 
Mussard,  Geo.  385. 
Musson,  James  385. 
Mustran,  John  448. 
Mutford,  George  312. 
Mutton,  Jno.  349,  376,  Kath.  240,  310, 

Mary  177. 
Mux,  Wm.  525. 
Muxford,  John   146,  Robt.  86. 
Myler,  Patrick  253,  497. 
Myles,    Barbery    204,    Edw.    341,    469, 

John  104,  513,  Kath.  204,  Margarett 

339,  500,  Robt.  204. 
Myller,  Ann  192. 
Myner,  Ann  69. 
Mynifie,  Geo.  118. 
Mynors,  Wm.  388. 
Mynyfie,  Mr.  392. 


General  Index 


697 


N 

Nable,  Mary  68. 

Nablett,  Mary  43. 

Nackington,   Fen.  426. 

Nahan,  Rebecca  265. 

Nailes,  James   282. 

Nailor,  James  397. 

Naipes,  Henry  264. 

Namans  feild  323. 

Nance,  Alice  121,  Richard  121. 

Nanry,  Jno.  539. 

Nansamund:   82,  85,  296. 

Nansatiquon,  place  called  336,  384,  470, 
472,  528. 

Napes,  Robt.  438. 

Napier,  Patrick  307. 

Napleton,  Jacob  221. 

Napper,  Tho.  525. 

Nappers,  Mr.  542. 

Nappier,  Tho.  525. 

Nappires,  Mr.  542. 

Nargatt,  Henry  185. 

Narrows,  place  called  494. 

Narton,  Wm.  245. 

Nash,  Ann  441,  Arthur  300,  377,  Bern- 
ard 351,  Danl.  247,  Edw.  277, 
Gregory  370,  Jane  446,  John  269, 
Margarett  315,  Robt.  33,  72,  Thomas 
312,  565. 

Naswattock,  place  called   194. 

Nasworthie,  Mr.  243. 

Nasworthy,  Geo.  446,  Jno.  513,  Tho. 
446,  Tristram  289,  445,  446,  513. 

Natives,  the  (Indians)   205. 

Nauson,  Jno.  524. 

Nayler,  James  246,  John  248. 

Naylor,  John  313,  327,  Richard  554, 
Tho.  236,  Wm.  113. 

Nazareth,  James  441. 

Nazworthy,  Trist.  342,  415. 

Neach,  Danll.  514,  565. 

Neale,  Ann  221,  Antho.  260,  Danll. 
395,  409,  565,  Edw.  453,  Eliz.  291, 
Henry  144,  146,  562,  Isabell  364, 
James  279,  293,  375,  Joane  189,  Jon. 
32,  John  18,  36,  43,  54,  55,  62,  68, 
80,  119,  134,  146,  170,  192,  225, 
253,  373,  374,  Mr.  173,  Pearce  43, 
215,  Peter  193,  262,  312,  382,  548, 
Pru.  351,  Richd.  278,  Ruth  256,  Tho- 
mas 41,  60,  Walter  553,  Wm.  134, 
542,   548,   Xtopr.   197. 

Neall,  Cornelius  526. 

Nealmes,  Richd.  383,  390. 

Neane,  John  215,  Morris  465. 

Neate,  Wm.  542,  Xtopr.  197. 

Neavor,  Richd.  305. 


Neaw,  Richard  396,  399. 

Neck,  Danll.  455. 

Neck  of  Land,  place  called:  3,  19,  48, 
83,  90,   109,   112,  423. 

Necks:  Acquasca  418,  Aqusca  295,  Ar- 
cadia 425,  Ashtons  398,  Atkins  406, 
Bakers  143,  149,  Barren  25,  54,  80, 
105,  142,  174,  Batchelors  184,  Bay 
Tree  91,  232,  Bermodo  Hundred  157, 
Black  Walnutt  57,  81,  503,  Breemans 
302,  Broad  39,  122,  282,  Brices  92, 
Brocas'  Timber  438,  Bryces  522, 
Budds  395,  Burrowes  38,  102,  331, 
Bushes  233,  Erasmus  Carter's  85, 
Caryes  85,  Checquers  36,  Checkroes 
43,  45,  98,  123,  288,  Cherry  Point 
333,  376,  Chesnutt  153,  Chippokes 
39,  73,  Cocketts  231,  Coopers  96, 
Claybornes  53,  77,  127,  Damm  415, 
Dawes    170,    Dawsons    116,    Devells 

211,  Egg  331,  407,  Fairewethers  334, 
Farlows  161,  Fishing  Point  30,  43, 
Forke  430,  481,  Fleets  263,  437, 
Frenchmans  23,  Goatepen  466,  Great 

80,  142,  Half  Way  32,  103,  Halfe 
Way  Tree  26,  Harveys  123,  Har- 
woods  33,  81,  133,  Hawkins  49, 
Hogg  Pen  23,  134,  265,  504,  Indian 
Cabin  521,  Island  189,  531,  Jockeys 
25,  30,  81,  142,  159,  162,  174,  486, 
495,    John's    25,    Joyle    533,    Joyners 

212,  Julians  111,  Juringe  Point  269, 
Kings    178,   206,   532,  Kingsmell  80, 

81,  Lewis  503,  519,  Little  521, 
Locust  208,  Long  388,  444,  Macho- 
ticke  235,  Macksoomuck  406,  Major 
170,  Martins  Brandon  559,  560,  563, 
Matchapungo  507,  Mattahuncks  386, 
502,  Mattapony  336,  Mattasip,  164, 
Mattchotick  208,  Meares  149,  Monack 
35,  Nantupcoy  336,  Nanzemum  292, 
Narrow  238,  New  Point  Comfort 
195,  Nimoles  541,  Nutt  Tree  39,  113, 
Nunckles  541,  Old  Mans  59,  115, 
135,  Oyster  Bancke  76,  Oystershell 
67,  Pascalls  50,  63,  Pease  Hill  77, 
Pemacrey  336,  Peter  Phyponds  236, 
Piney  Point  123,  Pochichery  329, 
Poplar  111,  135,  178,  186,  222,  411, 
469,  514,  Powells  530,  Puscatoway 
368,  Pyanketank  295,  Pynie  32,  92, 
Pyny  Point  288,  Quiacomico  439,  Quio- 
comack  212,  Rich  24,  54,  104,  105, 
114,  117,  139,  160,  208,  Sandy  Povnt 
,259,  462,  Stokes  81,  Store  Poynt  187, 
Taylors  512,  563,  Thomas'  230,  357, 
405,  455,  Tymber  144,  176,  187,  221, 


698 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Tindalls  126,  555,  Tinkersheires  94, 
Tunstalls   452,   Turkey  440,   Tutteys 

80,  81,   136,   142,  225,  336,  Walnutt 

81,  Ware  119,  325,  349,  533,  Wayer 
374,  Willoughbys  14,  73,  Woolfe 
107,  221,  Yeocomico  235,   356,  502. 

Nedle,  John  448. 
Nedles,  John  448. 

Needam,  259. 

Neede,  Henry  164. 

Needham,  Danl.  287,  John  4,  349,  390, 

Rich.  349,  Thomas  101,  120. 
Needles,  John  275,  276. 
Needum,  Eliz.  237. 
Neegle,  Tho.  217. 
Neesum,  Wm.  131. 
Nehen,  Cornelius  379. 
Neheuallin,  Darman  353. 
Nehevellin,  Darman  356. 
Nellson,  John  367. 
Nelmes,    Robt.    249,    Richd.    269,    358, 

459,  460,  461,  488,  486,  494,  Thomas 

558. 
Nelson,  Cornelius   379,   Fra.   329,   546, 

547,  Geo.  183,  Henry  125,  James  462, 

Jno.  462,  Mary  43,  68,  Mathew  112, 

Provess  254,  Provost  263,  Tho.  254, 

Wm.  445. 
Nelve,  Cormack  307. 
Nemerall,  Sarah  497. 
Nemo,  John  142. 
Neolly,  Teague  307. 
Nero,  Sebastian  511. 
Nerve,  John  164. 
Nesfeild,  Hen.  192. 
Neson,  Fra.  444,  512. 
Nesse,  Wm.  47,  65. 
Nessum,  Edwd.  180. 
Nesum,  Wm.  189,  531. 
Neswid,  John   245. 
Nethercott,  Nicho.  274. 
Netherwitt,  Nicho.   274. 
Nethrock,  Marke  213. 
Netlefeild.  Geo.  140. 
Nett,  Nicholas  111. 
Neucombe,  Hen.  255. 
Nevera,  Jane  307. 
Neves,  Jno.  468. 
Nevett,   Hugh   519. 
Nevil,  James  418,  Richd.  208. 
Nevill,  James  418,  Jonathan  475,  Jno. 

559,  Mr.  143. 
New,    Edward    501,    Richard    83,    104, 

306,  328,  336,  343,  399,  548. 
Newain,  Rich.  534. 
Newarke,   Jon.    22. 
Newark,  Wm.  304. 


Newball,  Francis  222. 

Newberke,  Robt.  34,  52,  59. 

Newberry,  Ro.  240. 

Newberry's  land,  352. 

Newburne,  Jno.  362. 

Newby,  Henry  211,  John  151,  Robert 
334,  336. 

Newcock,  Tho.  523. 

Newcombe,  Ann  293,  Arthur  248,  351, 
Eliz.  428. 

Newcom,  Roger  453. 

Newcome,  Wm.   376. 

Newdigate,  Jane  512. 

Newe,  Richd.  384. 

Newel,  Dan.  231,  Tho.  242. 

Newell,  David  559,  Jacob  487,  Peter 
442,  Rebecca  399,  Sarah  345,  Wm. 
298,  Winifred  109. 

Newer,  Jon.  82. 

Newes,  Jeane  338. 

Newett,  Hugh  519,  Winifrid  41. 

Newfound  Land,  7,  8. 

Newgate,   place   called    165,    166,    385. 

Newgent,  Christo.  23,  Wm.  293. 

Newhous,  Eliz.  557. 

Newhowse,  John  103,   123. 

Newill,  David  525,  Jonathan  475, 
Richd.  223. 

Newitt,  Hugh  404. 

Newkerke,  Robt.  206. 

Newland,  John  125,  Mr.  110,  Richard 
110. 

Newly,  Henry  313. 

Newman,  Alice  101,  125,  201,  Anne 
213,  Dickery  99,  Edw.  526,  Eliza. 
192,  207,  Ellis  193,  Francis  440,  499, 
516,  James  554,  Jon.  29,  50,  138, 
Jno.  521,  36,  85,  147,  153,  166,  177, 
305,  343,  402,  466,  485,  499,  521, 
Martha  481,  Mr.  228,  Richd.  128, 
444,  480,  534,  Robert  23,  38,  51,  66, 
70,  71,  73,  83,  109,  112,  157,  309, 
210,  304,  315,  339,  396,  478,  Sam. 
293,  362,  530,  562,  Susan  198,  213, 
255,  305,  Susanna  195,  213,  Tho. 
118,  195,  213,  297,  501,  Wm.  215, 
228,  266,  309,  348,  361,  386,  421, 
470,  481. 

Newman's  Dam,   465,   542. 

Newmon,  Tho.  485. 

Newnham,   Tno.  324. 

Neworth.  Wm.  252. 

News,  Richard  317. 

Newsam,  Eliz.  227,  Wm.  384. 

Newsom,  Eliz.  400,  John  186. 

Newson,  Thomas  10,  Wm.  124. 

Newsum,  James  133,  Wm.  147. 


General  Index 


699 


Newton,  Abra.  441,  Francis  22,  71,  178, 
Isaack  541,  James  222,  500,  Joane 
278,  John  148,  178,  196,  253,  257, 
426,  454,  Ph.  172,  Rich.  28,  Robert 
86,  159,  Sarah  355,  Tho.  293,  327, 
Wm.  253,   264. 

New  Discover,   place  called   445,   470. 

New  Nimcoke,  place  called  428. 

Newport  News,  4,  5,  420. 

New  Perfect,  place  called  487. 

New  Towne  Haven,  place  called  74. 

Nibbs,  Danll.  488. 

Niccolls,  Rob.  358. 

Nichells,  John  487. 

Nichola,  Jno.  568. 

Nicholas,  Henry  157,  365,  494,  Jon.  41, 
230,  Jno.  568,  Mirina  559,  Richd. 
115,  Wm.  166,  404. 

Nichols,  247,  Andrew  179,  Eliza. 

179,  238,  Fr.  125,  John  229,  Roger 
24,  Saml.  202,  Walter  79,  Wm.  129, 
179,  235. 

Nicholls,  Ann  559,  Charles  399,  Edm. 
559,  Elinor  285,  Eliz.  509,  Henry 
222,  237,  256,  277,  396,  440,  471, 
496,  497,  526,  536,  540,  544,  557, 
564,  James  263,  523,  John  263,  279, 
284,  285,  305,  307,  321,  333,  374, 
406,  407,  411,  526,  560,  Jone  286, 
Mary  243,  329,  384,  399,  Mathew 
369  479,  Nich.  285,  Peter  402,  558, 
562,  Richard  447,  Roger  180,  192, 
Saml.  164,  387,  395,  397,  402,  429, 
Susan  509,  Stephen  558,  Sands  179, 
Wm.  266,  314,  332,  376,  379,  431. 

Nichols,  Henry  222. 

Nicholson,  Alexr.  199,  388,  477,  Edw. 
220,  Elizabeth  28,  81,  Francis  226, 
Georg  24,  101,  Ja.  257,  Jane  261, 
305,  Phillip  222,  Ralph  196,  Richd. 
202,  Robert  323,  499,  Wm.  274, 
'325,  479,  498. 

Nigent,  Root.  169. 

Night,  Robt.  176. 

Nightingale,  Kath.  183,  Tho.  180. 

Niker,  Edward  560. 

Nimfe,  Chas  140. 

Nimcahoe,  Knora  338. 

Nimcock,  New  181,  Old  181,  places  called. 

Nitter,  Mary  401. 

Nitingale,  Eliza.  153. 

Nixen,  Godfrid  258. 

Noakes,  Henry  250,  James  426,  428. 

Noale,  Wm.  134. 

Noble,  Geo.  323,  Grace  316,  Jno.  481, 
499,  Michaell  147,  Miles  276,  Robt. 
195,  Wm.  84,  118. 


Nockey,  Tho.  324. 

Nodes,  Richd.  414. 

Noell,  Roger  425. 

Nohum,  Ann  373. 

Nokes,  Andrew  194,  Wm.  284. 

Noles,  Eliz.  316. 

Nomeny,  place  called  206,  228,  352, 
371,  435,  483,  499,  500,  536,  537, 
546. 

Norcott,  Johna.  467,  John  556,  Susanna 
527,  Tho.  537,  541,  554,  Wm.  81, 
358,  366,  530,  537. 

Nordell,  Jno.  552. 

Norden,  Walter  77. 

Nordett,  Jno.  552. 

Nore,  Susan  476. 

Norey,  Alex.  41,  88. 

Norgood,  Jno.  434. 

Norgrove,  Robt.  457,  Stephen  400, 
Wm.  396. 

Norm,  Edmond  558. 

Norman,  Austice  78,  Edw.  222,  443, 
Eliz.  308,  Geo.  494,  557,  Hen.  78, 
132,  316,  548,  James  468,  John  299, 
345,  370,  Jos.  538,  Mary  50,  58,  442, 
Peter  50,  58,  78,  100,  Robt.  460, 
466,  Rockell  386,  Roger  447,  Steph. 
236,  270,  315,  368,  373,  393,  396, 
400,  447,  490,  499,  538,  541,  Tho. 
300,   Wm.   547. 

Normansell,  Edwd.  249,  Richd.  234, 
403. 

Normanton,  Thomas  37. 

Normington,  Jno.  438,  444. 

Norrell,  Peeter  175,  Walter  199. 

Norrice,  Robert  144,  Tho.  150. 

Norrich,  Tho.  403. 

Norris,  Eliz.  124,  Jacob  110,  Jno.  324, 
456,  Richd.  143,  Tho.  166. 

Norsworthy,  Mr.  209,  Tristrum  158. 

Nort,  Thomas  554  . 

Nortant,  Mary  549- 

North,  Ann  291,  558,  Anth.  300,  500, 
517,  Fra.  291,  James  220,  304,  John 
41,  130,  255,  559,  513,  Martha  453, 
Mathew  476,  Tho.  367,  Wm.  216, 
220,  410. 

Northall,  Wm.  483. 

Northerborne,  Ed.  441. 

Northerne,  John  54. 

Northon,  Toby  170. 

Norton,  Ann  422,  Edm.  554,  Eliz.  351, 
449,  Gabriell  462,  536,  542,  549, 
James  525,  Jon.  77,  John  105,  146, 
173,  260,  267,  413,  Margt.  170, 
Patrick  494,  Peter  554,  Phill.  396, 
Richd.    223,    Robert    359,    390,    444, 


700 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Roger  400,  Sarah  525,  Susan  540, 
559,  Thomas  396,  462,  525,  537, 
545,  549,  554,  557,  558,  562,  Toby 
217,  261,  413,  Walter  185,  Wm.  26, 
58,  370,  400,  527,  Xtopr.  166. 

Norts,  James  263,  Ma.  173. 

Norvey,  David  373. 

Norville,  Sa.  480. 

Norvill,  Susan  450. 

Norway,  John  118. 

Norwood,  Henry  410,  Jno.  483,  Mary 
452,  Richd.  148. 

Nosworthy,  Ann  111,  Tristrum  83,  111, 
114,  135,  149,  151,  154,  156. 

Notary  Public,  a  163. 

Nott,  Edw.  452,  Matha  536. 

Nottingham  Park,  place  called  235. 

Notton,  Jon.  58. 

Nouseir,  John  191. 

Novell,  Mary  248. 

Novis,  Rich.  299. 

Nowell,  James  453,  Jon.  31,  84,  John 
554,  Mary  284,  Mr.  242,  408,  476, 
Peeter  170,  294,  Richard  66,  Thomas 
14,    15,    19,    30,    36,    280,    366,   453. 

Nox,  Mary  547. 

Noyce,  Andrew  61. 

Nudigute,  Jane  458. 

Nugent,  Christopher  90. 

Nuppar,  Roger  552. 

Nurden,  John  313. 

Nurdon,  Tho.  187,  216. 

Nurse,  Robt.  450,  Susanna  391. 

Nurserie,  Daniell  24. 

Nurseries,  John  271. 

Nursires,  Jno.  494. 

Nurte,  John  222. 

Nurton,  Anne  146,  Henry  315,  John 
97,  146,  275,  Wm.  181. 

Nusam,  William  37,  103. 

Nuse,  Wm.  176. 

Nusham,  Anne  248. 

Nusome,  Eliz.  386. 

Nusser,  Robt.  195. 

Nusum,  Margt.  526,  Wm.  165,  195, 
213,  526. 

Nuswattock,  place  called  337. 

Nut,  Phillip  362. 

Nute,  Tho.  73,  Winifred  73. 

Nuthall,  Eliz.   158,  John  158. 

Nutt,  James  313,  Jonathan  549,  Mr. 
363,  Richd.  205,  Thomas  452,  Wm. 
37,  63,  205,  309,  375,  424,  462. 

Nuttall,  Robt.  56,  195,  Thomas  56. 

Nutter,  James  279. 

Nuttingham,  Eliz.  357,  Rich.  357. 


O'Aver,  Mary  215. 

Oatelep,  Phillipp  51. 

Oakely,  Geo.  427,  Wm.  39. 

Oakes,  Greg.  78,  W.,  270. 

Oakham,  Hester  337. 

Oatly,  Darcy  364. 

Obart,  Bar.  245,  Bertram  329. 

Obbins,  Foulkerd  264. 

Obed,  John  208. 

Oberry,  John  39,  106,  Rose  39. 

Obert,    Bertram    190,    204,    284,    303, 

313,  422,  495,  507,  Mr.  136. 
O'Berye,  John  108,  Rose  108. 
Occahannock,  place  called  407. 
O'Carby,  Dan.  309. 
Ocathame,   Daniell    371. 
Occocomson,     place    called     452,     454, 

551,  553,  555. 
Ockford,  Wm.  433. 
Ockmond,  Jno.   328. 
O'Comly,  Teage  543. 
O'Conily,  Teage  543. 
Ocquell,  Sarah  512. 
O'Craham,  Donell  322,  Patrik  330. 
Octies,  Thomas   183. 
Odait,  Elin.  185. 
Odaley,  Daniell  336. 
O'Dannell,  Neale  560. 
Odell,  Henry  290,  300. 
Odeon,  Richd.  445. 
O'Derrick,  Tho.  306. 
O'Derruck,  Tho.   309. 
Odgar,  Gabriel  292. 
Odger,  Gabriell  371. 
Odier,  Gabriell  506,  529,  547. 
Odion,    Abram    562,    Ellen    445,    Wm. 

445. 
Odium,  John  451. 
O'Drenne,  John  309  . 
O'Fahee,  Tego  322. 
O'Fallo,   Teague  311. 
O'Farne,  Dermot  330. 
Offdale,  U.  291. 

Offeild,  Henry  209,  Tho.  441,  443. 
OfTkair,  Jno.  451. 
Offley,  Nicho.  133. 
Odgir,  Gabriell  246. 
Ogbourne,  Symon  263. 
Oger,  James  327,  Morris  207. 
Ogestor,  Elenor  319. 
Oggs,  Thomas  105. 
Ogley,  Turrell  328. 
O'Graham,  Donell  322. 
O'Grangenes,  Jon.  310. 
Ogre,  Dun.  331. 


General  Index 


701 


O'Harratt,  Richd.  306. 

O'Harrough,  Rich.  309. 

Oheley,  Roger  453  . 

O'Hind,  Danll.  479. 

Okeham,  John  550. 

Okeley,  Robt.  134. 

Okell,  Rich.  299. 

Okelly,  John  347,  Tho.  385. 

O'Kelly,  William  364. 

Okely,  Sisly  551,  Wm.  516. 

O'Kenedy,  Teage  559. 

Oker,  John  34. 

O'Kery,  Wm.  375. 

Okey,  Wm.  483. 

Okley,  Gregory  466. 

Old,  Wm.  370. 

Oldale,  John  266. 

Oldis,  James  263,  John  62,  Mr.  120, 
Thomas  36,  62,  70,  122,  127,  165, 
173. 

Oldsworth,  Wm.  286. 

Oldum,  Eliz.  150,  James  150,  Pearcy 
150. 

Oldfeild,  Joseph  390. 

O'Lanny,  Nella  328. 

O'Leally,  Jno.  330. 

O'Lealy,  Owin  309. 

Oliffe,  Robt.  142. 

Olive,  Judith  460,  523. 

Oliver,  Adam  76,  Edward  51,  89,  94, 
107,  113,  114,  126,  133,  145,  177, 
283,  465,  549,  Eliza.  150,  Geo.  301, 
499,  John  142,  176,  192,  274,  524, 
Mary  132,  Nich.  50,  54,  88,  120, 
Peter  528,  Richd.  140,  Robt.  Ill, 
554,  Tho.  119,  373,  427,  Walter 
313,  Wm.  132. 

Olives,  Walter  211. 

Ollaver,  Wm.  157. 

Olliver,  Ellinor  487,  Georg  49,  John 
480,  487,  538,  569,  Mary  487. 

O'Loffe,  Gwallo  328. 

Olton,  Jno.  428. 

O'Lyn,  Tho.  308. 

Omallin,  Pat.  214. 

O'Mally,  Cormack  306. 

Omarweare,  John  327. 

O'Melle,  Dollo  328. 

O'Morpher,  Connor  306. 

O'Moulins,  Teague  309. 

O'Naught,  Wm.  322. 

O'Naughton,  Wm.  453. 

Ondale,  John  136. 

Onely,  Clemt.  483,  Samuell  108. 

Onesby,  Wm.  222. 

Onesly,  Wm.   222. 

Onion,  John  112. 


Only,  Clemt.  465. 

Onsby,  Robt.  466. 

Onsloe,  Jno.  454. 

Oran,  Robt.   137. 

Orange,  Sivillius  430. 

Oravin,  John  302. 

Orbald,  Jno.  456. 

Orburns,  Tho.   565. 

Orchard,  Ann  50,  64,  Hugh  133,  John 
50,  64,  539,  Jon.  230,  Mary  64,  527, 
Tho.  119. 

Orchard,  the  471. 

Orde,  Margt.  171. 

Ordinance,  Master  of  the  226. 

Ordnary,  the  French  480. 

Ordone,  Edm.  452. 

Ore,  Joane  517,  Wm.  252. 

Oredan,  John  308. 

Orfle,  Peter  366. 

Orford,  Tho.  536. 

Organ,  Lawrence  315. 

Oride,  Henry  563. 

Orily,  Tho.  482. 

Oriott,  Tho.  524. 

Orland,  David  460,  James  499. 

Orley,  Tho.  209,  251. 

Orly,  Rebecca  362,  Tho.  245,  376, 
Susan  362,  Wm.  553. 

Orphew,  Edmund  308. 

Orpwood,  Rich.  304. 

Ororke,  James  276. 

Orrey,  Robt.  298. 

Orton,  John  298,  James  455,  Mich. 
375,  Wm.  555. 

Osben,  Tho.  93. 

Osberton,  Alexr.  39. 

Osborne,  Ann  388,  Bridgett  108,  Edward 
41,  Francis  60,  429,  Jenkin  25,  61, 
.175,  John  107,  Jon.  151,  Margarett 
107,  Mary  76,  175,  Oliver  552, 
Ralph  47,  Richard  78,  349,  Robert 
434,  Roger  453,  Thomas  61,  78,  80, 
137,  Wm.  362. 

Osbourne,  John  288,  303. 

Osburne,  John  453. 

Osburns,  Tho.   565. 

O'Shalenan,  Derman  308. 

O'Shalevan,  Derman  308. 

Oshulivan,  Margt.  296. 

O'Shulivan,  Margett.   388. 

Osman,  Adam  238,  John  378. 

Osmotherly,  William  53,  77. 

Ossett,  Joane  425. 

Ossipe,  An.  555. 

Ostums,  place  called  518. 

O'Sulivan,  Daniell  390. 

Osulvan,  Jno.  455. 


702 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


O'Swillan,  Teige  355. 

O'Swillivant,  Tho.  470. 

Other,  Thomas  101. 

OTire,  Jane  328. 

Otley,  David  347,  Rich.  435. 

Ottamon,  Teague  306. 

Otter  Hill,  land  called  473. 

Otterlong,  James  458. 

Otteway,  Richd.  262. 

Ottowaes,  Jno.  553. 

Oudlant,  Mr.  243. 

Ourton,  Tvmothy  144. 

Outred,  William  425. 

Outwright,  Henry  453. 

Oveddam,  Jno.  460. 

Oven,  an  old  439,  516. 

Overbey,  Nichola  411. 

Overbury,  Rich.  454. 

Overcott,  Tymothy  431. 

Overed,  Wm.  412. 

Overett,  Symon  566,  Wm.  512,  522, 
546,  547,  563. 

Overing,  And.  561. 

Overman,  Edw.  202,  268,  Mr.  241, 
325,  389. 

Overred,  Wm.  499. 

Overstreet,  John  480,  568. 

Overton,  Fra.  391,  435,  524,  Jno.  451, 
Mary  326,  435,  Rich.  422,  Roger 
477,  526. 

Overy,  Ed.  432,  Mathew  183,  Wm.  345. 

Owberry,  John  49. 

Owell,  John  113. 

Owen,  An  548,  David  214,  Edwd.  28, 
49,  John  218,  251,  260,  261,  268, 
283,  Jon.  241,  Lazarus  446,  Mack 
Wm.  327,  Marie  327,  Michaell  520, 
Morris  218,  298,  Nicholas  365,  538, 
Richd.  128,  Robt.  449,  Rowland  45, 
Teague  324,  Tho.  22,  76,  174,  396, 
453,  454,  478,  Wm.  202,  264,  435, 
452. 

Owens,  John  322,  Mary  322,  Richd. 
268,  507,  Tho.  322,  542,  Walter  190. 

Owenton,  Mary  326. 

O'William,  Jno.   328. 

Owin,  James  455,  Jno.  430,  Mary  268, 
Mories  224,  Richd.  512,  Simon  513, 
Tho.  298. 

Owles,  Robert   13. 

Owley,  Edw.  184. 

Owme,  John  216. 

Ownes,  Richd.   189. 

Oxford,  Christo.  35,  James  453,  John 
275,  Joseph  192,  William  50,  64, 
Xtopher.  301,  499. 

Oxford,  place  called  331. 


Oxford  Plantation  58. 
Oxley,  Th.  224. 
Oxly,  Thomas  453. 
Oxon,  Richd.  164. 
Oxton,  Thomas  554. 
Oyles,  Nicho.  183. 
Oyster  Banck,  the  102. 
Oystershell  Banck,  the  135. 
Ozzett,  Jno.  432. 


Pace,  Georg  10,  199,  273,  Henry  101, 
Mr.  203,  347,  380,  Richard  10. 

Pace's  Paines  Plantation,  10. 

Pack,  Christ.  137,  Robt.  546,  Wm.  546. 

Pacen,  Mathew  108. 

Packer,  Eliz.  36,  45,  65,  Joan  290, 
John  406,  Richd.  352,  Thomas  15, 
18,  19,  65. 

Packett,  Jone  62,  Phill.  455,  Wm.  61. 

Packford,  Abraham  528,  Wm.  57. 

Packhurst,  Antho.  130,  265. 

Packingtton,  Eliza.  374. 

Packman,  Geo.  133. 

Packson,  Wm.   190. 

Packwood,  Jno.  557. 

Pacotacke,  place  called  179. 

Pacton,   John   200. 

Pacye,  Henry  123. 

Paddam,  James  503. 

Paddison,  Rob.  336,  Tho.  131,  370, 
377,  502. 

Padey,  John  370. 

Padeyes,  Zachary  568. 

Padget,  Ann  237. 

Padgett,  Walter  491,  Wm.  193. 

Pady,  Zachary  191. 

Pagan  Shore,  the  76,  80,  82. 

Page,  Alice  279,  Annis  124,  Edward 
27,  Eliza.  279,  Henry  191,  John  231, 
252,  279,  340,  Jonas  302,  340,  Judeth 
350,  Mary  279,  446,  Nath.  102, 
Richd.  167,  388,  518,  Robert  55, 
237,  299,  483,  Rose  373,  Tho.  157, 
262,  345,  378,  480,  487,  518,  521, 
Wm.  477. 

Page's  Pilgrimage,  place  called  340. 

Pagett,  Sinkler  301,  Thomas  121. 

Pagg,  Joseph   207. 

Pagget,  Edmd.  567,  Richd.  189,  216. 

Paggett,  Ann  197,  Edmond  567. 

Paggett's  Neck,   173. 

Paggitt,  Tho.  467. 

Pagrane,  Gregory  56. 

Pagrave,  Gregory  56. 

Paice,  Edward  527. 

Paile,  More.  501. 


General  Index 


703 


Paile,  the  old  316,  544. 

Paine,  Ann  425,  447,  Clorentine  344, 
Eliz.  335,  435,  558,  Ezard  425, 
Florentine  131,  219,  Henry  261, 
Humphry  355,  John  94,  138,  248, 
295,  333,  345,  390,  423,  424,  432, 
442,  487,  511,  528,  531,  565,  567, 
Mr.  566,  Margery  247,  277,  Marga. 
333,  Mary  292,  299,  431,  476,  Ralph 
265,  398,  420,  Richd.  447,  Robt. 
227,  446,  554,  Sam.  231,  457,  Sarah 
433,  Thomas  192,  270,  348,  410, 
429,  457,  Wm.   138,   141,   358,   391. 

Painter,  John  120,  Mary  430,  Richd. 
304,  Wm.  475. 

Pakes,  Walter  108,  114. 

Palin,  Henry  267,  425,  427. 

Pall,  Eliza.  169. 

Pallard,  Digon  183. 

Pallett,  Martha  523. 

Pallin,  Jno.  500,  Sampson  557. 

Pallington,  Rebecca  112,  Theop.  486. 

Pallisadoes,  the  102,  105,  106,  110, 
113,  143,  160,  161,  162,  167,  186, 
224,  242,  266,  272,  474. 

Pally,  James  486,  Nath.  358. 

Palmer,  Ann  213,  Daniel  5,  Edmond 
444,  511,  Edward  22,  96,  140,  268, 
368,  Elinor  265,  507,  Eliz.  205,  290, 
422,  Francis  431,  Henry  98,  191, 
200,  516,  Howell  87,  James  290, 
441,  Joane  349,  Jno.  135,  183,  322, 
333,  383,  392,  396,  446,  454,  461, 
Jone  75,  390,  Jud.  520,  Margt.  405, 
Martin  249,  369,  377,  394,  475,  541, 
Mary  249,  291,  297,  368,  Peter  430, 
Priscilla  75,  Ralph  459,  Rebecca  137, 
Richard  324,  368,  404,  Samll.  552, 
Sarah  51,  61,  283,  Tho.  440,  446, 
454,  535,  563,  Wm.  34,  114,  165, 
429,  484,  486,  395. 

Palmeton,  Sarah  244. 

Palmy,  Wm.  454. 

Pamunkey,  244. 

Pamunky,  King  of  44. 

Pamunkee  Landing  Place,    169. 

Pancake,  place  called  421. 

Pancell,  Edw.   172. 

Panckhest,  Thomas  315. 

Pancraft,  Abra.  274. 

Pandle,  Henry  120. 

Pane,  Mathew  369. 

Panfack,  Eliz.  369. 

Panfitt,  Geo.  517. 

Pankerman,  Tho.  479. 

Pankman,  Tho.  227,  250. 

Panier,  Jon.  87. 


Pannell,  Marga.  286. 

Pannull  John,  540,  Katherine  540. 

Panter,  Wm.  441. 

Panthurst,  Abra.  43. 

Panton,  Eliz.  386,  Jone  233,  Tho.  375, 

395. 
Pantry,  Richard  526. 
Pantwell,  Duncumb  426. 
Paptast,  John  218. 
Paquosons,  the  503. 
Paramont,  Alice  527. 
Paramore,  Miles  472. 
Parbeck,  Jno.  454. 
Parce,  Tho.  256. 
Parchmore,  Peter  178. 
Parchmouth,  Richd.  497. 
Parckhurst,  Antho.  344. 
Parcost,  Tho.  54. 
Parcroft,  Tho.   120. 
Pardy,  Eliz.  291. 

Parfitt,  John  517,  Robt.  248,  305. 
Parford,  Tho.  502. 
Pargiter,  John  105. 
Pargetor,  John  429. 
Par  ham,  Fra.  441. 
Parin,  Tho.  428. 
Paris,  Nicho.  459. 
Parish,  Edward  22,  175,  Mary  514. 

PARISHES: 

Blissland,  229,  234,  349,  357,  496; 
Bristoll,  298,  352,  452,  466,  469, 
549. 

Chichahominy,  151;  Chiskyak  178. 

Eliz.  Citty,  15;  Eliz.  River,  237,  242, 
260,  268,  270,  415. 

Farnham,  444,  467,  468,  470,  472, 
476,  481,   503. 

Hampton,  136,  140,  153,  161,  214, 
232,  237,  253,  401,  420,  480,  568, 
Harrop,  317. 

Isle  of  Wight,  Lower:  391,  420,  466; 
Upper  444. 

Kiccoughtan,  5;  Kingstone,  375,  402, 
416;  Kiskeake,   158. 

Lawnes  Creek,  485,  561,  564;  Lin- 
haven  173,  181,  182,  187,  188, 
220,  221,  222,  239,  247,  249,  262, 
269,  273,  275,  276,  287,  288,  289, 
299,  302,  328,  331,  332,  344,  354, 
355,  358,  380,  415,  473,  502,  504, 
507,  518,  527,   528. 

Marston,  479;  Martins  Hundred,  97, 
117,  294;  Middle  251,  414;  Mul- 
berry Island,  30,  36. 

Nancimond,  Upper:  318,  450,  451, 
453,    457,    479,    480,     543,     568; 


704 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Lower:    385;  New  Poquoson,  124. 
Petsoe,  545. 

Sittingborne,     430,     431,     481,     484, 
485,     528,     530,     557;     Southwark 
287,     355,     509;     Stratton,     506; 
Stratton  Major  515. 
Waire,  462,  493. 
York,  355. 

Parkamore,  Elias   370. 

Parke,  Daniell  324,  381,  399,  479,  492, 
558,  Dorothy  372,  Edwd.  189,  370, 
Fran.  403,  John  262,  386,  513,  Robt. 
296,  Sarah  311,  479,  Tho.  484, 
William  311,  479. 

Parkenson,  Ro.  299,  Tim.  233. 

Parker,  Abigail  382,  Alice  343,  Andrew 
98,  Ann  185,  324,  335,  383,  386, 
Chas.  206,  Daniell  394,  404,  Edw. 
304,  312,  345,  376,  Ellin  255,  514, 
Eliz.  36,  45,  265,  485,  501,  Fran. 
260,  383,  403,  431,  432,  487,  565, 
Geo.  185,  193,  307,  400,  412,  532, 
Henry  399,  437,  450,  555,  James  200, 
201,  431,  517,  Jane  312,  Joan  296, 
Jon.  25,  69,  93,  John  99,  134,  158, 
276,  286,  307,  350,  406,  455,  Jo. 
370,  Mary  201,  431,  455,  491,  548, 
Mathew  448,  459,  Mr.  300,  483, 
Natha.  216,  Phillip  326,  Precilla  546, 
Richd.  150,  158,  166,  167,  183,  223, 
253,  276,  293,  314,  404,  412,  492, 
500,  569,  Robt.  185,  406,  425,  447, 
450,  551,  Roger  359,  Samll.  567, 
Susan  263,  383,  Thomas  15,  18,  19, 
65,  142,  147,  166,  170,  231,  244, 
274,  347,  430,  484,  520,  Wm.  5,  42, 
53,  74,  81,  85,  113,  141,  155,  301, 
468,  474,  538. 

Parkes,  Ambrose  348,  Danll.  474,  John 
153,  381,  Precilla  363,  Robt.  114, 
342,  Wm.  338. 

Parkhurst,  Antho.   130. 

Parkin,  Robt.   124. 

Parks,  Dan.  288,  Samll.  500,  Thomas 
25,   170. 

Parkson,  Ralph  429. 

Parlett,  Wm.   391. 

Parliament,  247. 

Parmeton,  John  244,  Nathl.  244. 

Parmyter,  John  388. 

Parnell,  Jane  427,  Wm.  213. 

Parnew,  Nicholas  76. 

Parney,  James  199. 

Parnis,  Miles  468. 

Parott,  Richd.  450  . 

Parr,  Alice  393,  Edward  180,  Margery 
40,    Mary    289,    Nicho.    381,    Ralph 


392,  Robt.  45,  62,  Tho.  214,  Wm.  526. 

Parram,  Mich.  427. 

Parramore,  Edw.  146,  521,  Michaell 
523,  Rob.  290. 

Parre,  Jane  475,  Wm.  224. 

Parrell,  Lewis  529,  547. 

Parett,  Edw.  287,  428,  Gillam  358, 
Gregory  274,  John  257,  Jone  286, 
Lewis  529,  Richd.  187,  189,  276, 
279,  460,  Symon  196,  302. 

Parrett's  Marsh,  384. 

Parrey,  Edward  8,  Robert  144. 

Parrfy,  John  198  . 

Parricoat,  Phil.  286. 

Parrinter,  Richd.   304. 

Parriot,  Robt.  456. 

Parriott,  Susan  544. 

Parris,  Arundell  141,  280,  Jon.  227, 
John  250,  300. 

Parrish,  Edw.  175,  Thomas  359. 

Parrit,  James  171. 

Parrott,  Dorothy  501,  Francis  523,  Joan 
242,  John  21,  22,  26,  66,  71,  73,  91, 
Joseph  523,  Mary  382,  Mr.  396, 
Prunella  22,  Richard  402,  Samll.  523, 
Susan  430,  William  68. 

Parrs,  Antho.  283. 

Parry,  Ann  57,  279,  440,  Edwd.  241, 
Elianore  397,  Elizab.  253,  276,  278, 
293,   351,  Guy  441,  Jane  267,  John 

213,  Jos.  501,  Math.  365,  Richd.  279, 
Ro.  240,  Robt.  341,  Roger  244,  Samll. 
203,  255,  256,  303,  334,  366,  368,  381, 
398,  463,  493,  Tho.  250,  268,  Wm. 
43,  51,  57,  79,  97,  103,  115,  133, 
145,  175,  221,  275,  289,  331,  340, 
343,  377,  434,  501. 

Parsly,    Ann    430,    Edward    429,    484, 

Fritzwith  430. 
Parsons,    Abigail    520,    Ann   448,    Edw. 

116,   Eliza.    279,    George   523,   Grace 

214,  Henry  146,  378,  Kath.  164, 
James  25,  69,  99,  John  94,  285,  468, 
556,  557,  568,  Johna.  502,  542, 
Joseph  352,  503,  Nich.  350,  Richd. 
116,  Sarah  276,  Thomas  109,  381, 
386,  Wm.  93,  254,  503,  506. 

Partin,  Avis  171,  Debora  171,  Edw. 
510,  Francis  523,  Margt.  171,  Mary 
471,  486,  496,  516,  Ralph  249, 
Rebecca  171,  Robert  62,  76,  112,  165, 
167,  168,  171.  317,  561,  Samll.  492, 
500,  Tho.  490,  Wm.  506. 

Parteete,  Tho.  223. 

Parthurst,  Antho.  173. 

Partlett,  Rich.  346. 

Parthmore,  Richard  314. 


General  Index 


705 


Partigg,  Richd.  213. 

Partner,  Rich.  432,  Wm.  486. 

Partridge,    Hester    50,    86,    Jno.    428, 

Wm.  262,  513. 
Parrwerthy,  Margarey  369. 
Parvin,  John  180. 
Parvis,  Miles  468. 
Parvoll,  Tho.  200. 
Pasbehay,   2. 
Pasbyhayes,  place  called,  18,  28,  51,  69, 

74,  97,  126,  127,  128,  139,  145,  151, 

177,  232,  433. 
Pasbyhaies  Feild,  347. 
Pascall,  Phillip  384. 
Pascattaway,  place  called  348,  376,  378, 

404,  420,  423,  487,  509,  511. 
Pase,  John  262. 
Pashe,  Jno.  390,  396. 
Pashly,  James  554. 
Paskall,  Phill.  267. 
Paskins,  Edw.  43. 
Pasmore,  John  87,  Mary  87. 
Passe,  Robt.  457,  Tho.  250. 
Passell,  Eliz.  552,  Sarah  552. 
Passmore,  Thomas  3,  8,  12,  271. 
Pastor,  26,  29,  30. 
Patch,  Edith  493. 
Patch  Tree  Dam,  205. 
Pate,  Eliz.   338,   544,  Henry  338,   471, 

544,   546,  John  216,   286,   470,  478, 

509,   550,  Katherine  338,  Mary  470, 

481,  Mr.  260,  380,  550,  Richard  49, 

204,  Robt.  548,  Wm.  72. 
Pateford,  Wm.  142. 
Pateman,  Eliz.  244,  Henry  493,  506. 
Patemaster,  Abraham  390. 
Patent,  the  Grand  180. 
Patent,  Rabecca  514. 
Patermastr,  Abra.  440. 
Paternoster,  Abra.  223,  359. 
Pates,  Anne  268. 

PATHS: 

Ashwell's  339,  364. 

Basbyes,  339,  Beare  445,  Bestland 
475. 

Cart  202,  266,  408,  429,  451,  465, 
484,  492,  521,  542;  Cheescake  256, 
257,  392,  394,  401,  456,  467,  495, 
542;  Cheskyacke  257,  258;  Ches- 
piack  506;  Chickahominy  160,  415, 
523,  526;Chicokone  254,  266,  372, 
373,  395,  396,  459,  460;  Chipoaks 
365;  Church  408,  517;  Corroto- 
man  437;  Cross  450;  Cunicott  202. 

Doeggs  481. 

Exolls  542. 


Foot  491. 

Horse  204,  225,  259,  268,  334,  402, 

440,  480,  491,  503,  511,  512,  547, 
548;  Hot  Water  324,  381,  399, 
474. 

Indian  193,  255,  326,  334,  340,  358, 
365,  366,  369,  457,  469,  471,  478, 
511,  514,  542,  559,  560,  Indian 
Feild  376,  511. 

Langstone's  510,  Col.  Lee's  Horse 
502. 

Machoticks  392,  397,  395,  429,  566; 
Maddicon  403;  Managirack  484; 
Mattapony  219,  391,  433,  451,  478, 
506,  527,  545,  557;  Midle  planta- 
tion 30;  Mobjack  230;  Morattico 
219,  248,  350,  359,  399,  425,  437, 

441,  477,  550,  561,  Mount  Folly 
393,  464;  Mumford's  491. 

Nangatico  400,  483;  Nicadawance's 
319,  386,  475,  502;  Nomany  400, 
Nungeocicoe  291. 

Occahannocke  339,  380,  412;  Old 
Mill  288,  474. 

Pamunkey  513,  Peach  Tree  Field  504, 
Pinkeman's  263,  Potobacco  523, 
Potomack  520,  Powhite  529,  Pur- 
ton  450. 

Queen  Hive  366. 

Rappahannock  257,  278,  284,  318, 
384,  417,  429,  488,  514,  523,  545; 
Rickahock  215,  227,  229,  231,  288, 
291,  310,  317,  324,  325,  336,  342, 

349,  350,  361,  364,  376,  386,  389, 
392,  399,  403,  404,  440,  470,  474, 
479,  487,  492,  494,  509,  540,  566, 
Ridge  542. 

Square  John's  459. 

Thornton's   502. 

Vasaticon  529,  547. 

Warranuncock,  295,  Warren's  355, 
Warreny  318,  324,  325,  355,  376, 
381,  399;  Wariscreeke  448,  War- 
wicke  488,  Warwicksquick  488; 
Westham  403,  458,  465,  475, 
Westover  422,  424,  467,  472,  475, 
479,   502,    542,    559;   Wiccocomico 

350,  437,  438,  561. 

York  294,  317,  339,  346,  471. 
Patience,  Arthur  353. 
Patient,  Arthur  58. 
Patlyon,  John  288. 
Patman,  Tho.  427. 
Patrack,  John  442. 
Patriack,  John  223. 
Patriarch,  Jno.  357. 
Patrick,  Hen.  40,  94,  Isabell  282,  Jno. 


706 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


94,  Leo.  160,  Richd.  418,  Seath  167, 

Thomas  145,  William  63. 
Patridg,  Joseph  562. 
Patridge,  Richd.  236,  Wm.  199. 
Patteford,  Wm.  115. 
Patten,  Henrv  359,  Mr.  304,  Valentine 

290,  302,  312. 
Pattern,  Eliz.  233,  Mr.  345. 
Patter,  Roger  347. 
Patterson,  John  366. 
Patteson,  James  366,  Thomas  361. 
Pattison,    Hen.    31,    James    43,    Susan 

463,  Tho.  31,  84,  357,  384,  433,  494, 

496,  498. 
Pattman,  Tho.   119. 
Pattyson,  Tho.  496. 

Paul,  John  195,  Pat.  175,  Tho.  58,  168. 
Paule,  Frances  58,  Francis   58,  Mathew 

58,    Stephen    145,    Thomas    58,    138, 

145. 
Paulet,  Tho.  486. 
Paulett,  Chidock  79,  Thomas  79. 
Pauley,  John  141. 
Paulle,  Henry  359. 
Paulwin,  Hester  273. 
Paverell,   Geo.   116. 
Pavy,  Wm.  173. 
Pawan,  Mary  281. 
Pawford,  Tho.  24. 
Pawle,  Hump.  428. 
Pawlett,  Henry  223,  Thomas  53. 
Pawley,  John  110,   112,   114. 
Pawly,  Joane  355,  Jon.  29- 
Pawre,  Gart.  265,  John  265,  Peter  265, 

Reynold  265. 
Payanketank,  place  called  214. 
Payne,  Edw.  196,  Florentine  175,  James 

391,  John  251,  311,  364,  Ralph  251, 

255,    436,    Richd.    299,    Robt.    250, 

Sarah  270,  Thos.  191,  205,  256,  259, 

273,  410. 
Paynes,  Tho.  202. 
Paynter,  Roger  218. 
Payton,    Col.    563,    Henry    495,    James 

404,  Mary   191,   256,  Mr.   319,    565, 

Peter    49,     Samll.     568,     Tho.     369, 

Valentine  376,  399,  495,  546. 
Peabes,  Tho.  211. 

Peace,  Antho.  191,  John  370,  Rich.  372. 
Peach,    Dosabell    214,    Mr.    349,    Samll. 

557,  Tho.  247,  Wm.  144. 
Peachy,   Samll.  433   . 
Peacock,    Mathew    219,    Michaell    138, 

Richd.    133,    333,    Robert    314,    386, 

445,  Tho.  35,  167. 
Pead,    Jon.    60,    John    265,    Mary    265, 

Robt.  222,  Sarah  469  . 


Peade  Jno.  358. 

Peadle,  Corbert  143,  Henry  116. 

Peagler,  Joane  178,  John  169. 

Peake,  Eliz.  386,  Isabell  434,  John  263, 

Mary    538,    Mathew   46,    Nich.    351, 

Rebecca  558,  Robt.  491,  510,  Thomas 

23,  138,  253,  304,  337,  Wm.  144. 
Peakes,  Tho.  211,  475. 
Peale,   Francis   32,   160,   242,   316,   474, 

544,  Wm.  220. 
Peales,  Tho.  232. 
Peancketancke,    place    called    180,    210, 

220,  276,  318,  369,  523. 
Peane,  Maurice  483,  Wm.  393. 
Pearce,  Edw.   35,  Katherine  81,  Robert 

43,  Wm.  43,  422,  547. 
Peare,  Edw.  285,  Eliz.  285,  Henry  285, 

John  285,  Tho.  208. 
Pearepoint,  Wm.   145. 
Pearle,  Andrew  282,  Franc.  28,  Francis 

81,  William  425. 
Pearman,  Mary  472. 
Pearse,  Edward  59,  Robert  57. 
Pearse's  Stile,  place  called  41. 
Pearsey,  Abraham  50. 
Pearson,  Edward  559,  James  322,  Mary 

160,  Tho.  54. 
Peasant,  William  100  . 
Peaseley,  Hen.  203,  Michaell  203,  Susan 

203. 
Peasly,    Henry    203,    356,    514,    Joseph 

336,    Madg.    236,   Michaell   47,    203, 

Wm.  299,  542. 
Peaslye,  Henry  267. 
Pease  Hill,   place  called   77,    107,    108, 

126,  295. 
Pease  Hill  Marsh,  83. 
Peat,  John  179. 
Peaver,  Grigo.   220. 
Peawde,  Wm.  502. 
Peay,  Mary  315. 
Peayler,  Joane  178. 
Pecham,  Henry  454. 
Peche,  Wm.  439. 
Peck,  Eliz.  307,  Humph.  481,  John  222, 

Peter  315,  Robt.  350,  Tho.  306,  307, 

376,  Wm.  347. 
Peckatowns  Feild,  place  called  522. 
Peckett,  Henry  348. 
Peckin,  Thomas  338. 
Peckstone,  Tho.   307. 
Pecock,  Rich.   557. 
Pedegrew,   Andrew  261. 
Pedendan,   Henry   170,    171,   217,  Mary 

164. 
Pedigrew,  And.   305. 
Pedly,. James  453j(Nicholas  554:Robt.538. 


General  Index 


707 


Pedocke,  Eliza.   184,  200. 

Pedro,  John  245,  257,  329. 

Pedroes,  John  204,  329. 

Pedwell,  Corbett  309. 

Pee,  John  218. 

Peefe,  Mary  29. 

Peele,  Luke  299,  Robert  426,  497, 
Roger  569,  Tho.  324. 

Peese,  Joseph  386. 

Peete,  John  264. 

Peeter,  Alice  251,  Ann  506. 

Peeters,  Ed.  483,  Hen.  322,  Jon.  23, 
John  428,  Lawrence  165,  166,  Symon 
285,  327,  415,  Tho.  144. 

Peeterson,  Neale  282. 

Peggis,  Garrett  298. 

Peggott,  George  553  . 

Peibles,  David  202. 

Peikins,  John  175. 

Peirce,  Capt.  123,  147,  187,  261,  Chr. 
170,  Daniell  81,  366,  David  81, 
Eliza.  148,  196,  531,  Ed.  244,  Geo. 
202,  303,  435,  481,  Giles  306,  Hen. 
197,  290,  James  395,  Jane  198,  John 
112,  150,  180,  188,  Kath.  190,  557, 
Mary  106,  169,  Mrs.  200,  Peter  174, 
Richard  47,  100,  106,  176,  480,  Robt. 
150,  220,  Ro^er  404,  Sarah  444,  512, 
546,  Thomas  99,  113,  131,  387, 
William  9,  14,  16,  25,  27,  29,  53, 
58,  62,  70,  98,  131,  143,  146,  147, 
149,  152,  160,  177,  185,  202,  225, 
259,  371,  421,  435,  444,  479,  497, 
506,   512,   529,   546,   547,   Xpr.   325. 

Peircey,  Abraham  88,  234,  Fra.  228, 
Katherine  24,  Mary  238. 

Peircie,  Abraham  72. 

Peirson,  Margt.  512,  Steph.  427. 

Pelam,  James  171,  John  253. 

Pelch,  Andrew  387. 

Peldon,  Tho.  516. 

Pelham,  Henry  454. 

Pelhire,  Abraham  54. 

Pell,  Timothy  350,  Wm.  275,  510. 

Pellett,  Ann  236. 

Pelloe,  Mary  256. 

Pelloone,  James  326,  Jno.  326. 

Pelock,  Barthol.  123. 

Peltree,  Abraham  102. 

Peltriman,  Robt.  137. 

Pemberton,  Cor.  557,  568. 

Pembridge,  Tho.  146. 

Pembrooke,  Christo.  493. 

Pembroke,  Owen  453   . 

Pemount,  James  492. 

Pemy,  John  65. 

Pen,  William  362. 


Pencherman,  Thomas  313,  325. 

Pendergast,  Phillipp   148. 

Peneales,  Mary  298. 

Penenton,  Jno.  297. 

Penestore,  Francis  516. 

Penhorne,  Christo.  60. 

Penifell,  Sym.  300. 

Penill,  Rich.  61. 

Penington,  Jno.  300,  Wm.  271. 

Peninsula,  a  314. 

Perm,    Elizabeth    191,    John    514,    Rog. 

271,  Robt.  151,  Tho.  275,  Wm.  275. 
Penne,  Richd.  176. 
Pennell,  George  318. 
Penning,  Tho.  461. 
Pennull,  Edward  525,  Jeffery  524,  Jno. 

545. 
Penny,   Erasmus    500,   John   10,   Richd. 

310,  421,  Wm.  146. 
Pen  ogee,  Ann  559. 
Penrose,  Walter  117. 
Penry,  Erasmus  404. 
Pensint,  Wm.  50,  58,  78. 
Pensuit,  Wm.  50. 
Penton,  John  22,  Tho.  119. 
Peoble,  David  202,  Fran.  460. 
Peobles,  David  216. 
Peoples,  David  202,  458,  Eliz.  458. 
Pep,  Joyce  267. 
Peper,  John  356. 
Pepin,  Mathew  532. 
Pepper,    Francis    135,    Henry    147,    Jon. 

237,  John  353,  413,  Wm.  265. 
Peppett,    Alice    8,    Fr.    257,    Gilbert    7, 

159,  Temp.  261. 
Peppitt,   Gilbertt   13. 
Peram,  Tho.  427. 

Perce,  Arthur  347,  Katherine  28,  Tho- 
mas 99,  Wm.  444,  547. 
Perches,  Charles  447. 
Perchin,  Jno.  208. 
Percie,  John  22  . 
Percifull,  Edw.  132,  Robt.  133. 
Percival,    Eliz.    233,    Richd.    235,    Wm. 

526. 
Percocks,  Tho.  100  . 
Percy,    Edward    78,    Eliza.    211,    Hugh 

350,    James    428,    Mary    396,    Saml. 

350. 
Percye,  Abraham  4. 
Pereene,  James  139,  482,  520. 
Perey,  Ben.  428. 
Perfect,  Robt.  192. 
Perfitt,  Noba  41,  Roger  470,  473. 
Perin,  James  165,  John  210. 
Perine,  John  357,  Ursula  216. 
Perkes,  Edward  24. 


708 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Perkenson,  Ed.  435. 

Perkins,  Andrew  99,  Davy  213,  Dinah 
219,  Diana  358,  Dorathy  443,  Ellin 
27,  Fortune  368,  Geo.  245,  265, 
Gilbert  35,  117,  James  139,  Jane 
125,  204,  John  450,  Mary  202,  Mrs. 
232,  305,  Nicho.  129,  202,  Obedience 
338,  Robt.  139,  Roger  262,  Saml. 
197,  Tho.  139,  204,  225,  Wm.  196, 
348. 

Permeter,  John  178. 

Perott,  Michll.  562. 

Perreene,  Thos.  114. 

Perren,  Andrew  313,  James  110,  Richard 
316. 

Perrie,  Capt.  496,  William  81   . 

Perrigoe,  Wm.  300. 

Perriman,  Tho.  390. 

Perrin,  Arthur  118,  Fortune  392,  James 
131,  John  132,  231,  Richard  78,  80, 
252,  352. 

Perrine,  John  216,  283. 

Perris,  Francis  76. 

Perrom,  Nicholas  446. 

Perrott,  Gregory  229,  John  109,  197, 
491,  Richard  363,  391. 

Perry,  Ann  154,  218,  326,  Capt.  79, 
491,  Charles  370,  Edmd.  242,  245, 
Eliza.  211,  259,  293,  Erasmus  459, 
Ezekiell  146,  Geo.  510,  Gregory  509, 
Henry  78,  120,  128,  378,  491,  Izabella 
10,  Jane  221,  364,  Joan  242,  John 
388,  Lewis  329,  Math.  346,  Mr.  442, 
Mrs.  74,  Nicho.  87,  181,  254,  282, 
Ralph  341,  Richard  25,  32,  103,  330, 
Robert  55,  122,  Roger  543,  Sa.  236, 
Samuell  431,  567,  Symon  369  Tho- 
mas 338,  388,  425,  William  10,  120, 
128,  156,  331. 

Perrye,  William  61,  110. 

Pers,  John  491. 

Persephers,  Rob.  362. 

Persey,  Eliza.  390. 

Persian,  Steph.  428. 

Persie,  Jno.  536. 

Persimon  Island  542,  Persimon  Tree 
Plain  404,  Persimon  Swamp   125. 

Persival,  Robt.   185. 

Persivall,  John  198. 

Persan,  David  382. 

Person,  Edward  382,  John  180,  Kath. 
69,  Phill.  525,  Ralph  73,  Rich.  383, 
Stephen  520,  Tho.   117,   120. 

Persons,  Jeremv  514,  Joane  196,  Henry 
176. 

Pert,  Rich.  438. 

Perterson,  Sanders  260. 


Pery,  Henry  78,  425,  Jno.  569,  Richard 
370,  William  78. 

Perye,  Capt.  393. 

Peryne,  Nicholas  359. 

Pester,  James  493,  Humphry  364. 

Peeteers,  Edmond  496. 

Peteete,  Ann  390,  John  387,  Tho.  206, 
357. 

Petegrew,  Susan  545,  Tho.  524. 

Peter,  Eliz.  197,  John  185. 

Peters,  Andrew  529,  530,  545,  Edmd. 
228,  315,  393,  Henry  261,  Jon.  66, 
Lawr.  124,  188,  201,  226,  Martha 
545,  Mathew  527,  Stephen  43,  Susan 
525,  Symon  327,  Tho.  440,  Walter 
537,  Wm.  25,  314,  395,  463,  528, 
530,  541,  549. 

Peterson,Andrew  37,  Ann  88,  Barnett 
204,  Cor.  250,  Edward  429,  Ever. 
289,  293,  Francis  523,  Jo.  431,  Neale 
230,  458,  472,  510,  Pe.  307,  Peter 
441,  443,  Samll.  558,  Tho.  358, 
William  89,  401,  527,  536,  557. 

Petick,  Eliza.  129,  Leonard  129. 

Petit,  Geo.  428. 

Petite,  Tho.  444. 

Pett,  Fra.  181,  273,  Math.  130,  163, 
217,  Peter  454,  554,  Warwick  527, 
Wm.   57. 

Pettaway,  Edward   312. 

Pettegrew,  Andrew  460,  461. 

Pettett,  Francis  532. 

Petteygrew,  Andrew  517. 

Pettibone,  Kath.  264,  Rich.  127,  177. 

Pettid,  Tho.  160. 

Pettigrew,  Andrew  337,  382,  471,  490. 

Pettin,  James   189. 

Pettis,  Henry  554,  Step.  60. 

Pettit,  Rich.  47,  Francis  435,  533. 

Pettito,  Ann  339. 

Pettock,  Leonard  169. 

Pettus,  Col.  492,  Eliz.  353,  534,  Steph. 
317,  494,  524,  Tho.  159,  162,  225, 
273,  297,  389,  486,  495,  534. 

Petty,  Lawrence  457. 

Petty s,  Mr.  32. 

Petus,  Tho.  159. 

Petway,  Rich.  32. 

Peury,  Jno.  358. 

Pewis,  Richard  316. 

Pew,  Geo.  287,  Jno.  386,  381,  Josias 
426,  Richard  64. 

Pewell,  Phillipp  76. 

Pewer,  Grigo.  220. 

Pewring,  James  551. 

Pewry,  Erasmus  404. 

Pewter,  Thomas  554. 


General  Index 


709 


Peynton,  Wm.  367. 

Peyston,  Robt.  293. 

Peyton,  Henry  365,  Val.  470,  489,  492. 

Pharin,  Phillipp  66. 

Pharney,  Phan.  199. 

Pharoah,   Ann   526. 

Pharrin,  Phill.  23. 

Phazin,  phillipp  66. 

Pheepound,  Peter  382. 

Phelpley,  Kate  459. 

Phelps,  Joseph  568,  Richd.  520,  Robt. 
79,   121. 

Phenix,  Wm.  467. 

Pheps.Tho.  567. 

Philcock,  Richd.  152. 

Phillippe,  David  411. 

Phillips,  Ann  219,  447,  456,  David 
175,  200,  206,  211,  236,  303,  319, 
322,  323,  330,  371,  380,  470,  471, 
Easter  482,  524,  Edward  95,  322, 
454,  553,  Elinor  159,  293,  Elizabeth 
26,  35,  40,  68,  100,  116,  197,  203, 
257,  259,  302,  348,  352,  454,  481, 
492,  Elmer  12,  16,  Esmer  71,  Francis 
486,  Georg  97,  Henry  525,  Jeff.  268, 
John  10,  38,  92,  144,  159,  236,  237, 
254,  259,  269,  279,  291,  293,  301, 
303,  304,  310,  316,  319,  374,  399, 
435,  436,  440,  441,  500,  561,  562, 
Jon.  36,  80,  360,  Lawr.  125,  237, 
Lewis  25,  69,  99,  Lucy  298,  Margtt. 
562,  Martha  324,  Mary  392,  400, 
451,  Math.  219,  541,  Michael  279, 
Miles  446,  447,  Morgan  78,  Norton 
554,  Peter  465,  Richard  29,  74,  290, 
Robt.  62,  123,  149,  172,  222,  303, 
Roger  512,  Sarah  293,  319,  Thomas 
26,  31,  62,  83,  205,  218,  228,  246, 
285,  Wm.  148,  176,  192,  232,  300, 
329,  335,  342,  433,  441,  538,  541. 

Phillmott,  Henry  525. 

Philmore,   Anthony   527. 

Philpot,  John  425,  468,  Jon.  233,  Richd. 
177,  Tho.  235. 

Philpott,  Jo.  375,  Robt.  204,  Tho.  516, 
532. 

Philpott's  land  352. 

Phinly,  Edwd.  74. 

Phipound,  Peter  210. 

Phipps,  Anne  336,  John  151,  240,  297, 
313,  340,  409,  432,  440,  451,  468, 
Jon.  231,  356. 

Phillipson,   Robert    103,    123. 

Phills,  Joseph  557. 

Physician  157. 

Physicke,  Dr.  of  3,  10,  15,  Practitioner 
of  94. 


Phyps,  John  340. 

Pice,  Hanna  291. 

Pickarin,   Geo.   422. 

Pickering,    Joane    131,    237,    Jon.    238, 

Jno.  532. 
Pickeringe,  Geo.  309,  Richd.  327. 
Pickers,  Mary  201. 
Pickery,  Edm.  198,  Edw.  449. 
Pickett,  Elizabeth   369,  Ell.  447. 
Pickfrizell,  Giles  326. 
Pickles,  Thomas  357. 
Picknar,  Tho.  150. 
Picknell,  Richd.  462. 
Pickrell,  Richd.  462. 
Pidd,  Wm.  184. 
Piddel,  Corbet  236. 
Piddington,  Christopher  99. 
Pidiston,  Sam.   203. 
Pidlers,  Roger  322. 
Pierce,  Wm.  176. 
Pig,  Jno.  563. 
Piget,  James  396. 
Pigg,    John    366,    422,    466,    469,    506, 

515,   527,   542. 
Piggatt,  Walter  198. 
Pigge,  Garrett  376,  John  368,  370,  404. 
Piggett,  Wm.  302. 
Piggin,   Dan.   258. 

Piggott,  311. 

Pight,  Andrew  377. 

Pigion,  Jon.  54. 

Pike,  Edward  524,  Jane  500,  Jno.  531, 

Susan  527,  Wm.  198. 
Pikman,  Marmaduke  523. 
Piland,     Alexandra     140,     James     140, 

Joane  140. 
Pile,  Jno.  553,  Judeth  446. 
Pilgrim,  Wm.  545. 
Pilkington,  William  26,  33,  87,  144. 
Pilkinton,    Margaret    26,    Wm.    26,    33, 

67,   115,   147,   158. 
Pillard,  Benj.  140. 
Pillary,  Jasper  177. 
Pillatory  Ridge,  place  called  470  . 
Piller,  Kath.  215. 
Pilkerman,  Tho.  260. 
Pilsberry,  Henry  183. 
Pirn,  Dorothy  80. 
Pimasioes,  place  called  52. 
Piminoe,  place  called  363. 
Pinces,  Jon.  34. 

Pincher,  Barah  221,  Wm.  25,  69. 
Pinckeman,  Thos.  439. 
Pincon,  Nath.  349. 
Pindar,  Nath.  241,  242. 
Pinder,  John  341. 
Pindleton,  Geo.  361,  Tho.  361. 


710 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Pine,  An.  540,  Fran.  557,  John  428, 
531,  Nathll.  527,  Stephen  527,  Wal- 
ter 517. 

Pinford,  John  181. 

Pinhorne,  John  270,  347. 

Pinion,  Nath.  376,  Wm.  145,  493. 

Pinkard,  Tho.  324. 

Pinke,  Fra.  198,  Wm.  3. 

Pinkeman,  Tho.  422,  473. 

Pinkerman,  Tho.  269. 

Pinkney,  James  26. 

Pinn,  Robt.  180. 

Pinnace,  place  called  the  523. 

Pinne,  John  196. 

Pinner,  James  145,  Richd.  233,  285, 
511,  Roger  395. 

Pinnock,  William  58. 

Pinnocke,  Tho.   264. 

Pinor,  Jane  276. 

Pinton,  Edward  377. 

Piper,  James  517,  Jon.  37,  John  66, 
199,  301. 

Pippin,  Wm.  97,  185. 

Pipps,  John  6. 

Pirce,  Edm.  555. 

Pirkins,  Jane  177. 

Piscaticon,  place  called  441. 

Piss,  Wm.  28. 

Pistole,  Eliz.  43,  Robt.  43. 

Pitcher,  John  286,  Mary  192,  Tho.  242, 
536. 

Pitcherd,  Tho.  142. 

Pitchfork,  Walter   180. 

Pithouse,  Mary  552. 

Pitman,  Mary  547. 

Pitt,  Ann  561,  Capt.  561,  Gyles  501, 
Henry  270,  John  449,  459,  Mary  380, 
517,  Richd.  255,  Robert  85,  143,  145, 
171,  230,  290,  433,  456,  465,  488, 
Thos.  127,  139,  559. 

Pittaway,  Edward  509,  Robt.  511. 

Pitts,  Edward  22,  Henry  270,  John  185, 
Mr.  554,  Richd.  210,  288,  Robert 
85,  453,  554,  555,  Saml.  264,  Tho. 
298. 

Pitway,  Edward  102,  Mary  102,  Robert 
102,  117,  511. 

Pittway,  Robert  83,  102,  108. 

Pitwell,  Robert  47. 

Pixley,  Benj.  120. 

Place,  Francis  293,  James  41,  47,  52, 
79,  82,  106,  121,  196,  538,  John  41, 
189,  216,  297,  Mary  41. 

Placenett,  Tho.  228. 

Plaice,  Edwd.  375,  395,  John  156. 

Plaine,  Hen.  300,  Richd.  378,  Robt. 
110,  352. 


Plainton,  Samll.  557. 

Plaistor,  Ann  440. 

Plant,  Mathew  109,  Rich.  89. 

Planters:  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  10,  11, 
12,  13,  14,  15,  16,  17,  18,  19,  20, 
21,  27,  30,  31,  32,  33,  36,  38,  40, 
41,  64,  67,  68,  70,  71,  81,  82,  87, 
95,  97,  156,  161,  165,  169,  174,  175, 
194,  226,  287. 

Plantations:  Accomac  7,  9,  11;  Charles 
River  70;  Indian  Howse  Thickett  19; 
Middle  22,  89,  91,  94,  95,  105,  106, 
113,  161,  167,  182,  186,  224,  266, 
267,  272,  316,  428,  486,  511,  544, 
Old  15,  Oxford  58,  Paces  Pains  10, 
Southern  275. 

Plase,  Francis  293. 

Plason,  Jno.  560. 

Platford,  Tho.  232. 

Piatt,  Gilbert  36,  Henry  438,  564,  Law. 
262. 

Plaver,  Eliz.  262. 

Player,  Richd.  237. 

Playstow,  Ann  139,  262. 

Pledge,  Nich.  50. 

Pleg,  Nich.  86. 

Plesbery,  Wm.  93. 

Pletsoe,  Geo.  263. 

Plevin,  Rose  546. 

Pley,  George  508. 

Pleydell,  Jno.  554. 

Plimridg,  Richd.  560. 

Plinton,  Jno.  440,  535,  563. 

Plomer,  Thomas  97. 

Plommer,  Thomas  97. 

Plouvier,  Ellis  517,  Fran.  517,  Peter 
517. 

Plovier,  Peter  517,  525. 

Plowman,  Edward  97,  Fra.  513. 

Plowman,  Watt  the  197. 

Pluckett,  Tho.  218,  520. 

Plum,  Peter  559. 

Plumblye,  Phillipp  85,   106. 

Plumer,  Fra.  297,  John  205,  Peeter  329, 
472,  524,  554,  543,  556,  559,  Roger 
375,  Tho.  159,  Wm.  200. 

Pluit,  Peter  556. 

Plumly,   Eliza.   199. 

Plummer,  Do.  432,  Jo.  239,  John  139, 
Peter  525,  535,  543,  553,  557,  Mr. 
551,  Tho.  138. 

Plummor,  Morris  330. 

Plumpton,  Henry  185,  516,  Wm.  544. 

Plumson,  Sara  459. 

Plumton,  Henry  451,   561. 

Plumtree,  Wm.   378. 

Plunckett,  James  82. 


General  Index 


711 


Plunket,  James  325. 

Plunkett,  Edw.  142. 

Plunton,  Henry  451. 

Poare,  John  245. 

Pochicck,  place  called  424. 

Pochink,  place  called  424. 

Pockett,  Eliz.  551,  Jno.  549. 

Pocomoke,  place  called  454,  456. 

Poell,  Arthur  548. 

Poiden,  Rose  143. 

Poindexter,  George  363   . 

POINTS: 

Bacon  184,  392;  Black  4,  8,  231, 
270,  463,  503;  Bluff  390,  468; 
Blunt  2,  4,  5,  12,  27,  39,  109,  119, 
420;  Brewers  145,  154;  Burnt  250, 
416. 

Canny  533,  Capp's  79,  Cedar  178, 
253,  477,  Cobbin  390,  Codd  185, 
Coxes  274,  Craney  45,  64,  66,  179, 
Craine  Marsh  182,  Cherry  251,  495. 

Danceing  8,  29,  59,  88,  130,  410, 
Dead  Man's  522,  Dividing  473. 

Flying  39,  87,  Fishing  46,  101,  127, 
Freston  358. 

Graces  522,  Grangers  491. 

Hampstead  54,  Hauke  Pen  285,  Haw- 
kins 190,  Hazeltree  293,  Hickmans 
132,  High  Piny  241,  Hoggpen  134, 
Hollowing  251,  Horse  438,  Hun- 
dred 439,  Hunkepen  484. 

Indian  Towne  327,  Island  194. 

Juring  18,  33,  37,  63,  94,  130. 

Landing  452,  Larretts  300,  Long  134, 
225,  344. 

Mathias  279,  345,  Mattron's  375, 
Merrye  38,  174,  396,  477,  478, 
Mossey  58,  100,  252,  314,  Munie 
134,  Musketo  54,  191,  199,  263, 
Muskmellon   260. 

Old  Point  Comfort  2,  18,  149,  New 
Point  Comfort  223,  Oyster  Shell 
93,   251,  254,  401,  420,  446,  553. 

Pace's  439,  Pagan  71,  158,  169, 
Paraketo  22,  66,  71,  73,  Parrat 
250,  Pease  Hill  102,  Peach  134, 
227,  564,  Perrots  227,  Pigg  197, 
Plumtree  142,  Pynie  26,  31,  86, 
89,  94,  112,  121,  220,  Pyping  314. 

Ragged  293,  Raggett  365,  Rappa- 
hannock 194,  Red  17,  84,  Reed 
121,  Rigby  133. 

Saies  216,  Sandy  56,  152,  173,  179, 
187,  198,  293,  340,  365,  375,  382, 
417,  449,  Sayes  132,  Starlings  514, 
Store  248,  448,  Swan  House  50. 


Trucking  69. 

Ware    223,    568,    Wells    423,    Wil- 
loughby   21,    Willson's    64,   Wind- 
mill 194. 
Pointeau,  James  59. 
Pointer,  Robt.   300,  Tho.  222. 
Polack  Jack,  565. 
Poiden,  Richd.  160. 
Pole,  Geo.  505,  Jno.  459. 
Polentine,  Michaell  245. 
Polewheele,  Wm.    150. 
Pollard,  Digon  183,  John  133,  Margtt. 

558,  Robt.  411,  441,  541. 
Pollinge,  Edward  390. 
Poison,  Jno.  378. 
Polwort,  John  311. 
Popler,  Eliz.  308. 
Polly,  Wm.  254. 
Pomery,  Henry  51. 
Pomfrett,  Ann  363,  Sam.  431,  499. 
Pomroy,  Mary  229. 
Pomunke,  Queen  of  533. 
Pomunkey  March,  the  162. 
Pond,   Arthur   525,   John    146,   Thomas 

335. 
Ponder,  John  389,  Thomas  97. 

PONDS: 

Great  fresh,  433,  High  207,  Long 
149,  205,  240,  Maggetty  Bay  155, 
Persimon  38,  103,  108,  112,  116, 
Poetan  298  Round  155. 

Pones,  Tho.  334. 

Ponnsey,  John  265. 

Ponson,  Jos.   173. 

Pontian,  Ja.  177. 

Pontiau,  Ja.  177. 

Pool,  David  309,  Mary  309. 

Poole,  Adrian  238,  Cicely  546,  Danl. 
235,  David  11,  135,  175,  255,  Geo. 
209,  369,  Henry  62,  98,  136,  137, 
320,  Humph.  501,  Jane  255,  308, 
John  8,  99,  290,  294,  311,  Jos.  427, 
Martin  255,  308,  Mary  255,  322, 
Richard  23,  269,  503,  Robert  8,  9, 
137,  159,  189,  497,  Tho.  24,  54, 
156,   163,   165,  424,  427,  462. 

Pooly,  Elianor  143,  Jon.  144. 

Poope,  Michael  282,  Wm.  433,  492. 

Poore,  Eliz.  399,  Jno.  404,  459,  500, 
Tho.  393,  426. 

Poorey,  Ann   177. 

Poory,  Secty.    109. 

Pope,  Ann  449,  An  530,  Dorothy  385, 
Fra.  233,  273,  472,  Henry  473, 
Humph.  449,  James  390,  422,  429, 
486,   488,   494,   509,   545,  John   195, 


712 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Lt.  Col.  371,  471,  Margtt.  530,  Mr. 
379,  429,  Nathan.  429,  Nath.  292, 
331,  333,  340,  371,  373,  382,  446, 
447,  448,  449,  462,  488,   531,  Nich. 

420,  Peter  527,  Tho.  177,  352, 
Thomas  446,  447,  448,  449,  482, 
William  327,  338,  396,  401,  463, 
491. 

Popele,  Richd.  Capt.  123. 

Popeley,  Capt.  140,  161,  272,  Elizabeth 

90,  167,  Richard  61,  62,  90,  95,  106, 

113,  161,  167,  204. 
Popelwell,  John  66. 
Popely,  Richard  102,  112,  224. 
Popelye,  Capt.  282. 
Poplewell,  Jon.  37. 
Popkin,  Thomas  15. 
Popley,  Richard  51,  102. 
Poplye,  Capt.  521. 
Poppey,  James  363. 
Poquosons:     94,    128,    162,    165,    188, 

206,   324,    331,    381,    391,    392,   419, 

421,  445,  485,  493,  500,  510,  521, 
522,  545. 

Pord,  Eliz.  517. 

Pore,  John  434. 

Porke,  Richd.  343. 

Porkett,  Ellin  483. 

Porridges  Feild  52. 

Port,  Elias  390,  Jacob  223,  Perey  250, 
Wm.  370. 

Portobacco,  place  called  139,  324,  334, 
420,   457,   528. 

Porte,  Em.  528. 

Porteen,  Wm.  553. 

Porten,  Mary  195. 

Porter,  Alex.  459,  Edmond  116,  142, 
Tdwd.  397,  Elizabeth  339,  Em.  528, 
Henry  124,  126,  295,  425,  453,  James 
150,  403,  460,  Joan  303,  John  142, 
274,  328,  446,  450,  507,  Jon.  239, 
Manassa  142,  Math.  261,  305,  Nicholas 
49,  69,  339,  Richd.  293,  425,  Robt. 
172,  385,  507,  Samll.  476,  Susan 
481,  Thomas  369,  Wm.  245,  272, 
276,   293,   366,  450,  523. 

Potery,  Ann  140. 

Porteu,  Alexander  317. 

Portholy,  place  called  336. 

Portman,  Robt.  105,  Tho.  404,  528. 

Porton,  Wm.  512. 

Portus,  Alex.  192,  299,  436. 

Pory,  Fr.  226. 

Posey,  Fr.  60. 

Posnett,  Fran.  431. 

Possell,  Wm.  36,  87. 

Possin,  Rich.  24. 


Poster,  James  493. 

Pot,  Wm.  362. 

Poteete,  Geo.  119,  John  102,  106,  113. 

Potlin,  John  259,  262. 

Potling,  John  500. 

Pott,  Bridgett  248,  Capt.  160,  Dr.  3, 
Francis  123,  142,  143,  225,  248, 
249,  296,  330,  344,  350,  361,  374, 
481,  553,  Hattill  126,  248,  Hen.  248, 
394,  John  3,  10,  13,  15,  142,  171, 
225,  248,  272,  Lucretia  264,  286, 
412,  Sarah  362. 

Pottacocock,  place  called  107. 

Pottblade,  Tho.  298. 

Potter,  Alice  370,  404,  Cuthberd  291, 
325,  334,  345,  370,  385,  391,  438, 
444,  448,  458,  466,  474,  497,  533, 
Edmond  348,  Eliz.  155,  172,  201, 
Fra.  506,  James  436,  459,  John  26, 
106,  220,  415,  436,  Jona.  520,  Mr. 
384,  451,  506,  Tho.  303,  Wm.  432, 
549. 

Pottpowler,  Wm.   386. 

Potts,  Capt.  340,  Dr.  340,  Francis  161, 
407,  408,  430,  551,  Lacrecia  183, 
Mary  523,  Tho.  253. 

Potuxon,  Thomas  of,  57. 

Pouder,  Thomas  97. 

Pouis,  John  175. 

Poulson,  John  264. 

Poulter,  Tho.  194. 

Poultner,  Hen.  195. 

Poultney,  Jane  433. 

Poulton,  John  196,  Wm.  143. 

Pouncy,  John  214,  234,  379. 

Pound,  Jno.  492. 

Pounsey,  A.  265,  John  208,  265. 

Pountney,  Wm.   189. 

Pourteu,  Alexander  317. 

Pourteous,  Alexander  399. 

Pouson,   Jos.    173. 

Povey,  John  153,  Richd.  460. 

Povy,  William  101. 

Powhetan,  160,  204,  377,  518,  Bridge 
109,  126,  147,  228,  Swamp  465,  Tree 
19. 

Powell,  Ann  26,  58,  131,  157,  263, 
Arthur  541,  Capt.  31,  86,  121,  353, 
David  124,  Edw.  297,  492,  Eliz.  258, 
449,  476,  Ellen  131,  Evan  482,  Fran. 
458,  Gabriell  327,  Georg  139,  165, 
179,  367,  526,  Grace  201,  Harbert 
293,  Hen.  29,  65,  81,  127,  304,  548, 
Hopkin  201,  Howell  141,  265,  487, 
Hugh  31,  192,  Isab.  237,  James  168, 
309,  555,  Jenkin  430,  453,  Joane 
205,  432,  482,  Jon.  41,  56,  John  38, 


General  Index 


713 


42,  49,  67,  82,  89,  140,  155,  159, 
172,  250,  264,  302,  344,  388,  398, 
433,  456,  526,  559,  Kath.  42,  Made- 
lene  166,  Margaret  54,  120,  248, 
429,  456,  507,  Martha  453,  Mary 
431,  Mrs.  434,  Nathaniell  20,  70, 
100,  Phi.  29,  Phillip  76,  Rati.  158, 
Rich.  24,  28,  80,  131,  195,  245,  301, 
503,  525,  569,  Robt.  88,  115,  128, 
217,  240,  Rowland  359,  Samuell  73, 
Sarah  209,  263,  551,  Thomas  8,  9, 
28,  39,  46,  49,  74,  76,  81,  95,  100, 
102,  113,  117,  119,  203,  209,  225, 
230,  253,  259,  279,  283,  300,  327, 
339,  346,  350,  360,  432,  436,  458, 
480,  481,  486,  495,  501,  561,  Walter 
144,  Wm.  110,  112,  120,  144,  145, 
165,  264,  279,  284,  315,  485,  489, 
490,  Winifred  284. 

Power,  Ed.  541,  Edmond  433,  Innocent 
7,   James   496,   Tho.   470,   Wm.   501. 

Powers,  Jeffery  91. 

Powes,  Robert  434. 

Powett,  Mary  190,  Richd.  131. 

Powis,  Robt.  193,  Thomas  10. 

Powlebrooke,  place  called   100. 

Powlett,   Fran.   377. 

Powlter,  Andrew  135. 

Powndle,  Henry  54. 

Pownsey,  John  251,  504. 

Powre,  Stephen  564. 

Poyndexter,  George  363. 

Poyner,  Ambrose  108. 

Poynt  Corner  Grant,  the  564. 

Poynter,  Edwd.  561,  Robt.  290,  Tho. 
148,   344,  Wm.  306. 

Poyter,  Wm.  165. 

Poythers,  Francis  60,  93. 

Poythres,  Francis  129,  175. 

Poyton,  Roger  359. 

Practer,  Thomas  5. 

Praise,  Biggony  294,  Wm.  153  . 

Praiser,  Robt.  176. 

Prame,  Eliza.  455  . 

Prator,  Jno.  431. 

Pratt,  Andrew  65,  Bartho.  342,  Edm. 
556,  Griffeth  548,  Henry  507,  Jane 
517,  John  140,  152,  194,  213,  Jon. 
60,  Mary  228,  Ro.  366,  Symon  382, 
Tho.  309,  381,  Walter  351,  Wm. 
548. 

Prebedy,  Geo.  122. 

Preddery,  Danll.  212. 

Preese,  Tho.   112. 

Preist,  Fra.  444. 

Pren,  John  122. 

Prendergast,  Phillip  169. 


Prendergrast,  Phill.  323. 

Prenn,  Elizabeth  191. 

Prenthrall,  Brd.  300. 

Prentice,  Val.  294. 

Prenton,  James  316. 

Presbury,  Wm.  49. 

Prescoate,  Henry  324. 

Prescot,  Jon.  241. 

Prescott,  Edward  368,  560,  Fra.  565, 
John  513,  514. 

Prescutt,  Mr.  447. 

Preslee,  Richard  98. 

Presley,  Mr.  339,  Wm.  198. 

Preslie,  Mr.  486,  Wm.  489. 

Presly,  Jane  185,  Mr.  422,  Paul  185, 
Payle  185,  Peter  185,  532,  Wm.  185, 
209,  351,  375,  382. 

Preslye,  Mr.  362. 

Press,  Hugh  77,  Nich.  331,  Sibill  432. 

Presser,  Wm.  84. 

Prest,  Jno.  511,  Tho.  480. 

Prestedge,  Edw.  454. 

Prestly,  Eliz.  522,  Peter  522. 

Preston,  Abra.  385,  Edw.  185,  525, 
Geo.  427,  Hen.  141,  290,  449,  527, 
538,  James  355,  John  177,  200,  267, 
Joseph  290,  Richard  53,  76,  90,  108, 
127,  290,  336,  375,  398,  485,  527, 
Wm.  228,  426. 

Prestwood,  Mr.  290,  488. 

Pretiman,  John  552. 

Pretloe,  Francis   373. 

Prettiman,  John  552. 

Prettyman,  Tho.  332,   334. 

Prewitt,  Tho.  39. 

Price,  Alice  265,  286,  Ann  197,  290, 
311,  514,  Arthur  131,  181,  212,  241, 
284,  312,  344,  Barbara  200,  Ben. 
298,  Charles  538,  David  299,  373, 
Edmond  367,  397,  403,  409,  422, 
465,  475,  485,  Edw.  457,  484,  Eliz. 
218,  Fra.  281,  431,  Geo.  171,  195, 
432,  513,  Hannah  330,  345,  Henry 
78,  176,  Hercules  113,  Hoell  337, 
354,  Howell  484,  Hugh  110,  144, 
Humph.  112,  James  191,  257,  338, 
380,  407,  418,  467,  Jane  112,  157, 
391,  Jenkin  276,  285,  307,  357,  407, 
413,  414,  418,  Joan  300,  Jon.  60, 
65,  235,  John  54,  86,  88,  110,  134, 
171,  181,  194,  236,  266,  345,  354, 
450,  460,  462,  523,  552,  Jonah  455, 
Kath.  233,  Letitian  54,  Lewis  196, 
554,  Lydian  24,  Margarett  446,  Mar- 
gery 64,  Mary  314,  459,  501,  Mathew 
88,  388,  Maurice  146,  Moore  382, 
Morgan   516,   Richard   70,    312,    387, 


714 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


388,  412,  477,  479,   517,  Robt.   166, 

455,  567,  Thomas  54,  150,  165,  227, 

249,  250,  271,  281,  284,  319,  Walter 

175,   369,  467,   523,  Wm.   127,    136, 

202,    249,    260,    261,    298,    329,    366, 

403,  514,  547. 
Prichard,  Alice  166,  Danll.  511,  Frances 

506,    Jno.    384,    Nich.    341,    Richard 

112,    Robert    67,    441,    Symon    428, 

Tho.    278,    280,    484,    Walter    438, 

Wm.   344. 
Pricherd,  Rowland  99. 
Prichett,    Joane    196,    Ralph    316,    Tho. 

198,  516. 
Pricklove,  Geo.  60. 
Pricklow,  James  497. 
Prickett,  Jno.  437,  Kath.  404,  Miles  5, 

10,   Robt.    568,   Tho.   207,    373,   475, 

Wm.  5,  280. 

Pride,   Benjamin  367,   553. 

Priddock,  Margt.  465. 

Priddy,  Robert  228,  232,  236,  308,  348, 

560,  457. 
Prie,  Wm.  547. 
Prime,  Samll.  404. 
Prin,  Judeth  527. 
Prince,   Edmund   152,   Edward   30,    117, 

127,   138,   166,   177,   340,  James   118, 

Jno.    430,    Richd.    452,    Samll.    404, 

Tho.  120,  259. 

Princess  Follv.  place  called  196. 

Prior,   Anthony   544,   Margaret   63,   Mr. 

133,  Tho.  343,  463,  William  26,  57, 

,62,  63,  71,  92,   120,   131,    132,   259, 

271,  278. 
Prise,  Arthur  214,  Hoell  547,  Jon.   32, 

Tho.  204,  William  438. 
Pritchard,  Jno.  291,  363,  Pallarday  258, 

Richd.    248,    Tho.    309,    381,    Walter 

239,  289. 
Pritchett,  Tho.  249,  Wm.  354. 
Prite,  Silvan  263. 
Prittiman,  John  435,  Thomas  402. 
Privett,  Thomas  41   . 
Probat,  Jon.   32. 
Probatt,  Eliz.  493. 
Proby,  Geo.  171,  Richd.  309,  381. 
Proctor,    Ambrose    75,    192,    Anth.    94, 

John  188,  454,  Thomas  5. 
Proctors,  place  called   516. 
Prohing,  Wm.  563. 
Proper,  Tho.  153. 
Prosser,  Ann  53,  Georg  81,  Isaak  476, 

Jane  22,  John  252,  528,  565,  Morris 

99,  Phillip  387,  Wm.  84. 
Prosier,  Jno.  526. 
Prossier,  John  440. 


Prouce,  James  301. 

Proude,  Jno.  342. 

Prous,  Marke  209. 

Prouse,  Emblence  116. 

Prout,  Giles  501,  Wm.  284. 

Provo,  Marke  288. 

Provose,  Marke  134. 

Prower,  Geo.  28,  Morris   182. 

Prowling,  Wm.  535. 

Prowse,  John  115,  117,  William  8. 

Prowting,  Wm.  440  . 

Pryce,   Jenkin   326,   John    324,   Thomas 

330,  Wm.  289,   322. 
Pryde,  Wm.  34b. 
Prye,  Oliver  48,  Ralph  411. 
Pryer,  John  327,  Tho.  428. 
Prynn,  Edmund  128. 
Pryon,  Wm.  218. 

Pryor,  Mary  517,  William  95,  218. 
Pryse,  Jane  255,  Tho.  429. 
Pruett,  Oliver  481. 
Puckerell,  Mary  312,  Tho.  302. 
Puckett,  Elinor  425. 
Puckrell,  Mary  308. 
Puddyford,  Em.  431. 
Pudivatt,  Jane  142,  Wm.  142. 
Pue,  Wm.  301,  499. 
Puel,  Francis  500  . 
Puell,  Jno.  486. 
Puggett,  Cesar  150. 
Pugly,  Wm.  176. 
Pugsley,  John  57. 
Pullapin,  Jon.  31. 
Pullam,  Wm.  335,  359,  360,  386,  396, 

408,   424,   464,   475,   493,    505,    507, 

542,  392,  484,  485. 

Pulle,  Bennett  10. 

Pullen,  235. 

Puller,  John  259. 

Pullin,  Constance  431,  Roger  228,  522, 

Samp.  568. 
Pullipen,  Richard  7. 

Pullman,  403. 

Pulman,  Hen.  432,  Richd.  265. 

Pullock,  David  129. 

Pullum,  Edmund  50,  86,  Eliz.  359. 

Pulson,  Danl.  269. 

Puly,  Alex.  430. 

Pumfrey,  John  24. 

Pumocke,  Tho.  264. 

Pumry,  Henry  18. 

Pumwell,  John  245. 

Pungoteague,  place  called  324,  357. 

Pungly,  Susan  282. 

Pupill,  Jane  183. 

Purchase,   Henry  263,   265. 

Purches,  Robt.  33. 


General  Index 


715 


Purchurst,  Antho.   173. 

Purden,  Rich.  501. 

Purdew,  Rich.  501. 

Purdie,  Richd.   160. 

Purefoy,  Thomas  512. 

Purgrave,  Mary  346. 

Purifie,  Mr.  165,  Thomas  21. 

Purifoy,   Capt.   331,   Lucy  331,  Thomas 

14,  318,  331,  381,  485,  Wm.  331. 
Purfury,  Thomas   12. 
Purify,  Lucy  175. 
Purifye,  Capt.  77,  116,  Thomas  36,  38, 

62,  63,  98,  118,  261. 
Purkeys,  Robert  72. 
Purnell,  Arthur  55,  Ed.  536,  John  263, 

Margt.    412,    Mary    265,    Math.    269, 

Wm.  33,   101,  301. 
Purner,  Dorothy  194,  Tho.  194. 
Purrell,  Peter  517. 
Pursell,  Tho.  244. 
Purser,  Georg  25,  61. 
Purt,  James  254. 
Purton,    Samll.    476,    477,    Wm. 

506. 
Purvey,  Ann  112. 
Puscattaway,  place  called  279,  350,  351, 

352,  361,  366,  384,  405. 
Puse,  Richd.  133. 
Pusie,  Elizabeth  333. 
Putner,  Jno.  483. 
Puttinge,  Margery  369. 
Puttivatt,  Wm.  121. 
Pyanketanck,  place  called  235,  276. 
Pye,    Eliza.    201,    214,    327,    John    181, 

273,  314,  Joseph  279,  Walter  464. 
Pyke,  Tho.  133. 
Pyland,    James    480,    Robt.    408,    476, 

489,  495. 
Pylar,  Wm.  203. 
Pymm,  Eliza.  196. 
Pyne,  John  189. 
Pynion,   Lawrance   102. 
Pypinge,  Mathew  327. 


Qually,  Joane  245. 
Quanticotte,  place  called  381. 
Quarles,  Charles  369. 
Quarrell,  Ellen  106. 

QUARTERS: 

Allen's  296,  407. 

Batts,  434,  Bever  403,  Boare  42,  94. 

Clapboard  28,  Clayborne's  475,  476, 
566,  Cow  taile  513,  Cross  14,  21, 
Croynes  195,  Cuckold  508. 


Fleets  276,  Footeball  77,  94. 

Goulden  344,  434. 

Hickory  506,  Higgenson's  466,  Hogs- 
head 81. 

Indian  230,  434,   516. 

Michell's  484,   485. 

Nansimond  155,  Nickatounce's  335, 
Nutmegg  25,  38,  111,  112,  127, 
128,   162,  225,  274. 

Onachymoyes   392. 

Pottash  133,  149,  Powell's  209,  Land, 
the  544. 

Roedes  434. 

Scotes  149,  Shotball  169. 

Topgallant  21. 

Wiggs  394. 
Quash,  Francis  137. 
Quayle,  Jno.  197. 
Quayles,  Richd.   117. 
Quelche,  Wm.  113. 
Queen,  of  Pomunke  533,  Cocka  Coeske 

533. 
Queen  Hith  242,  Hive  143. 
Quesenbury,  John  218. 
Queyning,  Richard  35. 
Quiacomack,  place  called  313,  478. 
Quick,  John  318,  Richd.  219. 
Quier,   Hugh  482. 
Quillmead,  Willi  66. 
Quilmead,  Wm.  23. 
Quimbee,  Anne  220. 
Quimby,  An  569. 
Quinbrough,  And.  207. 
Quilt,  Saml.  269. 
Quinee,  Tho.  263. 
Quiner,  Tho.  254. 
Quiney,  Richd.  147,  189. 
Quome,  Eliz.  543. 
Queyning,  Richard  35. 
Quyny,  Richd.   188. 
Quynye,  Richard   55. 


R 

Rabb,  John  291. 

Rabbish,  James  134. 

Rabenett,  Wm.  33. 

Rabishaw,  Wm.  443. 

Rabnet,  Mr.  242   . 

Rabnett,  Mr.  476,  William  20,  83,  101, 

242,  495. 
Raby,  Robert  66. 
Rabye,  Robert  23,  65. 
Race,  Roger  17. 
Racholins,  Nich.  543. 
Rack,  Isaack  307. 
Rackley,  Edw.  344,  505. 


716 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Rackly,  Rich.  112. 

Racle,  Edw.  369,  505. 

Radcliffe,   Charles   552. 

Radder,  Geo.  453. 

Raddish,  David  136. 

Raddocke,  Robert  356,  435. 

Rader,  Joane  525. 

Radford,  Francis  542,  John  21,  86,  123, 

170,  274,  Mr.  359,  409,  531,  Richard 

40,  59,  Thos.  172. 
Radish,  John  56,  57,  Jon.  78. 
Radley,  Richard  183. 
Radlyr  Tho.  359,  Wm.  455. 
Radner,  James  480. 
Rador,  James  480. 
Radulphus,  Wm.  380,  412. 
Radway,   Isaac  100,  Jane  35,  Wm.   35, 

100,  560. 
Radye,  Robt.  47. 
Rafe,  Mary  229. 
Raffe,  John  269. 
Ragg,  Benj.  35. 
Ragged,  Richard  99. 
Raignett,  An.  392. 
Railings,   Eliz.   349. 
Raiman,  Rich.  245. 
Rain,  Fra.  301. 
Rainalls,  John  291. 
Raine,  Rowland  47. 
Rainer,  Henry  298. 
Rainhard,  Nicho.   167. 
Rainshaw,  William  47,  90. 
Rainshawe,  William  82. 
Rainworth,  land  called  150. 
Raison,   Francis    108. 
Ralfe,  Margt.   149. 
Ralph,  Sam.  235,  Tho.  385. 
Ram,  Fra.  301. 
Rammell,  Rice  290. 
Ramongack,   land  called   359. 
Rampe,  Jno.  341. 
Rampsie,  Wm.  269. 
Ramsby,  Samll.  61. 
Ramsden,  Jon.   139- 
Ramsey,  Bar.  237,  Eliza.  135,  Joan  551, 

Mary    348,    Penelope    37,    Samll.    25, 

Thomas  74,  135,  206,  347,  Wm.  513. 
Ramshaw,    Richard     542,    Thomas     53, 

443,  Wm.  511. 
Ramsy,  James  291. 
Ramzee,  Elinor  282. 
Ran,  Wm.  506. 
Rand,  Wm.  493. 
Randall,    Blanch    293,    512,    530,    562, 

Herbert   554,    James    200,   John    117, 

313,    439,    440,    498,    Joseph    218, 


Tho.  27,  52,  Mary  296,  Vincent  454, 

Tho.  311. 
Randolph,    Henry    347,    376,    499,    550, 

Mr.  361,  423,  556,  560. 
Raner,   Rich.    399. 
Range,  John  314. 
Ranier,   Henry  398. 
Rankins,  Tho.  165. 
Ranley,  Ralph  510. 
Rann,  Wm.  460. 
Ransha,  Tho.   133. 
Ranshaw,  Katherine  24,  Thomas  29,  33, 

57,  75,  William  24,  55. 
Ranshow,  Ed.  410. 
Ransom,  Mr.  398,  Peter  391. 
Ransome,  Peter  156. 
Ranson,   Eliz.    194,   George  499,   James 

499,   Mr.   268,   Peter  238,   261,    278, 

303,  336,  499,  Tho.  567,  Wm.  476. 
Rantow,  Michaell  118. 
Rapford,  Mr.  531. 
Raply,  Rich.  417. 
Rappahannock   212. 
Rappahannoc,  Indians  251. 
Rapwell,  John   223. 
Rasall,  Richd.  139. 
Rasbury,  John   314. 
Rascall,  Thomas  538. 
Rasee,  Sarah  362. 
Rasfe,  John  269. 
Rash,   James    284,    Richd.    203,    Walter 

182. 
Rashbrook,  Alex.  361. 
Rashe,  John  24. 
Rashly,  John  347. 

Rason,  Mary  544,  Thomas  431,  525. 
Rassell,  Mary  192. 
Rassey,  Mary  348. 
Rastell,  Wm.  483. 
Rastill,  Tho.  187. 
Rastin,  John  388. 
Raston,  Tho.  112. 
RatchlifT,   Chas.  200. 
RatclifT,    Charles    551,    552,    553,    Land 

of  554. 
Ratcliffe,  Chas.  454,  Edw.  127,  Michaell 

82,  Samuell  548,  Tho.  493. 
Ratford,  Eleazer  254. 
Rathborne,  Eliz.  452. 
Rathbourne,  Wm.   297. 
Ratliffe,  Edwd.  547. 
Raton,  Wm.  238,  526. 
Ratsell,  Ralph  482. 
Ratsham,  John  61. 
Rattam,  Tho.   173. 
Ratton,  Wm.  272,   526. 
Rauldin,  Wm.  525. 


General  Index 


717 


Rauley,  Wm.  459. 

Rauson,  Tho.  567. 

Raven,  John  218,  224,  298,  351,  402, 
Luke  448,  Peter  166,  237. 

Ravenall,  Tho.  466. 

Ravenett,  Wm.  33,  35,  49. 

Ravening,  Joane  553,  Rebecca  5. 

Ravew,  Luke  523. 

Raw,  Marparett,  99. 

Rawboord,  Christo.   139. 

Rawell,  Eliz.  26. 

Rawkin,  Lawlin  195. 

Rawles,  Gilbert  23. 

Rawley,  Tho.  196. 

Rawling,  Johannah  479. 

Rawlings,  Christo.  117,  Ed.  430,  534, 
Gregory  238,  303,  501,  Johannah 
479,  Jon.  64,  John  128,  457,  William 
80,  492. 

Rawlins,  Chas.  245,  285,  Edward  527, 
Gregory  238,303,  Jeremy  322,  John 
153,  269,  Nich.  526,  Richd.  199, 
292,  304,  Rog.  293,  Walter  299, 
304,  Wm.  24. 

Rawson,  Robt.   23,   66,   367,   Tho.   517. 

Rawton,  Wm.  309,  383. 

Ray,  Alex.  264,  Benj.  100,  Darby  136, 
Dorothy  430,  Eliz.  250,  Geo.  351, 
Joane  562,  John  129,  203,  268,  334, 
Margrt.  555,  Peter  150,  Tho.  136, 
147,  524,  Walter  367,  128. 

Raye,  Henry  144,  Jane  375,  Mathew 
525,  Thomas  58,  81. 

Rayes,  Glogs   223. 

Rayle,  Wm.  358. 

Rayman,  Geo.  375,  425,  468,  Joane 
386. 

Raymon,  Nicholas  99. 

Raymond,  Arthur  121,  Margt.  388. 

Raynard,  Robt.  148. 

Raynbeard,  Nicholas  7. 

Raynbeare,  Nicholas  7. 

Rayne,  Andrew  335,  369,  Rowland  56, 
Thomasin  56. 

Raynes,  Robt.  279. 

Rayney,  Andrew  442,  John  436. 

Raynolds,   Samll.   558. 

Raynor,  Henry  539. 

Rayson,  Mathew  56. 

Razor,  Eliz.  296. 

Rea,  John  464. 

Read,     Archibald     251,    Argabell     503, 

-  Andrew  563,  Edward  500,  509,  Eliza- 
beth 369,  Ellianor  145,  351,  493, 
Georg  96,  126,  127,  144,  180,  181, 
201,  221,  237,  248,  284,  292,  360, 
389,    412,    500,    Grace    479,    James 


432,    509,    John    41,    49,    162,    186, 

190,  220,  301,  438,  493,  499,  531, 
548,  Mr.  201,  Nich.  481,  499,  Owen 
324,    Peter    298,    Ralph    206,    Richd. 

191,  192,  450,  Roger  419,  468,  Robt. 
72,  375,  386,  426,  467,  468,  Stephen 
216,  Tho.  25,  48,  111,  280,  310,  346, 
395,  402,  409,  419,  429,  453,  461, 
513,  514,  William  56,  125,  166, 
264,  387,  389,  Walter  266,  290. 

Reade,  Alex.  448,  Fra.  272,  Geo.  177, 
337,  522,  Jno.  362,  Richd.  452, 
Thomas  333. 

Reades,  Eliz.  143. 

Reading,  John  245. 

Readman,  John  354. 

Readwood,  John  153. 

Reaid,  Wm.  566. 

Reale,  Lyonell  208. 

Reaper,  Capt.  482. 

Reason,  Hen.  35,  John  193. 

Reaves,  John  201,  Robt.  326,  Thomas 
92. 

Rebell,  Wm.   97. 

Reboore,  An  tho.  102. 

Red,  David  70. 

Redbye,  Tho.  67. 

Redchester,  Jno.  256. 

Redd,  John  304. 

Redder,  Sarah  291. 

Reddey,  James  41. 

Redding,  Ann  481,  Jno.  468,  Richd. 
512,  Robt.   144,  Tho.  370. 

Reddish,  John  138. 

Reddock,  Alex.  285,  John  196. 

Rede,  Robt.  158. 

Redferne,  Nicho.  384. 

Redford,  Martha  492  . 

Redgison,  James  63. 

Redicke,  John   149. 

Reding,  Tho.  559. 

Redinge,  Tho.  349. 

Redishes,  John  314. 

Redland,  Ann  452. 

Redly,  Tymothy  453. 

Redman,  Joan  453,  John  55,  63,  308, 
363,  Mary  261,  Richd.  117,  188, 
Tho.  453,  Wm.  47,  65,  143. 

Redock,  Jno.  403,  Rich.  75. 

Reds,  Eliza.  178. 

Redwood,  James  172. 

Reech,  Jno.  514. 

Reed,  David  217,  Geo.  249,  Julian  120. 

Reeding,  Richard  334. 

Reeds,  Mary  342,  Richd.  428. 

Reeise,  Mary  257. 

Reekes,  Richd.  282,  397,  433,  Tho.  370. 


718 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Reeks,  Rich.  88. 

Reelyes,   Mr.   302. 

Reene,  Richard  7. 

Reere,  Tho.  166. 

Reeve,    Ann    561,    Dennis    34,    Fr.    33, 

John  79,  528,  Richard  7,  Thomas  69, 

166. 
Reeves,  Chas.  264,  Edw.  205,  216,  435, 

444,   Edm.   347,   John   38,    139,    268, 

Jon.    134,    137,    Jone    153,    Leonard 

99,  Robt.  34,  Roger  419,  Tho.   500, 

Wm.  288,  324,  405. 
Reevs,  Thomas  25. 
Regall,  Xtopr.  545. 
Regans,  Danll.  562. 
Regalt,  Xtopr.  545. 
Regault,  Christo.  302. 
Reign er,  Barton  212. 
Reighnolds,  Geo.  227,  Tho.  444. 
Reiley,  Miles  545. 
Reily,  Anth.  506,  Miles  433,  440,  447, 

530. 
Reinolds,    Christopher    363,    Fra.    325, 

Geo.  279. 
Reinolls,  Eliz.  361. 
Rekey,  Mary  218. 
Reley,  Tho.  298. 
Relfe,  Dr.  426,  Thomas  427. 
Relph,  Mary  514. 
Relue,  David  307. 
Rely,  Myles  440. 
Reman,  Nich.  288. 
Remington,  Jon.  143,  Silvest.  301. 
Remmons,  Wm.  297. 
Remorts,  John  257. 
Renall,  Randall  121. 
Renalls,  Tho.  285. 
Rench,  Robt.  453. 
Rendrick,  Edwd.  153. 
Rends,  William  311. 
Rene,  Wm.  459. 
Renell,  Austin  73. 
Renells,  Randall  324,  Thos.  283. 
Renfro,  Symon  86. 
Reniston,  Geo.  366. 
Renn,  Harry  315. 
Rennells,  Tho.  285,  Wm.  293. 
Renney,  John  264. 
Rennolds,    Ann    209,    213,    Tho.    187, 

Wm.  205,  213. 
Rennolls,  Wm.  278,  295. 
Renny,  John  286,   452,   454,   483,   551, 

553. 
Renolds,  Elizabeth  365,  Mary  255,  Peter 

448. 
Renolls,  Anne  325,  Eliz.  290,  Rob.  300, 

Wm.  487,  Y.  300. 


Renshaw,  Richard   532. 

Reny,  John  183. 

Report,  John  257. 

Reppington,  Fran.   558. 

Resbury,  John  138,  248. 

Resburye,  John  56. 

Resperry,  John  172. 

Rest,  Walter  124. 

Reston,  Jon.  78. 

Rethstroote,  Rich.   314. 

Reve,  Robt.  280,  Wm.  459. 

Revell,  Austin  73,  Edw.  233,  272,  401, 
425,  429,  John  262,  Randall  233,  272. 

Revells,  Eliz.  376,  Randall  324,  Tho. 
360. 

Reverton,  Daniel  312. 

Reves,  Roger  521,  Thos.  184. 

Revet,  Jeremy  404. 

Revett,  Jonas  477. 

Rewed,  Jarvis  69. 

Rey,  Eliz.  195,  Everard  236,  Geo.  193, 
Henry  59,  Hugh  300,  Margarett  59, 
Peter  41,  58,  89,  103,  Thos.  42. 

Rey,  Dela,  Jaques  42. 

Reycock,  Bryan,   60. 

Reyland,  Tho.  391. 

Reylue,  Tho.  307. 

Reyly,  Miles  440. 

Reyman,  Robt.  388. 

Reymond,  Tho.   140. 

Reymor,  Tho.  220. 

Reynalds,  Gilbert  41. 

Reyne,  Rowland  139. 

Reyner,  Henry  266,  Jone  180,  Wassett, 
180. 

Reynes,  Wm.  82. 

Reyney,  John  413. 

Reynold,  Alex.  172,  Peter  241. 

Reynolds,  Andrew  508,  Ann  515,  Christo. 
47,  80,  363,  Cornelius  515,  Edward 
22,  102,  Eliz.  102,  Garrett  526,  Geo. 
227,  Gilbert  96,  136,  Hen.  399,  437, 
Isaak  546,  Jon.  23,  Margt.  381,  515, 
Mary  515,  Nicholas  53,  70,  103,  115, 
141,  497,  Richard  66,  93,  277,  387, 
Susan  515,  Thomas  64,  78,  399,  437, 
Willi.    58,    64,    89,    142,    171,    181, 

235,   243,   284,   343,   500,   515,  

454. 

Reynoll,  John  250. 

Reynolls,  Abygoll  381,  Ann  500,  Chris- 
topher 36:3,  365,  Deborah  381,  Hannah 
381,  John  350,  365,  381,  Mary  305, 
Rich.  267,  Wm.  260,  381,  500. 

Rhoades,  Robt.  82. 

Rhodam,  Mathew  510. 

Rhoden,  Mathew  487. 


General  Index 


719 


Rhodes,  Africa  205,  Jno.  483. 

Rhods,  Math.  514. 

Rhodum,  Math.  292. 

Rible,  Richd.  116. 

Ribone,  Antho.  134. 

Rice,  David  137,  196,  Edward  555, 
Frances  146,  Francis  134,  174,  465, 
Henry  203,  260,  334,  James  257, 
Jane  218,  John  110,  248,  Kath.  227, 
Martha  504,  Nicho.  233,  472,  Peter 
23,  66,  218,  Ri.  194,  Richd.  341,  345, 
'558,  Robert  394,  Wm.  93. 

Rich,  Abraham  314,  Cutberd  43,  Edward 
528,   Elin   291,   Elk.   282,   Jno.   427, 

450,  451,  Miles  281,  Peter  444, 
Thomas  429,  Walter  359. 

Rich  Levell,  the  317,  561. 

Rich  Neck,  the  24. 

Richards,  Ann  167,  192,  Arch.  44, 
David  304,  Edw.  385,  Eliza.  144,  170, 
212,  275,  Florence  25,  69,  George 
543,  Griff.  283,  Hugh  543,  James 
196,  263,  287,  453,  561,  Jane  318, 
Jo.  171,  John  99,  120,  158,  171,  220, 
247,  249,  262,  431,  435,  Jon.  139, 
150,  243,  Joseph  36,  Lawr.  284, 
Maude  142,  Mich.  482,  520,  Peter 
402,  484,  Richard  10,  144,  147,  178, 
223,  353,  356,  Robt.  196,  Tho.  149, 
162,  190,  209,  304,  Walter  195,  Wil- 
liam 27,  41,  78,  96,  131,  136,  180, 
181,  195,  335,  364,  377,  386,  450. 

Richardson,  Adam  178,  Barbary  255, 
Bridgett  185,  Dorothy  312,  Ellice 
420,  Ellis  136,  Herbert  558,  Isaac 
204,  224,  307,  308,  Ja.  189,  John 
190,  541,  Leonard  73,  101,  Lidia 
564,    Luke    44,    Mary    179,    Mathew 

451,  Mich.  414,  Nich.  308,  Peter  118, 
174,  213,  517,  Robt.  Ill,  307,  552, 
Roger  429,  557,  Symon  49,  395,  402, 
433,  Tho.  106,  138,  140,  150,  195, 
Wm.    60,    348,    393,    444,    479,    556. 

Richbill,   Francis   20. 

Richerdson,  Isabell  141,  John  133. 

Richeson,  Barnaby  121,  Edmond  385, 
Elianor  387,  Eliz.  298,  Isaac  224, 
250,  265,  278,  416,  417,  515,  John 
133,  Peter  215,  Sarah  387. 

Richett,  Christo  114,  Francis  145. 

Richey,  Susan  30. 

Richford,  Jon.  97,  Mary  185,  257. 

Richings,  Jo.  358,  Nich.  369. 

Richins,  John  477. 

Richinson,  John   177. 

Richman,  Henry  361,  Tho.  435. 

Richmond,  Tho.  427,  428. 


Rickett,    Fra.    299,    Michael    287,    Wm. 

476. 
Ricketts,  Edw.   131,  Michaell  413,  414, 

Wm.  209. 
Rickless,  Richd.  310. 
Ricklesse,  Richd.  277. 
Rickson,  Walter  390. 
Ricraft,  Silvanas  178. 
Ricroft,  R.  119. 
Rickahock,   place  called   187,   202,   250, 

276,  279,  336,  350,  381,  398. 
Ricohockian  Stand,  place  called  315. 
Riddle,  Edw.  493,  James  215. 
Ridding,   Tho.   199. 
Rideing,   Mr.    551,   Thomas    551,   Wm. 

383. 
Rider,    Andrew    548,    555,    Henry    555, 

Sarah   38,   405,  Willi.   79,    121,    164, 

381,  394,  514. 
Ridford,  John  166,   185. 
Ridge,  Abigail  348,  Joseph  350. 
Ridge,   the   258,   468,    558,   Beech   387, 

Piny  254,  Turkey  354. 
Ridges,  Rich.  57,  115,  178,  279. 
Riding,  Thomas  551. 
Ridle,  John  266. 
Ridley,   Ann   101,  Mr.   221,   Peter   114, 

Tho.  171,  214,  Wm.  121,  247. 
Ridly,  Ann  33,  Hester  533,  James  422, 

John  312,  315,  Peter  283,  Wm.  79, 

452. 
Ridmore,  Sarah  276. 
Ridue,  John  309. 
Rigbee,  Jno.  387. 
Rigby,  Jno.  556,  Mary  388,  Peter  124, 

132,    133,   202,    289,    318,    556,    557, 

Robert  87,  141,  Roger  107. 
Rigbye,  Dorothy  124,  Peter  124. 
Rige,  Abigail  397. 
Rigg,  Alice  544. 
Rigga,  Robt.  373. 
Riggan,  Char.  216. 
Rigge,  John  240. 

Rigglesworth,  Jane  540,  Peter  268. 
Riggons,  John  318. 
Riggs,  Jno.   392,  Richd.   156. 
Right,  Ambrose  444,   Giles    140,  Jason 

61,    Jathen    51,    John    86,    209,    284, 

Tho.  528,  William  3,  259. 
Rightsome,  Ann  86. 
Rigie,  Abra.  280. 
Rigilsworth,  Peter  494. 
Rigot,  Sam.  516. 
Rigsby,  James  60. 
Rigson,  Walter  370. 
Rilby,  Wm.  277. 
Riles,  Miles  468. 


720 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Riley,  Richd.  189,  214. 

Rilie,  Tho.  465. 

Rilly,  Richd.  214. 

Rily,  Dorothy  260. 

Rimmer,  Alice  517. 

Rimmington,  Tho.   148. 

Rine,  Tho.  448. 

Ringall,  Tho.  138. 

Ringe,  Tho.  358. 

Ripley,  John  46,  Richd.  223,  267,  417, 

Susan  448. 
Riply,  Fra.  306,  Susan  523. 
Riplye,  Tho.  281. 
Rippin,  Christ.  40,  68. 
Ripple,  John  55. 
Rippon,    Ann    122,    Ellis    122,    Mathew 

453. 
Risbixt,  Wm.  302. 
Risby,  Jno.  552,  Robt.  39. 
Risden,  Blandma  321,  James  330,  Jane 

321,    Landma    330,    Mary    321,    330, 

Phil.  294. 
Risding,  Joane  428. 
Rise,  Richard  500. 
Riser,  Richd.  212. 
Rishton,  John  25. 
Risly,  Jno.  552. 
Ritch,  David  339. 
Rith,  Row.   260. 
Riveley,  Jason  38. 
Rivers,    Ann    453,    Christo.    233,    483, 

Joane  257,  Rich.  456,  Rowland  453, 

Thomas    67,     122,    502,    Wm.    506, 

Xtop.  511. 

RIVERS: 

Appamattocks:  31,  32,  33,  37,  40,  41, 
51,  54,  59,  60,  61,  65,  69,  75,  85, 
87,  88,  89,  93,  94,  103,  110,  111, 
116,  117,  121,  122,  125,  127,  128, 
134,  136,  137,  140,  186,  221,  239, 
243,  247,  255,  281,  298,  301,  347, 
352,  405,  411,  452,  466,  469,  472, 
499,  505,  508,  535,  547,  556. 

Aquaconde:   352,  353,  357. 

Aquia:    512. 

Back:  2,  4,  6,  7,  8,  15,  16,  19,  20, 
32,  62,  80,  85,  107,  110,  111,  115, 
124,  126,  151,  231,  270,  380,  503, 
507. 

Blunt  Point:    72. 

Carolina:    425,  426,  427,  428. 

Cattatawoman:    271,    272,    445,    504. 

Charles:  22,  26,  37,  44,  90,  94,  96, 
102,  106,  114,  117,  120,  124,  126, 
130,  131,  132,  133,  135,  136,  140, 
141,  144,  161,  162,  164,  167,  169, 


176,  179,  181,  203,  210,  212,  231, 
236,  239,  249,  254,  256,  263,  271, 
292,  303,  317,  422,  489,  555. 

Chesopeian:  22,  34,  36,  59,  80,  90, 
168,  288,  489. 

Chetanck:    211. 

Chickacone:  205,  252,  266,  292,  308, 
341,  360,  382,  398,  441,  460,  463, 

486,  487,  488,  500,  558,  566. 
Chickahominy:     18,    19,    26,    33,    37, 

43,  47,  50,  56,  58,  63,  64,  67,  69, 
77,  82,  83,  84,  88,  89,  91,  92,  94, 
96,  97,  98,  99,  100,  101,  102,  103, 
104,  105,  107,  108,  112,  113,  114, 
115,  116,  123,  124,  125,  126,  138, 
141,  147,  149,  168,  175,  177,  178, 
192,  196,  201,  204,  205,  206,  211, 
215,  217,  222,  224,  229,  230,  231, 
234,  256,  262,  275,  276,  285,  288, 
289,  295,  299,  306,  311,  317,  319, 
322,  323,  326,  327,  328,  330,  336, 
341,  342,  364,  366,  378,  379,  384, 
386,  387,  388,  389,  393,  394,  396, 
399,  400,  420,  430,  443,  457,  472, 

487,  491,  499,  502,  503,  506,  507, 
510,  512,  513,  515,  524,  525,  541, 
548,  558,563,  565. 

Chiscake:    44. 

Chisopeiacke:    47,   57,   110,  136. 

Chowanoke:    426,  428. 

Chuckatuck:  77,  78,  83,  85,  93,  95, 
100,  106,  108,  154,  160,  176. 

Corrotoman:  189,  191,  192,  196, 
199,  200,  201,  212,  219,  229,  238, 
248,  254,  256,  257,  259,  270,  271, 
272,  278,  279,  284,  291,  295,  305, 

308,  309,  311,  313,  320,  322,  325, 
333,  337,  346,  347,  350,  354,  359, 
360,  362,  365,  374,  380,  383,  385, 
399,  409,  411,  425,  429,  436,  437, 
439,  441,  448,  460,  461,  462,  487, 

488,  491,  495,  504,  506,  526,  530, 
531,   541,   550,   561,   569. 

Cossatowoman:     237,  275. 

Elizabeth:  21,  22,  24,  27,  34,  38,  42, 
48,  49,  50,  51,  52,  54,  55,  57,  64, 
65,  67,  72,  73,  78,  79,  82,  84,  86, 
89,  90,  93,  98,  99,  100,  101,  106, 
111,  116,  119,  122,  123,  129,  155, 
156,  157,  165,  166,  167,  168,  169, 
170,  171,  172,  174,  178,  179,  180, 
181,  182,  188,  193,  222,  228,  229, 
232,  233,  236,  238,  239,  240,  241, 
'243,  247,  248,  251,  256,  260,  268, 
269,  274,  275,  280,  283,  285,  287, 
288,  289,  297,  298,  301,  303,  308, 

309,  311,  314,  327,  328,  329,  332, 


General  Index 


721 


341,  342,  343,  379,  385,  387,  401, 

415,  416,  423,  424,  445,  446,  457, 
469,  470,  471,  473,  477,  478,  479, 
489,  492,  494,  497,  499,  501,  507, 
509,  511,  513,  514,  518,  540,  544, 
553,  560,  564,  565. 

Gingoteage,  553. 

Great,  the:    2,  5,  9,  11,  106,  130. 

Hampton:  16,  18,  19,  27,  37,  71, 
79,  115,  136,  137,  145,  151,  156, 
186,  320. 

Henrico:     137. 

Hungars:    96. 

James  River:  22,  24,  25,  26,  28,  32, 
38,  42,  54,  55,  59,  61,  64,  68,  81, 
87,  90,  91,  94,  103,  112,  129,  130, 
134,  141,  143,  146,  149,  151,  152, 
153,  154,  157,  158,  165,  171,  175, 
176,  179,  180,  183,  186,  190,  196, 
199,  206,  231,  238,  241,  242,  246, 
250,  254,  262,  266,  268,  271,  273, 
277,  281,  282,  283,  286,  287,  294, 
299,  303,  306,  310,  312,  313,  314, 
316,  317,  319,  323,  325,  326,  327, 
329,  336,  340,  341,  342,  344,  350, 
353,  356,  364,  365,  366,  367,  374, 
376,  386,  393,  396,  399,  405,  408, 

416,  420,  423,  425,  432,  444,  450, 
451,  458,  464,  466,  469,  471,  472, 
477,  478,  490,  491,  493,  494,  496, 
498,  503,  504,  505,  507,  513,  516, 

533,  534,  535,  537,  542,  543,  544, 
548,  549,  564,  565,  566. 

Katotin,  501. 

Kecoughtancke:    425,  427,  428. 

Lynhaven:  34,  36,  59,  79,  80,  90, 
92,  98,  104,  111,  136,  141,  143, 
148,  149,  179,  181,  287,  288,  330, 
371,  415,  489,  519. 

Machotick:  198,  201,  205,  210,  211, 
223,  237,  253,  254,  281,  292,  305, 
315,  337,  344,  346,  354,  361,  362, 
363,  367,  368,  373,  379,  382,  390, 
400,  401,  403,  432,  447,  473,  475, 
486,  487,  489,  490,  492,  517,  522, 

534,  560. 

Maine,  the:    2,  6,  8,  9,  52,  99. 

Manoaken:    456. 

Matchepungo:    294,  407,  418,  517. 

Matrevers:     100,  101,  102,  103. 

Mattapony:  149,  169,  172,  173,  188, 
210,  212,  213,  216,  220,  229,  232, 
234,  235,  236,  240,  241,  242,  243, 
256,  258,  259,  267,  272,  276,  280, 
281,  283,  284,  287,  295,  299,  304, 
306,  307,  308,  309,  310,  311,  314, 
322,  325,  328,  333,  335,  337,  342, 


347,  350,  359,  361,  364,  365, 
369,  370,  372,  376,  377,  379, 
381,  385,  387,  388,  392,  394, 
408,  409,  417,  421,  424,  457, 
467,  469,  470,  476,  485,  494, 
496,  500,  502,  503,  506,  515, 
520,  522,  530,  541,  542,  555, 
565. 

Mencococond:     194. 

Meredeth:    462. 

Milford   Haven:    564. 

Morraticon:    265,  305,  385,  403, 

Nansamund:     17,  21,  23,  24,  27. 
33,  36,  37,  41,  50,  51,  53,  55. 
57,  58,  65,  66,  70,  71,  73,  74 
78,  81,  83,  84,  85,  91,  94,  95 
100,  102,  103,  111,  113,  115, 
120,  122,  123,  124,  127,  128, 
130,  134,  135,  137,  141,  143, 
150,  153,  155,  158,  160,  162, 
165,  166,  167,  168,  172,  173, 
177,  180,  184,  189,  197,  201, 
218,  226,  236,  237,  238,  239, 
257,  264,  268,  271,  280,  297, 
301,  302,  314,  317,  327,  329, 
358,  386,  393,  408,  443,  451, 

473,  474,  475,  476,  479,  480, 
491,  492,  495,  497,  500,  503, 
509,  518,  543,  568. 

New  Towne  Haven:  55,  58,  71 
76,  77,  78,  84,  85,  90,  106, 
116,  118,  127,  128,  131,  134, 
142,  143,  145,  150,  151,  154, 
162,  163,  164,  168,  171,  173, 
230,   282,  290,  297,  488,  560. 

Nomeny:  198,  208,  209,  212, 
228,  246,  249,  297,  304,  335, 
354,  367,  371,  403,  421,  435, 
464,  468,  478,  492,  506,  522, 
547,  563. 

North:     136,     146,     148,     150, 
339,  427. 

Northampton:     296. 

Nuswattocks:     185,  406,  418. 

Oquioh:  218,  290,  293,  298, 
300,  302,  304,  319,  332,  345, 

474,  480,  495,  565. 
Ohoquin:    294,    298,    301,    353, 

371,  474. 

Pamunkey:     14,     15,    44,     117, 
172,  212,  393,  398,  467,  480, 
510. 

Pasbetanke:    426,  427,   428. 

Peankatancke:     131,    132,     133, 
142,  146,  187,  208,  221,  229, 
239,  243,  245,  247,  248,  257, 
263,  278,  281,  283,  289,  290, 


368, 
380, 
401, 
464, 
495, 
519, 
563, 


459. 

28, 

56, 

76, 

96, 

118, 

129, 

148, 

164, 

174, 

204, 

244, 

298, 

356, 

464, 

489, 

504, 

,  75, 
115, 
135, 
156, 
189, 

219, 
340, 
441, 
546, 

328, 


299, 
400, 

358, 

162, 
509, 


141, 
230, 
262, 
298, 


722 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


303,  306,  313,  318,  330,  334, 

349,  350,  354,  365,  368,  369, 

377,  378,  384,  385,  392,  398, 
416,  417,  422,  437,  438,  441, 
457,  471,  476,  477,  488,  496, 
542,  544,  550,  555,  557,  563. 

Pequimons:    427,  501. 

Pocomook:  453,  456,  465,  551, 
553,  554,  555. 

Poquoson:     14,   21,   331. 

Poquoson,  new:  26,  29,  34,  35. 
39,  42,  53,  54,  57,  62,  65,  67 
75,  82,  92,  99,  100,  102,  112, 
114,  116,  122,  127,  156,  190, 
464,  493,  500. 

Poquoson,  old:  20,  32,  35,  51, 
79,  94,  96,  98,  102,  108,  110, 
117,   122,   171,   175. 

Poropotanke:     186,  204,  258. 

Potomack:  149,  150,  153,  185, 
193,  198,  199,  201,  205,  206, 
208,  209,  211,  213,  218,  219, 
224,  229,  236,  237,  246,  251, 
253,  256,  260,  262,  264,  266, 
275,  279,  280,  282,  284,  288, 
290,  291,  293,  295,  297,  298, 
300,  301,  303,  304,  305,  311, 
315,  316,  319,  323,  325,  331, 
335,  339,  340,  343,  345,  346, 

350,  351,  352,  353,  356,  357, 
359,  360,  362,  365,  366,  367, 
369,  371,  372,  373,  375,  376, 

378,  379,  380,  381,  382,  383, 
388,  389,  390,  392,  397,  398, 
402,  403,  404,  405,  406,  411, 
421,  423,  424,  431,  432,  442, 
447,  448,  449,  460,  461,  464, 
471,  473,  474,  475,  477,  478, 
486,  487,  489,  490,  496,  499, 
501,  512,  518,  522,  523,  531, 
533,  534,  535,  536,  537,  546, 
557,  563,  567. 

Pungotegue:  233,  305,  321,  324, 
513,  532. 

Quantecot:    348. 

Quiough:     266,  332,  420,  477. 

Quinicough:     276. 

Rappahannock:  132,  137,138,  139, 
141,  144,  146,  148,  177,  178, 
182,  184,  185,  186,  187,  189, 
191,  192,  193,  194,  195,  196, 
198,  199,  200,  201,  202,  204, 
213,  214,  215,  216,  217,  219, 
230,  235,  236,  237,  238,  239, 
241,  242,  245,  246,  248,  253, 
255,  256,  257,  259,  263,  265, 
269,  270,  272,  273,  275,  276, 


337, 
375, 
406, 
448, 
541, 


552, 


38, 

69, 

113, 

259, 

54, 
115, 


187, 
207, 
222, 
252, 
272, 
289, 
299, 
312, 
333, 
348, 
358, 
368, 
377, 
385, 
400, 
420, 
446, 
468, 
481, 
500, 
532, 
549, 

338, 


140, 
181, 

190, 
197, 

209, 
227, 
240, 
254, 
268, 
277, 


279,  281,  282,  284,  288,  290, 
293,  295,  296,  299,  300,  301, 
303,  304,  305,  306,  308,  310, 
313,  315,  316,  318,  319,  320, 
324,  325,  329,  332,  334,  335, 
340,  342,  343,  344,  345,  347, 
349,  350,  354,  355,  356,  357, 
359,  360,  361,  362,  363,  364, 
368,  370,  371,  373,  374,  376, 
380,  381,  383,  384,  385,  387, 
391,  392,  393,  394,  397,  398, 
400,  402,  403,  408,  410,  411, 
419,  420,  422,  423,  424,  428, 
430,  431,  432,  433,  436,  437, 
439,  440,  442,  443,  444,  445, 
448,  449,  450,  457,  460,  461, 
463,  465,  466,  467,  468,  469, 
471,  472,  476,  477,  478,  480, 
484,  485,  487,  488,  494,  495, 
499,  500,  501,  503,  504,  506, 
510,  512,  515,  516,  517,  518, 
521,  523,  524,  526,  528,  530, 
536,  538,  545,  546,  549,  550, 
558,  561,  563,  565,  567,  568. 

Roanoke   (Roynoak):    171,  501. 

Severne:  132,  133,  136,  142, 
178,  214,  250,  303,  306,  486, 

Southampton:  6,  8,  9,  10,  12, 
15,  19,  70,  71,  156,  224. 

Trent:     199,  534. 

Wallingford:     246,    328. 

Ware:  132,  135,  136,  141,  178, 
200,  203,  212,  222,  223,  233, 
258,  262,  263,  267,  272,  279, 
315,  325,  331,  337,  339,  345, 
365,  381,  402,  417,  421,  514, 
550,  553,  565,  568. 

Warwicke:  7,  8,  9,  10,  12,  13. 
49,  67,  81,  88,  112,  133,  146, 
151,  159,  161,  164,  174,  239, 
471,  507,  533,  542. 

Warwicksqueick:  10,  11,  27,  31 
42,  53,  54,  71,  75,  76,  77,  84, 
106,   146,  450. 

Wiccocomocco:  144,  183,  184, 
206,  207,  211,  219,  227,  223, 
234,  235,  237,  239,  248,  250, 
256,  257,  259,  263,  264,  266, 
283,  288,  290,  292,  295,  300, 
308,  309,  314,  316,  324,  330, 
333,  337,  339,  341,  343,  347, 
349,  359,  360,  368,  371,  372, 
375,  376,  379,  385,  390,  391, 
398,  400,  402,  408,  409,  419, 
422,  424,  429,  459,  460,  461, 
463,  467,  468,  471,  488,  492, 


291, 
302, 
312, 
322, 
337, 
348, 
358, 
365, 
379, 
389, 
399, 
412, 
429, 
438, 
446, 
462, 
470, 
481, 
497, 
508, 
519, 
531, 
557, 


147, 

490. 

14, 


182, 
247, 
308, 
356, 
532, 

,  29, 
149, 
267, 

,  39, 
101, 

192, 
232, 
252, 
280, 
302, 
332, 
348, 
373, 
395, 
421, 
462, 
493, 


General  Index 


723 


494,  507,  512,  516,  522,  531,  536, 
544,  545,  566. 
Yeocomico:  149,  150,  198,  215,  228, 
234,  235,  246,  252,  258,  265,  269, 
287,  316,  317,  319,  325,  332,  333, 
355,  363,  364,  372,  379,  400,  421, 
450,  461,  464,  468,  470,  484,  486, 
487,  489,  491,  495,  501,  518,  522, 
532,  565. 
Yorke:  142,  144,  162,  169,  171,  173, 
174,  178,  180,  181,  184,  186,  187, 
189,  190,  203,  204,  208,  210,  211, 
213,  214,  215,  216,  222,  234,  235, 
241,  242,  243,  244,  245,  249,  251, 
252,  258,  260,  265,  270,  271,  272, 
279,  284,  291,  295,  297,  308,  310, 
311,  312,  314,  315,  318,  335,  336, 
338,  342,  344,  347,  348,  349,  357, 
358,  359,  360,  367,  371,  376,  377, 
380,  381,  383,  386,  387,  388,  392, 
396,  397,  399,  401,  403,  404,  408, 
415,  417,  421,  422,  424,  433,  458, 
470,  471,  473,  474,  480,  494,  496, 
504,  508,  509,  511,  514,  533,  538, 
,542,  547,  550. 
Rives,  Tho.  502,  Wm.  448. 
Rix,  Jno.  451,  Peter  527. 
Roach,   Hen.   292,   344,   361,    363,   367, 

379,  560,  Thomas  551,  Wm.  265. 
Road,  to  York  540. 
Roades,    Christopher    95,    Jeffery    453, 

Richard  96,  122,  Roger  324. 
Roads,  Jon.  44. 
Roak,  Jno.  404. 
Roan,  Mathew  454. 
Roane,  Charles  518,  550,  Teague  324. 
Robb,  Tho.  308. 
Robbinhoods  Well  550. 
Robbins,    Alice    285,    Edw.    167,    Eliza. 
167,    Grace    539,    John    7,    174,    286, 
Obedience    170,    435,    533,~Ratchell 
167,  Ri.  559,  Sampson  285. 
Robbinson,    Edw.    558,   Geo.   460,   John 
450,  456,  458,  508,   520,   521,  Lawr. 
454,   455,   Tho.   497,    519,    545,   568, 
Wm.  552. 
Robbison,  Ann  393,  Tho.  387. 
Robenson,  Jno.  299. 
Robert,  Antho.  158,  Jarvis  558,'Wm.  213. 
Roberts,  Alice  393,  552,  Anne  271,  291, 
529,   Ben.   214,  David   328,   370,   Ed. 
242,   Edmond    200,    Edward   81,    116, 
127,    151,    194,    205,    366,    Eliz.   264, 
Evan    148,    Everard    382,    Ewen    145, 
Fr.    60,    Francis    82,    200,    203,    350, 
Gab.   196,  Geo.   286,  479,   Griff.  60, 
Henry  116,  324,  James  60,  268,  375, 


Joane  479,  Jon.  45,  81,  93,  233,  John 
47,  106,  108,  131,  156,  202,  204, 
205,  246,  253,  271,  286,  314,  348, 
366,  382,  383,  384,  453,  480,  563, 
564,  Lewis  262,  Magdalen  237,  Marg. 
324,  Mary  307,  452,  Morgan  25,  69, 

99,  Peter  136,  142,  Ralph  106,  117, 
480,  Richd.  238,  Rob.  290,  Saml. 
268,  479,  Sarah  309,  Susanna  390, 
Thomas  99,  127,  428,  Tymothy  458, 
Wm.  178,  180,  213,  271,  293,  353, 
356,  367,  370,  413,  417,  463,  475, 
528,   545. 

Robertson,  Jno.  548,  Martha  514,  Wm. 
563. 

Robingson,  John  412. 

Robins,  Alice  58,  102,  Arthur  555, 
Dorothy  102,  Grace  225,  Hen.  78, 
291,  393,  Humph.  468,  John  16,  19, 
96,  102,  106,  107,  108,  115,  126, 
136,  138,  142,  144,  159,  177,  186, 
189,  224,  286,  295,  301,  306,  309, 
380,  385,  413,  418,  434,  554,  Joseph 
191,  Judith  196,  Lawrence  82,  Maj. 
288,  Mary  514,  Mr.  303,  Obedia  523, 
Obedience  84,  152,  224,  225,  401, 
407,  435,  554,  Robt.  77,  Sampson 
28,  265,  285,  330,  412,  413,  414, 
525,  Sam.  285,  Samll.  4l4,  Wm.  394. 

Robinson,  Andrew  42,  91,  511,  Ann  67, 
155,  426,  444,  Christo.  139,  273, 
Edw.  148,  328,  Elinor  218,  Ellin  190, 
Francis  180,  272,  Henry  43,  150,  209, 

288,  James  16,  74,  81,  203,  263,  Jane 
396,  John  21,  45,  66,  80,  82,  196, 
257,  263,  264,  282,  284,  305,  321, 
334,  376,  410,  411,  428,  469,  513, 
Jon.  150,  Jonas  482,  524,  Jonathan 
327,  Tho.  526,  Lawr.  482,  554,  Lucy 
252,  284,  Margt.  135,  209,  272,  288, 
Martha  367,  Mary  80,  339,  Math.  35, 

100,  Nicholas  108,  114,  147,  Patrick 
60,  Richd.  21,  110,  133  552,  Robt. 
301,  499,  Sarah  150,  239,  Simon  178, 

289,  Steph.  173,  531,  Susaan  275, 
Tho.  52,  110,  119,  146,  344,  427, 
433,  440,  468,  470,  477,  481,  484, 
497,  530,  Wm.  28,  147,  181,  239, 
248,  274,  293,  341,  380,  408,  502. 

Robison,  Georg  100,  Giles  336,  John 
356,  393,  Magdalin  381,  Marg.  375, 
Richard   336. 

Robotton,  Jno.  324. 

Robrisius,  John   254. 

Robyson,  Thomas  508. 

Roch,  David  392,  John  144,  Morris  343, 
Symon  302. 


724 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Roche,  Henry  400,  James  82. 

Rochester,  Jon.  92. 

Rock,  Anthony  184,  Danll.  444,  David 

392,  Katherine  354,  Thomas  435. 
Rockahockaw,  457,  a  place  called. 
Rockby,  Ed.  481. 
Rocke,  Fra.  167,  Henry  400. 
Rockhold,  Robt.  204. 
Rockholes,  Robt.  174. 
Rockingham,  place  called  348. 
Rocks,  Ann  143. 
Rocks,  the  20,  247,  402,  444,  in  Appa- 

mattocks  River  95,  the  great  110,  137, 

299,  302,  499. 
Rockwell,    Mr.    176,    Mary    66,    Robert 

66,   115,   158,  Sarah  66,  Thomas  66, 

115. 
Rockwood,  Anth.  28,   83. 
Rocto,  Jon.  39. 
Rodalphus,  Wm.  356. 
Roddam,  Mr.  460. 
Rode,  John  156. 

Rodes,  Jno.  465,  Mary  347,  Ro.  351. 
Rodgett,  Tho.  142. 
Rodis,  John  169. 
Rodman,  Jno.  363. 
Rods,  James  253. 
Rodulphus,  Kath.  353,  Wm.  353. 
Roe,  Ann  252,  378,  Anthony  381,  Chas. 

252,    Damascene   378,    Ed.   461,    385, 

448,  451,  467,  Elliott  453,  Geo.  453, 
James  215,  228,  293,  378,  Joane  378, 
Jon.  78,  82,  John  125,  252,  Lawrence 
453,  Luke  553,  Mary  115,  Nicholas 
12,  146,  157,  Ri.  196,  Susan  383, 
Wm.  378. 

Roede,  380,  434. 

Roffe,    Jno.    460,    Thomas     359,    453, 

Wm.  440. 
Roge,  John  269. 
Roger,  Jon.  145. 
Roger,  ap  Robt.  501. 
Rogeris,  Stephen  359- 
Rogers,  Abra.  406,  Alice   357,   Andrew 

449,  Capt.  460,  510,  Chas.  33,  72, 
Edward  7,  39,  53,  58,  63<,  70,  Elianor 
114,  Ellin  83,  Francis  99,  Giles  502, 
Hannah  350,  458,  Henry  201,  Hugh 
202,  James  190,  425,  Jane  393,  Joane 

-480,  John  118,  128,  199,  250,  260, 
2>2,  327,  357,  413,  419,  423,  459, 
562,  Jos.  427,  Man.  427,  Margarett 
63,  84,  96,  Mary  221,  Nicho.  157, 
169,  Phill.  176,  Rice  507,  Step.  513, 
Toby  460,  523,  Tho.  60,  80,  117, 
291,  352,  376,  444,  558,  Wm.  54, 
120,  201,  314,  349,  389,  Xtop.  459. 


Rohoke,  Eliz.  386. 

Rohoske,  Elinor  369. 

Roisers,  John  327. 

Roke,  Georg  548. 

Rokesby,  Martha  453. 

Roland,  Francis  339. 

Roles,  Robert  58. 

Rolfe,  John  9,  226,  Mary  388,  Mr.  317, 
374,  Tho.  29,  121,  126,  206,  234, 
295,  328,  353,  384. 

Rolfe's  Indian  Feild  317. 

Roll,  Jno.  552. 

Rolles,  Wm.  153. 

Rolland,  John  254. 

Rollett,  Jude  386. 

Rolls,  Fra.  349,  Robt.  422. 

Rolph.  Danll.  538,  John  378,  Mr.  306, 
396,  399. 

Rombwell,  Thomas  89. 

Rone,  Antho.  368. 

Ronston,  Jon.  41. 

Rood,  Wm.  133. 

Roods,   Richard  428. 

Rooe,  Jno.  454. 

Rooke,  Danl.  270,  Michaell  453,  Rich. 
453,  Wm.  554. 

Rookes,  Jno.  353. 

Rookesby,  Margt.  388. 

Rookins,  Wm.  39,  67,  73,  87,  115,  170, 
198. 

Rooknee,  Geo.  384. 

Rookwood,  John  218,   275,   298. 

Roomes,  Alice  491. 

Rooper,  Capt.  287,  Wm.  482. 

Roose,  John  280. 

Roote,   Abraham   20,   Richd.    274,   

128. 

Rootes,  Thomas  439,  491. 

Roots,  Tho.  308. 

Rop,  John  262. 

Rope,  Tho.  268. 

Roper,  Jane  347,  John  343,  Jone  427, 
Phillip  144,  William  46,  130,  139, 
295. 

Rose,  Alex.  231,  564,  Ann  446,  Charles 
49,  Darcus  449,  Edward  394,  Henry 
115,  Isaak  404,  John  295,  348,  369, 
443,  Mabell  112,  Mary  229,  Maurice 
354,  Morrice  54,  120,  Rich.  289, 
Rob.  322,  Sarah  371,  422,  Tho.  449, 
Wm.  79,  287,  316,  352,  563. 

Roseer,  Elizabeth  356. 

Roseires,  John  179- 

Rosewell,  Tho.  500. 

Rosh,  John  222. 

Rosier,  Eliza.  205,  475,  Jon.  237,  John 
205,    335,    340,   420,   421,   447,   468, 


General  Index 


725 


475,    505,    520,    Mr.    130,    246,    506, 

529,  547,  Morgin  40,  69. 
Rosier's  Refuge,  place  called  468. 
Rosier,  John  259. 
Ross,  Alexr.  445,  Dan.  352,  John  443, 

525,  Wm.  252. 
Rosse,   Adam   493,   Alexr.    190,    Francis 

429,  James  134,  John  271,  427,  453, 

460,  Timo.  429,  Tho.  137,  453,  Wm. 

440,  444. 
Rossell,  Eliz.  259. 
Rosser,   Eliz.   297,   Fr.    144,   Mary   367, 

Morgan  342,  Tho.  394. 
Rossier,  Mr.  228. 
Rostall,  Rich.  359. 
Roswell,  Wm.  485. 
Rosyer,  John  163,  246,  251,  304. 
Rotheram,  Geo.  23,  66. 
Rotherford,  Mary  455. 
Rothewell,  Capt.  250,  543. 
Rotland,   Samll.  483. 
Rotoby,  Martha  453. 
Rouch,  Rich.  143,  Wm.  265. 
Roufe,  Symon  86. 
Roules,  Eliz.  452. 
Roulston,   Francis    110,   Lyonell    18,   99, 

206,  Mr.  102,  106,  174,  Tho.  502. 
Roult,  Henry  378. 
Rouncifull,  Henry  47,  64. 
Round  Hill,  the  487. 
Round  Mill,  the  173. 
Roundabout,  the,  place  called   151. 
Round  about  Slash,  the  516. 
Rounds,  James  370. 
Rouse,    Abram    462,    Dan.    298,    Hen. 

351,  James  250,  Jno.  427,  Joane  525, 

Jone  528,  Thomas  49,  93,  425,  427, 

553,    Walter    274,    293,    355,    Wm. 

253,  256. 
Rousee,  Jno.  476. 
Rousey,  Ralph   193. 
Rouston,  Jon.  141,  Lyonell  206. 
Rout,  Hugh  129. 
Routh,  John  265,  Wm.  260. 
Rouzee,    Edw.    262,    Kath.    262,    Martha 

262,  Ralph  262,  312,  Sarah  262. 
Rouzey,  Ralph  215. 
Rovely,  Jason  176. 

Row,  Hugh  564,  John  148,  Teague  324. 
Rowden,  Robert  51,  65. 
Rowder,  Robert  65. 
Rowdon,   Mathew   206. 
Rowe,  John  125,  167,  Tho.  352,  402. 
Rowell,  Jno.  511. 
Rowen,    Henry    10,    32,    88,    556,    Peter 

459. 
Rowland,  Fr&.  181,  Ja.  31,  James  84,  Jon. 


30,  John  309,  Lewis  260,  286, Tho.  309. 
Rowles,  Fra.  327,  Georg  66,  Jno.  248, 

Mary  249. 
Rowlett,  Jon.  32,  Judith  359. 
Rowley,   Jno.   523. 
Rowlington,  Edw.   122. 
Rowlins,  Marg.   404. 
Rowlinson,  John  274,  Rob.  215. 
Rowlson,  John  289. 
Rowly,  Ann  448,  William  93. 
Rowne,  Robt.  265. 

Rownfifall    (Or  Rownsifall)    Hen.    143. 
Rowse,  Abra.  469,  Ann  440,  Jone  475, 

Tho.  113. 
Rowsen,  Wm.  304. 
Rowzee,  Ann  440,  Ralph  420. 
Rowzey,  Ralph  312,  365,  420. 
Roxby,  Margaret  425. 
Roy,  Dunkin  367. 
Royall,  Henry  64,  Joseph  64,  105,  130, 

138,    157,    317,    405,    561,    Margaret 

497,  Thomasin  64,  Tho.  562. 
Royden,  Wm.  444. 
Royes,  Antho.  355. 
Royes  Rest,  place  called  154. 
Royly,  Anth.  544,  Joane  213,  John  213. 
Royston,  Thomas  456. 
Rubue,  Jon.  86. 
Ruck,  Wm.  258. 
Ruckly,  Edw.  293. 
Ruckston,  Nich.  481. 
Ruddeford,  Jane  188. 
Rudder,  James  428. 
Ruddock,  Harman  430. 
Rudds,  Jno.  507. 
Rude,  Ja.  246. 
Ruferd,  Nath.  376. 

Ruffe,  Edwd.  324,  Reese  271,  Wm.  138. 
Ruffell,  William  434. 
Ruffer,  Wm.  446. 
Ruffin,  Eliz.  569. 
Ruford,  Nath.  349. 
Rugg,  Ann  201,  Benj.  150. 
Ruke,  Ester  428. 

Rule,  Dorothy  107,  109,  117,  124. 
Rulford,  Tho.  221. 
Rumbald,  Jno.  457. 
Rumball,  John  259,  500. 
Rump,  Hannah  541. 
Rumsden,  John  262. 
Rundsay,  Robt.  214. 
Runner,  Jno.  548. 
Runney,  Place  called  the  122. 

RUNS: 

Barbadoes    444,    Baylies    535,    Beech 
Spring  473,  Bowmans  477. 


726 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Cattaile    513,    Cellar    491,    Chestuxen 
491,  Coleman's  493. 

Fishing  230,  485,  537,  Flinton's  535. 

Harris'  250,  543,  Hatcher's  273. 

Jones  323. 

Lee's  510. 

Mill,  267,  Moses  314,  323,  468,  498, 
Moyses  249,  564,  Muttnate  217. 

Namans  491,  Nickawas   502. 

Occapason  420. 

Pease    Hill    326,    475,    Pockatamanio 
236,   Poplar   544,   Potataweno   555. 

Rabennetts  317,  Ravenets  328. 

Sedar    230,     Seller    230,     485,     537, 
Skennow  335,  Stony  535,  556. 

Tanxe  Weynoake  336. 

Webbs,  386,  502,  Wickwas  326,  387. 
Rury,  Edw.  453. 
Rushy,  James  341. 
Ruse,  Dan.  323. 
Rush,   Geo.    210,    288,   Jon.    137,   Wm. 

200,  258. 
Rushton,  Wm.  560. 
Rusk,  Wm.  258. 
Russe,  Wm.  138. 
Russell,    Alice    283,    Ann    189,    Charles 

80,    Dennis    22,    Doctor    382,    460, 

Dorathy   378,    Eliz.    367,   Joane    160, 

Jon.  32,  John  22,  190,  245,  345,  502, 

Katherine    339,    Mr.    314,    Nicholas 

378,    531,    Phillip    349,    Richard    37, 

66,    178,    252,    362,    387,    422,    480, 

487,    Robt.     187,    Sarah    422,    Susan 

298,  Tho.   197,   289,  Wm.   152,   176, 

291. 
Russer,  Morgan,  109. 
Russey,  Elizabeth  66. 
Rute,  Dorothy  107. 
Rutherford,    John    13,    329,    511,    Rich. 

19,  492. 

Rutkin,  Hen.  23,  66. 

Rutland,  Edmond  369,  George  98,  141, 

149,    Mary    363,   Rich.    125,    Samuell 

332. 
Rutt,  Jerimiah  126. 
Rutte,  Jane  514. 

Rutter,  Jeremiah  479,  John  132,  538. 
Ruttler,  Jno.  491. 

Ryall,  Edwd.   211,  Joseph  40,   59,   167. 
Ryalls,  Ann  306,  Sarah  306. 
Rycroft,  Edw.  427. 
Ryd,  Dunken   341. 
Rye,  Henry  238,  396,  521,  563,  Herbert 

454,  Margt.  491,  Wm.  452. 
Ryland,  Tho.  209. 
Ryle,  Tho.  483. 
Ryley,  Anne  235. 


Ryly,  Dan.  362. 
Ryman,  Nicho.  113. 
Ryppin,  Alice  196. 
Rythe,  Chr.  157. 
Rytherland,  Rich.  176. 


Sabbrell,  Nicho.  167. 

Sabin,  Susan  238,  Robt.  518,  Tho.  140, 

177,  214,  Wm.  430. 
Sable,  Geo.  266. 
Sabrell,    Nicholas    95,    480,    511,    559, 

Richd.   199. 
Sache,  Wm.  418. 
Sacker,  Edw.  264,  Jno.  554. 
Sackes,  Tho.  181. 
Sackhill,  Andrew  204. 
Sacom,  Wm.  391. 
Sacott,  Peter  556. 
Sacum,  Wm.  429. 
Sadd,  Richard  89. 
Sadler,  Ailce  212,  Dorothy  277,  Edmund 

124,  Edward  84,  548,  Eliz.  124,  244, 

314,  Geo.  260,  JefTery  45.^  John  35, 
55,  147,  188,  277,  Margt.  124,  Martha 

315,  Mary  124,  359,  Robt.  554,  Roger 
277,  Tho.  43,  55,  136,  515. 

Sadleway,  Xtopr.  199. 

Sadlington,  Jonas  25,  69. 

Sadome,  Allen   113. 

Saeton,  Richd.  189. 

Safeild,  Ja.  510. 

Saffall,   Tho.   232,    237,    257,   300,   348, 

423,  460,  461,  507. 
Saffell,  Jane  455. 
Saffin,  Rich.  431,  484. 
Safrell,  Richd.  324. 
Saffron,  Tho.  250,  290. 
Saffrons,  Tho.  227. 
Sagar,  Ellinor  481. 
Sage,  Gregory  225. 
Sagent,  Fra.  283. 
Saind,  John  153. 

Saines,  John  105,  110,  Wm.  248. 
Saiferne,  James  173. 
Saintloe,  Richd.  450. 
Saintpere,  Nath.  237. 
Saker,  Tho.  250. 
Sale,    Eliz.    116,    Jno.    501,    Susan    448, 

Wm.  375,  515,  247. 

Salem,  Giles  442. 

Sales,  John  466. 

Salford,  Joane  5,  John  4,  5,  159,  Robert 

5,  Sarah  4. 
Salin,  Wm.  430. 
Salisbury,    Georg   85,    189,    560,    Roger 


General  Index 


727 


85,  Robt.  163,  194,  199,  Tho.  235, 
292,  395,  396,  408,  437,  460,  463, 
521. 

Sallace,  Chas.  289,  438. 

Sallard,  Charles  438. 

Sallate,  Saml.  224. 

Salle,  Elianor  141. 

Sallett,  Chas.  148,  Giles  135,  223,  357. 

Sallis,   Saml.  236. 

Sallitt,  Robert  370. 

Sally,  Saml.  229. 

Salmon,  Edw.  217,  Jane  249,  322,  Jervis 
513,  John  475,  Sarah  470,  Wm.  393. 

Salmy,  Wm.  191. 

Salsberry,  Tho.  166. 

Salsburie,  Georg  118. 

Salsbury,  Edw.  118,  Georg  42,  100, 
134,  171,  Hen.  133,  Robert  59,  129, 
Tho.  297,    332,   337,   349,   376,   421. 

Salsbury  Plaines,  place  called  355,  415. 

Salsall,  Thomas   339. 

Salt,  Wm.  482. 

Salter,  Edw.  106,  109,  220,  Eliz.  451, 
Fra.  323,  Jane  404,  John  196,  Mary 
467,  Richd.  299,  Robt.  117,  188,  375, 
395,  Symon  375,  Tho.  486,  Wm.  352. 

Salters  Hill,  place  called  100. 

Saltir,  Tim.  404. 

Salton,  Tho.  510. 

Saltrea,  John  128. 

Salum,  Eliz.  431. 

Salvage,  John  75,  Hannah  30,  Thomas 
75. 

Salvadge,  John  167,  216,  452. 

Sames,  Eliz.  40,   109. 

Samford,  James  433,  435,  477,  481, 
484,  486,  512,  545. 

Sammon,  Jno.  521,  Joseph  55,  69. 

Sammond,  Joseph  47. 

Samon,  John  414,  Joseph  36,   37. 

Samper,  Mary  528. 

Sampson,  Alex.  300,  Constance  479, 
Edw.  249,  James  107,  486,  566,  Jane 
506,  Jno.  509,  Robt.  558,  Tho.  448, 
475,  550. 

Sampton,  Tho.  448. 

Samrayes,  Jona.  447  . 

Sams,  James   153. 

Samuel,  Wm.  151. 

Samuell,  Edw.  153. 

Samuraies,  Jonathan   425. 

Samwayes,  Sarah  428. 

Sand,  Henry  404. 

Sandall,  Edward  53,  77. 

Sandavor,  John  421. 

Sandburne,  Wm.  560,  559,  563. 

Sanders,   Abraham  429,   Ann   209,   480, 


499,  Bl.  479,  Cor.  242,  Edw.  375, 
395,  405,  429,  558,  559,  562,  Eliza. 
150,  220,  381,  388,  480,  Eustace  190, 
Geo.  502,  Grace  247,  Henry  144,  404, 
480,  Hugh  480,  Isabell  91,  James 
370,  432,  Jon.  50,  78,  Jone  394,  John 
427,  429,  482,  513,  Katherine  33, 
Leonard  465,  Margarett  94,  458, 
Mary  480,  Richard  48,  63,  94,  107, 
154,  Robt.  103,  379,  397,  441,  Roger 
121,  Samll.  524,  Simon  432,  Tho. 
167,  232,  247,  254,  263,  361,  381, 
541,  456,  Ustus  539,  557,  William 
108,  110,  113,  139,  140,  388,  187, 
403,  543,  544,  558,  565. 

Sanderby,  Tho.  131. 

Sanderson,  Edward  101,  105,  112,  123, 
205,  348,  524,  527,  Edmond  215, 
Henry  199,  James  453,  Jno.  452,  Mr. 
234,  Ri.  536,  Tho.  222. 

Sandes,  Georg  525. 

Sandford,  James  545. 

Sandever,  John  381. 

Sandiford,  Wm.  395. 

Sandis,  Geo.  168. 

Sandish,   Stephen   131. 

Sands,  David  250,  Edw.  466,  George 
401,  James  453,  Joane  351,  Mary 
173. 

Sandy,  Jno.  559,  Mary  481. 

Sandyes,  Geo.  190. 

Sandys,  Georg  1,  3,  4. 

Sandys  Hundred,  place  called  226. 

Sanford,  Wm.  326. 

Sanin,  Robt.   147. 

Sanner,  Sarah  129. 

Sansnery,  Robt.  433. 

Sansom,  Thomas  370. 

Sansons,  Wm.  339. 

Sanvill,  Jno.  465. 

Sapher,  Geo.   171,  Mr.  171. 

Sapheir,  Georg  51. 

Sapsoate,  Rob.  324. 

Sar,  Wm.  300. 

Sares,  Lidia  500. 

Sarfnett,  Wm.  347. 

Sargent,  Jno.  467. 

Sarkett,  Hester  428. 

Sarkin,  Mattum   227. 

Sarmar,  Jno.  426. 

Sarrigg,  John  302. 

Sarrow,  Benja.  263. 

Sarslett,   Xtopr.   207. 

Sarson,  Jno.  427,  Rich.  298,  Tho.  344, 
William  319,  469. 

Sarsonn,  Wm.  86. 

Sarum,  Jno.  524. 


728 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Sassall,  Thomas  339. 

Sassell,  John  110. 

Satchell,  Eliz.  196. 

Satton,  Richard  363. 

Satums,  Robt.  171. 

Saucer,  Rich.  422,  Wm.  151. 

Sauell,  Tho.  82,  Wm.  486. 

Saugher,  Henry  76. 

Saughier,  Elizabeth  76,  Georg  76. 

Saunders,  Ann  301,  Edw.  291,  Eliz. 
301,  James  431,  476,  Mary  296, 
Michaell  132,  Rich.  37,  Roger  13,  15, 
18,  20,  Tho.  310,  538,  Wm.  301. 

Saunderson,  Edward  31 6,  Montecue  316. 

Savadge,  Jno.  463,  515,  524,  Hannah 
9,  Thomas  9,  18,  Wm.  176,  302. 

Savage,  An  347,  Antho.  178,  Fr.  25, 
69,  Hannah  23,  James  299,  John  30, 
418,  468,  524,  Mart.  181,.  Mary  347, 
Richard  85,  123,  Thomas  9,  30,  31, 
101,  139,  Walter  524,  Wm.  234. 

Savage's  Choice,  place  called  23. 

Savary,  Jno.  385,  William  76. 

Savatt,  Morris  393. 

Savedge,  Bridgett  171,  Tho.  171. 

Saveinge,  Mary  377. 

Savell,  Tho.  82,  Wm.  486. 

Saven,  Robt.  237,  238,  Susan  238. 

Savery,  Tho.  265. 

Savidge,  John  290,  435,  481,  532,  533, 
549,  Robt.  254,  263,  Thomas  203. 

Savill,  Eliza.   271,  Tho.   141. 

Savin,  Edw.  485,  Robt.  404,  Tho.  122. 

Savory,  Mary  336. 

Savory,  Tho.  265. 

Sawe,  Cha.  427. 

Sawer,  Eliz.  344,  Richd.  381,  Wm. 
450. 

Sawford,  Mary  188. 

Sawyer,  Fra.  29,  57,  269,  Mary  186, 
Lidia  331,  Mich.  275,  Thomas  57, 
84,  156,  204,  254,  269,  275,  332, 
379,  Wm.  132,  138,  189,  200,  214, 
237,  365. 

Sax,  Bassett  164,  Thomas  99,  189,  531. 

Saxby,  Jno.  558. 

Saxon's  Gaole,   13. 

Saxton,  Ann  469,  Peter  469,  Robt.  525. 

Say,  Ann  463,  479,  Antho.  449,  Edward 
525,  554,  Jane  208,  John  113,  454, 
Hugh  208,  Tho.  132,  562. 

Saye,  John  65,  171. 

Sayer,  Abigail  429,  Anne  275,  Gregory 
225,  Mary  225,  Thomas  508,  Wm. 
554. 

Sayes,  Tho.  132. 

Sayle,  Humph.  214,  Jno.  538. 


Sayler,  Ralph  189. 

Saylor,  Arthur  137. 

Sayne,  Henry  349,  Hum.  290. 

Saynes,  Geo.  297,  Henry  432,  John  175. 

Sayor,  William  180. 

Saysell,  John  279. 

Saysill,  John  156. 

Saywell,  Tho.  32,  115. 

Scabroocke,  Peter  431. 

Scales,  Geo.  69,  John  214,  264. 

Scafe,  Tho.  394. 

Scape,  Tho.  220. 

Scarborough,  Chas.  174,  Edmond  35, 
43,  55,  101,  109,  Hannah  35,  55, 
Matilda  307,  Tho.  108. 

Scarborrough,   Edmund   43,    55. 

Scarbourgh,  Chas.  307,  Litt.  307,  Math. 
28,  Matilda  307. 

Scarbrough,  Charles  321,  Edmund  80, 
170,  374,  Littleton  287,  Matilda  338. 

Scarbrow,  Richd.  334. 

Scarburgh,  Chas.  260,  264,  286,  305, 
413,  456,  513,  Col.  328,  Edmund 
119,  121,  134,  139,  183,  184,  225, 
286,  305,  418,  419,  424,  425,  452, 
453,  454,  456,  465,  524,  536,  554, 
555,  John  258,  Kath.  261,  Littleton 
393,  536,  Mary  119,  Matilda  328, 
407,  413,  454,  455,  Tabitha  328, 
455,  Tho.  229. 

Scarfe,  Edw.   502,  Moses  229. 

Scarton,  Ann  440. 

Scarlett,  Ann  453. 

Scearle,  John  170. 

Schin,  Law.  294,  Marg.  294. 

Schoole  land,  the  52. 

Scibbs,  John  274. 

Scifeild,  Saml.  245. 

Scoe,  John  331. 

Scoen,  Humphry  85,  89,  96. 

Scone,  Humphry  55. 

Scoffin,  John  77. 

Scoggin,  Geo.  230,  Tho.  248,  252,  346, 
395,  419. 

Scolcroft,  Jno.  560. 

Scold,  Jno.  460. 

Scoldinge,  Jno.  363. 

Scone,  Humphry  82,  84. 

Scone's  Dam,  place  called  111. 

Scory,  Robert  25. 

Scot,  James  366,  Jon.  34,  Jno.  391, 
Kath.  238,  Richd.  324,  Wm.  69,  238. 

Scotch,  Benj.  455. 

Scott,  Andrew  350,  Arth.  24,  Barbery 
282,  Bryan  448,  458,  459,  514, 
Charles  315,  Daniell  104,  Dan.  78, 
Eliz.    491,    Francis    433,    440,    Henry 


General  Index 


729 


63,  230,  291,  405,  Isaack  375,  425, 
468,  James  71,  280,  306,  Jon.  78, 
John  378,  428,  440,  559,  Mary  440, 
Nicho.  119,  Pattrick  283,  Peter  553, 
Robt.  198,  274,  528,  Saml.  167,  401, 
Thomas  183,  195,  199,  459,  485, 
Win.  25,  136,  232,  214,  262,  285, 
301,  357,  514. 

Scots:  Alex  315,  Saul  315,  John  331, 
George  361,  536. 

Scottell,  Robert   389. 

Scowne,  Humphry  47,  48. 

Scowen,  Humphry  89,  150,  160,  164, 
173. 

Scoven,  Humph.  297. 

Scragg,  Rich.  404. 

Scratton,  Sisley  183. 

Scricher,  John  146. 

Scriven,  Mary  435. 

Scrivener,  Mathew  254. 

Scriver,  Jose  191. 

Scroope,  Mary  453. 

Scrudge,  Rich.  484,  485. 

Scrudy,  Richard  430,  475. 

Scruggs,  Nich.  410,  Richd.  306,  308, 
409. 

Scuefeild,   Nicho.    157. 

Scull,  John  160,  547. 

Sculler,  John  129. 

Scurry  Hill,  place  called  243. 

Scurvy  Hill,  place  called  243. 

Sea,  Jno.  470. 

Seaborne,  Nich.  270. 

Seabott,  James  453. 

Seabottom,  Jon.  237. 

Seabrell,  Nicho.  387. 

Seaburne,  John  38,  Nicholas  38,  273, 
415. 

Seacraft,  Jno.  208. 

Seaden,  John  245. 

Seadgall,  Humph.  196. 

Seafort,  Tho.  454. 

Seag,  Thomas  316. 

Seager,  Jon.  144,  Oliver  385. 

Seagrasse,  Amey  261. 

Seagreene,  Xtop.  468. 

Seale,  Hen.  80,  Mary  264,  Wm.  335. 

Seale  of  the  Va.  Company  mentioned 
163,  the  Colony  247. 

Seales,  Wm.  265. 

Sealing,  Mary  248. 

Seaman,  Gilbert  340,  John  340,  446, 
Wm.  340. 

Seamer,  Francis  68,  Owen  116. 

Seane,  Ralph  178. 

Seanoble,  John  171. 

Seanor,  John  180. 


Search,  Eliz.  281. 

Seare,  Ed.  426,  444,  468. 

Searell,  Nich.  72. 

Seares,  Chas.  458,  Henry  323. 

Seargent,  John  258. 

Searle,  Gabriell  123,  Jon.  33,  John  115, 

270,  506,  Mary  432,  Richd.  127,  292, 

367,  372,  378,  423. 
Searles,  Richard  441,  442. 
Searne,  John  101. 
Seate,  Ann  544. 
Seaton,  George  355,  382,  Jon.  60,  John 

385. 
Seavell,  David  259. 
Seaver,  Hugh  128. 
Seaverne,  Jno.   171. 
Seaverne — Severne,     place    called:     135, 

188,   227,    301,   358,    365,   402,   416, 

417. 
Seaward,  John  24,  69,  83,  85,  106,  118, 

125,    126,    135,    139,    145,    162,    168, 

Mr.   143,   290,  309. 
Seawell,   Arthur   124,  Jervis   82,   Mercy 

63,  Thomas  21,   102,   165,   172,   181, 

485. 
Seay,  Thomas  316. 
Sebbrell,  Nicho.  267. 
Sebeard,  John  113. 
Seberry,  John  102. 
Sebocke,  Wm.  267. 
Sebrell,  Nicho.  267,  364. 
Sebright,  Solo.  163. 
Seckbone,  James  294. 
Seeker,  Geo.  151. 
Secretary,  place  of  the  7,  11,  12,  75,  84, 

143,  159,  162,  170,  486,  495. 
Secretary  of  State,  213,  244,  339,  359, 

390. 
Sedberry  Peter  100. 
Sedcott,  Eliz.   565. 
Sedger,  Ann  387. 
Sedgwick,  Joseph  23. 
Seeker,  Roger  39. 
Seeleyn,  Mary  248. 
Seemer,  John   196. 
Seere,  Abigail  484,  Fra.  220. 
Segar,  Francis  76,  Oliver  281,  319,  370, 

383,  438,  442,  568. 
Segrave,  Joane  293. 
Seines,  Law.  351. 
Selbee,  Robert  97. 
Selby,  Richard  434,  Robt.  37,  66,  Tho. 

452,  515. 
Seldome,  Wm.  85. 
Selfe,  Robt.  464,  468. 
Selikley,  Timo.  209. 
Sell,  John  339. 


730 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Sellby,  John  406. 

Seller,  Wm.  363. 

Sellett,  Eliza.  107. 

Sellevants  Gutt,  place  called  467. 

Sellick,  Saml.  290. 

Selly,  John  101,  21*6,  315. 

Selvey,  Tobias  551. 

Semaster,  Hen.  133. 

Sen,  Stephen  131. 

Senior,  Eliz.  557,  Henry  90,  John  39, 
160,  199,  221,  225,  240,  258,  271, 
278,  279,  310,  313,  353,  477,  495, 
514,  548,  550,  Sarah  39,  Tho.  335, 
514,  Wm.  556. 

Sennett,  Garrett  358. 

Sentence,  Hen.  395. 

Senter,  Wm.  278. 

Senton,  Jno.  548. 

Septon,  John   198. 

Serah,  Wm.  484. 

Serby,  Robt.  269. 

Serch,  Wm.  429. 

Sergeant,  Fran.  458,  Wm.  460. 

Sergent,  Arthur   149. 

Sergiant,  Wm.  523. 

Serjant,  Hugh  557,  Hue  568,  Jno.  304, 
559,  Wm.  567. 

Serjeant,  Fra.  230,  Wm.  87. 

Serly,  Robt.  404. 

Sermoner,  Edmd.   242,   286. 

Serridon,  Tho.   128. 

Servant,  Phillis  516. 

Serviant,  Jno.  468. 

Session,   Judeth   158. 

Seth,  William  58. 

Sethell,  Eliz.  325. 

Setteplace,  Tho.  456. 

Settle,  Fra.  384,  Judith  155. 

Seullin,  Robt.  193. 

Seveor,  John  190. 

Several",  Robt.  488. 

Severne,  John  155,  157. 

Seward,  Cha.  427,  Edw.  554,  George 
543,  James  326,  John  171,  439, 
Margtt.  559,  Mary  512,  Mr.  164, 
488,  Peter  562,  Richd.  476,  Wm. 
320,  402,  457,  552,  554. 

Sewell,  John  108,  383,  385,  Judith  348, 
Lane.  275,  Margt.  263,  Mary  429, 
456,  Mr.  179,  Rich.  213,  Thomas  76, 
79,  98,  458,  484,  Wm.  401. 

Sewes,  Anthony  554. 

Sewill,  James  548. 

Sewins,  Wm.  338. 

Sexton,  Ann  332,  Jno.  558,  Nich.  291, 
471,  Peter  247,  248,  274,  275,  510, 
Richd.  282. 


Sey,  Wm.   142. 

Seyes,  Miles  553. 

Seymor,  Thos.   127. 

Seyton,  Dorcas,  287. 

Shabin,  Geo.  359. 

Shackleforth,  Roger  368. 

Shackly,  John  235. 

Shade,  Henry  276. 

Shaddock,   Jon.   65. 

Shadock,  Peter  293. 

Shadwell,  Overner  208. 

Shagbrough,  Joane  214. 

Shakelton,  Ann  449. 

Shakley,  John  198,  252. 

Shakly,  John  235,  522. 

Shall,  Jane  453. 

Shallamine,  John  310. 

Shallock,  John  99. 

Shalpe,  Jno.  426. 

Shanack,  Peter  536. 

Shandall,  Antho.   167. 

Shandler,  Thomas  425. 

Shanks,  John  198. 

Shane,  James   371. 

Shans,  Jno.  427. 

Shaply,  Jno.  426. 

Shapwell,  William  101. 

Shard,  John  426. 

Share,  Jacob  258,  Samll.  509. 

Sharman,  Jno.  518. 

Sharp,  Ann  41,  Eliz.  548,  Fra.  238, 
Jane  448,  John  283,  310,  Mary  482, 
Richard  41,  109,  Saml.  137,  Wm. 
157,  293. 

Sharpe,  Andrew  257,  Elizabeth  361, 
Fra.  315,  Henry  189,  316,  363,  John 
68,  259,  284,  292,  296,  312,  341, 
350  370  383  393,  410,  422,  425,  426, 
430,  435,  437,  441,  462,  468,  501, 
530,  Jon.  96,  Mary  396,  Nathll.  476, 
Oliver  221,  Ralph  375,  425,  468, 
Rebecca  73,  Richd.  188,  220,  Robt. 
47,  106,  266,  290,  Tho.  196,  275, 
483,  567,  568,  Wm.  36,  45,  65,  113, 
127,   358,  426,  Zachary  538. 

Sharper,  Joner  195. 

Sharpies,  Eliz.  121,  Tho.  120. 

Sharpless,  Eliza.  180. 

Sharplesse,  Eliz.  221. 

Shatboule,  Richd.  29. 

Shaw,  Abram  459,  Ann  37,  261,  307, 
Francis  147,  Geo.  252,  James  308, 
Jane  453,  492,  512,  525,  Jon.  87, 
104,  134,  Joan  435,  John  141,  194, 
376,  391,  397,  422,  430,  465,  471, 
483,  Mary  458,  Nath.  491,  Nich.  40, 
68,  Richd.   112,  Tho.  246,  472,  483, 


General  Index 


731 


484,   510,   Wm.   43,    147,    355,   

320. 

Shawbooke,  Jon.  28. 

Shawley,  Wm.  484. 

Shawly,  Marma.  514,  Tho.  399. 

Sheare,  Georg  56. 

Sheapard,  Alexander  366,  John  409, 
Lewis  341,  Robt.  342,  Nath.  300. 

Sheapheard,  Tho.    183. 

Sheappard,  Ehanor  300. 

Shearman,  Abra.   171. 

Sheeles,  Jon.  227,  John  250. 

Sheely,  Roger  330,  401. 

Sheen,  Ellen  191. 

Sheep,  Ellen  189. 

Sheeres,  Geo.  338,  John  278,  512,  Susan 
223. 

Sheerman,  Edm.  196,  Edw.  510. 

Sheers,  James   120,  Wm.   143. 

Sheetes,  Andrew   342. 

Sheevs,  Geo.  338. 

ShefTeild,  Jno.  375,  425,  Phill.  441, 
Robt.  384,  Thomas  20,  36,  87. 

Sheild,  Thomas  93,  Walter  198. 

Sheir,  Geo.  237. 

Shekells,  Barbary  318. 

Sheld,  Tho.  211. 

Sheldon,  James  525,  Wm.  454. 

Shelington,  Jno.  452. 

Shell,  John  147,  342,  Mary  506. 

Shelley,  Jeane  429,  Tho.  133. 

Shellington,  Elizabeth  390. 

Shelly,  Edw.  198,  453,  Geo.  344,  Jane 
453,  456,  John  257,  Ri.  562,  Roger 
70. 

Shelton,  Fr.  86,  290,  300,  Rich.  105, 
Symon  381,  Tho.  361,  538. 

Shepard,  Alexander  336,  Ann  348,  Capt. 
326,  Jane  552,  John  156,  161,  398, 
405,  516,  Major  340,  Margaret  336, 
Mary  545,  Rich.  379,  Rob.  427, 
Susan  150,  Thomas  355,  Wm.  385, 
455,  372. 

Shepey,  Tho.  323. 

Shephard,  Alex.  506. 

Shepherd,  Nath.  227,  Peter  561,  Tho. 
234. 

Sheppard,  Ann  142,  544,  Antho.  446, 
Baldwin  456,  Edw.  203,  Jon.  142, 
John  96,  118,  130,  156,  282,  456, 
558,  Lucy  282,  Major  508,  511,  562, 
Mary  204,  Priscilla  28,  204,  Robert 
28,  40,  42,  94,  109,  204,  446,  219, 
258,  402,  461,  489,  557,  568. 

Sheppe,  Edw.  258. 

Shepperd,  Jon.  143,  John  118,  257, 
Nath.  250,  Richard  5,  156,  Wm.  139. 


Sheppey,  Thomas  60,  112. 

Shepping,  Jon.  222. 

Sheppye,  Tho.   157. 

Shepway,  John  184. 

Sheppird,  John  258. 

Sherborne,  James  136. 

Sherbourne,  James  120. 

Sherbutt,  Geo.  159. 

Shere,  Strength  10. 

Sheres,  Susan  234. 

Sheriffe,  James  510,  Tho.  179. 

Sherlacke,  John  148. 

Sherland,  Wm.  294. 

Sherlark,  Mary  431. 

Sherley,  Daniell  19,  Thomas  331. 

Sherlock,  John  251,  362,  531. 

Sherlocke,  John  505,  514. 

Sherlow,  Arth.  510. 

Sherly,  Agnes  78,  Eliz.  43,  Henry  298, 

Jane  399,  Nich.  438,  Robt.   513,   S. 

500,  Tho.  482. 
Sherly    Hundred,    place    called     (Note: 

Look  under  Hundred)   93,  130,   138, 

165,  167,  240,  317. 
Sherman,  Anne  272,  Henry  450,  James 

146,   Jno.   448,    528,   Quintaine   440, 

519,  545,  Tho.  397,  Wm.  260. 
Sherwin,  Tho.  486. 
Sherwood,      Francis      246,     472,     473, 

Humph.    176,    Jane    285,    John    112, 

Mary   329,    Peter    367,    Thomas    426, 

536. 
Shetting,  Thomas  527. 
Shetworth,  Dan.  267. 
Shevarne,  Henry  278. 
Shewce,  Edw.  486. 
Shewell,   Johna.   412,   Mary   276,    Sam. 

294. 
Shewmaker,  Wm.  513. 
Shewood,  Peter  497. 
Shilooe,  Ann  422. 
Shinte,  Wm.  393. 
Ship,  Tho.  453,  Wm.  499. 
Shipcot,  Tho.   162. 
Shiply,  Hen.  364. 
Shipman,  Martha  446. 
Shipp,  Richard  192,  Wm.  174. 
Shippard,    Adrell    301,    Ann    298,    Eliz. 

292. 
Shippe,  Danl.  258. 
Shippey,    Edw.    79,    Eliz.    33,    60,   John 

6,  Tho.  33,  60,  112,  262. 
Shipright,  a  67. 

Ships:    Abigail  14,  16,  Africa  22,  Anne 

7,  Ark  22,  Bona  Nova  2,  4,  17,  Bona 
Adventure  23,  Bonny  Besse  3,  5, 
Charitie  16,  Charles  4,  5,  Christopher 


732 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


&  Mary  22,  David  of  Bristol  129, 
Defense  56,  Dove  of  London  128, 
Elianor  16,  Elizabeth  7,  Ellins  10, 
Faulcon  226,  Flying  Hart  7,  French 
22,  George  4,  5,  6,  8,  9,  15,  16,  17, 
226,  Great  Hopewell  3,  Guift  5, 
Honour  122,  Hopewell  22,  23,  Jacob 
4,  5,  James  7,  Jon  &  Dorothy  23, 
John  &  Francis  10,  13,  Jonas  129, 
Jonathan  8,  London  Merchant  6, 
Margarett  &  John  4,  8,  16,  Marma- 
duke  10,  Marrigold  6,  Mary  of  Bristol 
129,  Mary  Providence  5,  Merchants 
Hope  23,  Neptune  5,  8,  13,  Primrose 
of  London  22,  Returne  7,  Return  of 
London  17,  Revenge  22,  Samuell  2, 
Seaflower  4,  9,  Sea  Venture  3,  South- 
ampton 3,  7,  13,  16,  Starr  8,  17, 
Susan  of  London  22,  Swann  7,  Tem- 
perance 8,  10,  Treasurer  6,  True  Love 
22,  Tyger  3,  4,  6,  14,  Virga.  Merchant 
536,  Warwick  5,  7,  13,  William  129, 
Wm.  &  John  15,  Wm.  &  Thomas  5, 
144. 

Shirle,  Tho.  150. 

Shirly  Hundred,  place  called   203,   317. 

Shirt,  John  180,  Nich.  444,  Tho.  498. 

Shoare,  Arthur  382,  Robert  339. 

Shoemaker,  Wm.  266. 

Shollman,  Dennis  358. 

Shone,  Mary  322,  Teage  322. 

Shonelock,  Hen.  134. 

Shoore,  Arthur  398. 

Shoot,  Mary  434. 

Shootboult,  Richd.  302. 

Shore,    Arthur    372,    398,    553,    Helen 

192,  James  54,  John  54,  121,  536, 
Jonas  121,  Kath.  54,  121,  Susan  547, 
Tho.  370. 

Shorebury,  Jno.  427. 

Shorne,  Jno.  545. 

Shorne  Brook  Hill,  place  called  142. 

Shorpe,  Dennis  404. 

Short,  Abigail  546,  Abra.  452,  David 
233,  Francis  346,  Henry  153,  James 
506,  John  277,  336,  403,  533,  565, 
Martha  525,  Mary  453,  Nich.  512, 
546,  Peter  542,  Robt.  147,  Samuell 
425,   446,   Tob.   558,   Wm.   29,    113, 

193,  250,  302,  558. 

Shone,    Mathew    351,    Tho.    450,    Wm. 

115,  355. 
Shorten,  Mary  41,  96. 
Shorter,  John  99,  Mary  96. 
Shortland,  Rich.  346. 
Shory,  Jno.  521,  Tho.  472. 
Shotbold,  Richard  65. 


Shotower,  Phillip  430. 

Shoud,  Jonathan  265. 

Should,  Tho.  448. 

Shoute,  Henry  203. 

Showdall,  Edw.  429. 

Showell,  Ann  455,  Jonath.  286. 

Showning,  Geo.  168. 

Shreffer,  John  214. 

Shreive,  Wm.  387. 

Shresser,  John  214. 

Shrews,  Tho.  286. 

Shrimpton,  Mr.  414,  Wm.  163,  181,  414. 

Shuett,  Richd.  129. 

Shuffman,  Edw.  517. 

Shugge,  Tho.  422. 

Shuile,  James  528. 

Shure,  Jacob  258. 

Shurley,  Daniell  19,  Wm.  266. 

Shurlock,  Jno.  460. 

Shurlocke,  John  505. 

Shute,  Martin  142,  Mary  445,  William  66. 

Shuter,  Richd.   118. 

Shutleworth,  Jon.  134. 

Sibbs,  John  Capt.  507. 

Sibill,  Margaret  371. 

Sibsey,  John  64,  91,  98,  179. 

Sibthrop,  Francis  433. 

Sickard,  Symon  301. 

Sidley,  Tho.  225. 

Sidney,  Col.  328,  Eliza.  148,  323,  John 

156,    169,   415,  Mr.   239,   289,   Robt. 

191,  Wm.  369. 
Sidnie,  Mr.  518. 

Sidny,  Barbara  514,  565,  Robt.  514,  565. 
Sidway,  Capt.  326. 
Sidwell,  Roger  526. 
Sigmar,  Richd.  112. 
Signett,  Balden  112. 
Siler,  Michael  42,  Robt.  121. 
Siliston,  Kath.  223. 
Silke,  Anne  282. 
Silley,  Edward  101. 
Sillimore,  Morter  493. 
Sillingat,  Dorothy  172. 
Sillis,  John  473,  Marke  207. 
Sillito,  Roger  150. 
Silliward,  Jon.  32. 
Sills,  Ann  501. 
Silver,  Mary  146. 
Silverlocke,  James  425. 
Silverton,  Kath.  359,  390. 
Silvester,    Edw.    562,    Hen.    456,    Jno. 

412,    Phillipp    140,    150,    213,    343, 

Richd.  562. 
Simmes,  John  337. 
Simmons,    Ed.    312,    Eliz.    481,    James 

462,  Oliver  87. 


General  Index 


733 


Simms,  Benjamin  26. 

Simnell,  John  3. 

Simonds,  Mary  566,  Nathaniell  558. 

Simons,  Francis  376,  Jno.  563,  Martin 
517,  Mary  428,  Milicent  285,  Roger 
425,  Sarah  564,  Symon  338,  475,  503, 
Tho.  441,  472,  Wm.  423,  466,  513. 

Simpcock,  Alex.  332. 

Simpkins,  Edward  58,  Ralph  51,  61. 

Simproot,  James  430. 

Simpson,  Ann  309,  Dan  316,  363,  Ed. 
242,  Edmond  555,  Edw.  188,  281, 
300,  302,  304,  308,  494,  502,  Grace 
246,  John  112,  149,  399,  428,  438, 
448,  558,  563,  Kath.  287,  430,  Patrick 
112,  Paul  380,  Rachell  523,  Rich. 
460,  Robert  83,  104,  Tho.  142,  248, 
315,  Wm.  349,  467. 

Sims,  Andrew  23,  Bartho.  460,  Benj. 
35,  Jno.  513. 

Simson,  John  277,  531,  Rich.  151. 

Sinckler,  Abraham  336,  Alex.  285,  Jane 
326,  John  326,  Margaret  87,  Morris 
232,  Wm.  340. 

Sinclur,  Archebald  347. 

Sinett,  Wm.  544. 

Singcleare,  Jon.  30. 

Singlar,  Edmond  331. 

Singlehirst,  Eliz.  236. 

Singleton,  Arabella  548,  Geo.  475,  525, 
528,  Grace  232,  Henry  213,  222,  232, 
244,  416,  417,  John  62,  223,  416, 
Leonard  382. 

Singlewood,  Symon  279. 

Sinycott,  John  209. 

Sipley,  John  511. 

Sippey,  John  6. 

Sipsey,  John  7,  22,  42,  48,  233. 

Sipsone,  John  282. 

Siropp,  Alice  282. 

Siscock,  Jon.  68. 

Sisemores,  place  called  440. 

Sissell,  Robt.  477,  Wm.  288. 

Sisson,  Robt.  387,  433,  443,  526. 

Sitch,  Rob.  331. 

Sitfore,  Thomas  520. 

Sivilian,  Elinor  280. 

Sixton,  Jno.  454,  Peeter  332,  Robt.  528. 

Skame,  Wm.  388. 

Skarfe,  Bryan  208. 

Skeate,  Kath.  459. 

Skeed,  Wm.  297. 

Skegs,  Rich.  387. 

Skerrett,  John  301. 

Skery,  Susan  212. 

Skewes,  Amy  559. 

Skidd,  John  195. 


Skiddiner,  John  252. 

Skidmore,  Augustine  99. 

Skiffin,  Wm.  193. 

Skill,  Wm.  457. 

Skillorne,  Dorothy  107. 

Skimino,  place  called  313,  325,  422, 
439,  473. 

Skiner,  Augustine  462,  525,  Wm.  412. 

Skinham,  Wm.  264. 

Skinner,  Andrew  449,  Anth.  24,  54, 
Arthur  548,  Austin  549,  Edw.  208, 
Francis  527,  Henry  540,  Joane  193, 
Jon.  82,  John  10,  85,  Martin  148, 
Mary  481,  Moses  499,  Richd.  327, 
Robt.  213,  Thomas  537,  538,  Wm. 
286,  549,  554. 

Skip,  Wm.  516. 

Skipner,  Edw.  195. 

Skipp,  Math  337. 

Skipwith,  Grey  379,  392,  417. 

Skirrick,  Thomas  99. 

Skory,  Tho.  523. 

Skull,  John  129. 

Skyrnes,  Edw.  127. 

Slade,  Geo.  232. 

Slaitor,  John  349. 

Slaner,  James  351. 

Slash,  dividing  York  &  Denby  Counties 
370. 

Slashes:  the  493,  Hog  Bed  451,  Water 
516. 

Slater,  Arthur  323,  John  81,  103, 
Leonard  116. 

Slatter,  Artick  428,  John  390. 

Slattor,  Jno.  361,  Tho.  396. 

Slaughier,  Georg  76. 

Slaughter,  Anne  253,  257,  Bridgett  388, 
Dorothy  327,  Fra.  514,  George  541, 
John  5,  21,  25,  34,  86,  115,  123, 
174,  196,  239,  506,  Mary  318,  Nath. 
486,  Rebecca  28,  Richd.  236,  399, 
Robt.  318,  Samll.  499,  Sarah  303, 
Wm.  486. 

Sleadman,  Jno.  369. 

Sled,  Henry  178. 

Sledwell,  Tho.  321. 

Slee,  Francis  133. 

Sleeve,  Ellin  177. 

Slich,  Jno.  388. 

Slight,  Geo.  279. 

Slinton,  Wm.  295. 

Slippett,  a  435. 

Slitham,  Geo.  461. 

Sloe,  Roger  376. 

Sloper,  Samll.   197,  290. 

Slotum,  Samll.  543. 

Slowly,  Michaell   133. 


734 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Slye,  Jeremiah  97. 

Smalecomb,  Tho.  173. 

Smalewell,  Fra.   328. 

Small,  Capt.  112,  Eliz.  116,  Jno.  484, 
Margaret  77,  Wm,  222. 

Smalledge,  Ja.  29,  Jon.  29. 

Smallwood,  John  76,  349,  480,  Mathew 
19,  270,  Randall  110. 

Smally,  Margt.  29. 

Smarley,  Wm.   191. 

Smarlurt,  Wm.  131. 

Smart,  Charles  382,  513,  James  450, 
Jane  470,  471,  Joane  460,  Jon.  143, 
John  250,  376,  448,  Judith  553, 
Martin  520,  Nich.  404,  Rob.  351, 
Susan    541,    Tabitha    393,    455,    Tho. 

173,  393,  567,  Wm.  170,  322,  384, 
417,  435,  438,  518,  548,  557. 

Smarte,  Wm.  146. 

Smarth,  Wm.  329. 

Smee,  George  526. 

Smeete  Wm.  142. 

Smellock,  Jno.  195. 

Smelt,  Jonas  555. 

Smett,  Wm.  544. 

Smister,  Hugh  181. 

Smite,  John  183. 

Smith,  Abra.  502,  Alex.  210,  213,  254, 
284,  Alice  82,  134,  140,  345,  493, 
Andrewes  379,  An.  338,  Ann  28,  43, 
115,  205,  216,  291,  296,  300,  338, 
357,  388,  405,  453,  Antho.  459, 
Arthur  76,  82,  83,  117,  125,  526, 
Bryan  87,  429,  493,  Bryant  129,  Ca. 

200,  Clemolius  385,  Danl.  275,  315, 
366,  460,  Edward  72,  108,  146,  217, 
314,  367,  370,  391,  414,  431,  452, 
454,    462,    551,    Eliz.    27,    134,    173, 

201,  228,  229,  276,  293,  349,  361, 
404,  422,  427,  431,  507,  521,  567, 
Ellis    129,   Fra.    180,    219,    278,    315, 

359,  373,  456,  492,  507,  Gabriell 
149,   Geo.    115,    119,    130,    152,    162, 

174,  180,    198,    217,    248,   249,    271, 

286,  296,    327,    342,    346,    347,    349, 

360,  370,  371,  403,  419,  421,  433, 
444,  465,  475,  526,  538,  547,  Grace 
24,  80,  Hannah  206,  380,  Hen.  33, 
72,    113,    115,    130,    138,    190,    199, 

287,  309,  332,  355,  375,  395,  424, 
462,  463,  473,  484,  519,  554,  555, 
Herbert  337,  Hester  158,  Hump.  341, 
Jacob  508,  James  23,  47,  65,  66,  128, 
143,  172,  210,  274,  309,  381,  426, 
Jane  209,  Jarvis  56,  Jeffry  300,  Jone 
213,  Joane  250,  446,  Jo.  171,  Jon. 
33,   53,   60,    144,   242,   John   10,    17, 


25,  54,  61,  72,  83,  89,  93,  107,  113, 
115,  120,  121,  134,  135,  150,  156, 
158,  161,  172,  184,  194,  202,  211, 
213,  219,  250,  252,  258,  259,  263, 
274,  275,  278,  282,  284,  287,  290, 
291,  296.  297,  300,  307,  309,  311, 
314,  315,  324,  336,  337,  339,  354, 
357,  361,  368,  373,  386,  397,  417, 
425,  426,  430,  431,  433,  435,  438, 
449,  450,  454,  458,  459,  476,  477, 
482,  483,  489,  495,  499,  511,  513, 
515,  543,  545,  551,  553,  554,  564, 
Johanna  459,  Joseph  62,  395,  437, 
520,  Joshua  455,  Joyce  273,  472, 
Kath.  43,  264,  286,  412,  513,  Law. 
264,  365,  548,  Margery  182,  Martha 
95,    Mary    30,    134,    210,    212,    234, 

237,  252,  301,  303,  312,  333,  350, 
364,  404,  432,  453,  459,  460,  500, 
568,  Massey  200,  Math.  387,  428, 
514,  Maurice  447,  Mich.  267,  Mr. 
155,  Nath.  367,  Nicho.  126,  148, 
158,  172,  181,  290,  329,  375,  395, 
441,  478,  512,  522,  559,  Peter  212, 
351,  352,  383,  385,  506,  531,  544, 
548,  Phil.  177,  Phillipp  10,  555, 
Phillis  296,  Rebecca  98,  Robert  25, 
78,  204,  217,  228,  235,  304,  317, 
318,  322,  334,  355,  357,  366,  384, 
388,  392,  400,  404,  467,  478,  487, 
517,  Roger  2,  374,  389,  Richd.  23, 
43,  47,  65,  66,  78,  83,  112,  123,  135, 
148,  155,  157,  158,  161,  169,  172, 
180,  182,  195,  200,  204,  212,  214, 
215,    216,    230,    236,    271,    275,   279, 

296,  327,  331,  357,  360,  369,  375, 
390,  394,  405,  406,  412,  426,  455, 
459,  468,  482,  520,  550,  551,  552, 
565,  Samll.  138,  206,  279,  323,  352, 
369,  377,  Sanders  129,  Sarah  43,  115, 
134,  180,  300,  314,  329,  339,  357, 
418,  430,  Silvester  144,  Sph.  264, 
Susan  519,  Susannah  203,  411,  Symon 
129,  163,  194,  199,  Thomas  13,  15, 
17,  23,  25,  28,  29,  30,  37,  41,  43, 
46,  50,  63,  66,  70,  79,  81,  92,  97, 
107,  110,  114,  115,  118,  126,  135, 
142,    145,    150,    152,    209,    213,    222, 

238,  249,    250,    259,    269,    274,    291, 

297,  311,  324,  326,  350,  359,  377, 
381,  399,  418,  429,  431,  436,  451, 
453,  456,  459,  465,  482,  483,  484, 
485,  499,  510,  517,  520,  564,  Tobias 
477,  Toby  57,  125,  128,  151,  155, 
162,  174,  209,  217,  239,  273,  291, 
293,  304,  315,  319,  348,  350,  469, 
503,   519,  521,   528,  Ursula  56,   259, 


General  Index 


735 


Uryas  172,  Valent.  502,  Vergis  427, 
William  3,  14,  28,  57,  58,  78,  152, 
167,  168,  186,  198,  202,  208,  215, 
218,  219,  228,  241,  246,  266,  275, 
276,  279,  289,  290,  295,  309,  327, 
352,    357,    367,    378,    381,    385,    387, 

389,  416,  418,  462,  478,  505,  510, 
515,  519,  552. 

Smith's  Ford  126,  151,  155  . 

Smith's  Fort,  175,  176,  177. 

Smith's  Mount,  26,  32,  103. 

Smithcock,  Henry  108. 

Smithell,  Wm.  134. 

Smither,  Geo.  255,  262. 

Smithey,  John  310,  416. 

Smithfeild,  Hen.  134. 

Smithouse,    Jno.    557,    568,    Mary    557, 

Susan  557,   568. 
Smithock,  Henry  39. 
Smithnest,  Edw.  143. 
Smithson,    Tho.    303,    Wm.    261,    337, 

390,  394. 
Smithwicke,  Hugh  129. 
Smithwood,  Rob.  274. 
Smithy,  John  272,  402. 
Smoggs  Hole,  place  called  193. 
Smoocker,  Wm.  343. 

Smoot,  Wm.  184,  392,  393. 

Smyth,  Jno.  151,  Richd.  189,  Toby  155. 

Smythwood,  Robt.   166. 

Snackson,  Mould  89. 

Snagy,  Wm.  552. 

Snaile,  Henry  76,  270,  332. 

Snallop,  Wm.  510. 

Snape,  Edd.  351,  John  177. 

Snapes,  Wm.  235. 

Snarsdell,  Paul  525. 

Snart,  Jno.  441. 

Snayle,  Henry  76,  173. 

Snead,  Alice  70,  224,  Charles  391,  481, 

487,    567,   Richard   47,    376,   Samuell 

30,  47,  70,  204,  222,  224,  533,  Wm. 

483. 
Sneade,  Alice  30,  Chas.  345,  John  266, 

Robt.  293,  Samuell  30,  Wm.  30. 
Sneale,  Alice  51,  Dorothy  51,  Eliz.  51, 

Henry  51,  John  51,  Mary  51. 
Sneath,  Edwd.  375,  426. 
Sneed,  Peter  288,  Wm.  492. 
Snede,  John  21. 
Sneldon,  Dyana  193. 
Snelgreene,   Susan    107. 
Snell,  John  339,  547,  Mary  386. 
Snellen,  John  141. 
Snelling,   Mary  459,   Richd.   248,   Wm. 

500. 
Snellinge,  John  250,  349,  375,  376. 


Snellocke,  Jon.  143. 

Snoddy,  Dan.  302. 

Snodell,  Wm.  291. 

Snoke,  John  441,  500. 

Snow,    Abram    463,    Elfrid    453,    Fran. 

208,  Geo.  183,  Han.  501,  Henry  42, 

91,  Leo.  559,  Martha  69,  Mary  209, 

Rich.  454,  Tho.  218,  301. 
Snowdell,  Jno.  469,  Wm.  470. 
Snowson,  John  118. 
Soale,  Robt.  350. 
Soane,  Eliz.  222,  Henry  222,  240,  277, 

291,   336,   394,   522,    563,  John  222, 

Judeth  222,  Mr.  387,  William  8. 
Soanes,  Henry  241,  280,  310,  337,  341, 

444,  499,  506,  512,  548,  Judeth  548, 

Mr.  263,  318,  327,  435. 
Soaper,  Jno.  165,  307. 
Soare,  Henry  323,  Tho.  427. 
Sobderme,  Jno.  385. 
Soccohack,  Phillip  330. 
Solbey,  Tho.  267. 
Solitree,  Mary  433. 
Solivart,  Dennis  324. 
Soil,  Angues  196. 
Sollace,  Saml.  278,  307,  308. 
Sollers,  Robt.  524. 
Sollis,  Roger  267,  Saml.  265,  284,  416, 

417,  440,  474. 
Solloman,  Jo.  158. 
Solm,  Peter  425. 
Soloman,  Phillipp   358. 
Somerdon,  Joane  543. 
Somers,  Alex.  323. 
Somersale,  Thomas  50,  86. 
Somersett,  Tho.  434. 
Somerton,  Jon.  231. 
Somerton,  Danll.  558. 
Sones,  Judeth  557. 
Soopson,  Tho.  176. 
Sooter,  John  185. 
Soper,  Greg.  82. 
Soreland,  Oliver  259,  297. 
Sorrell,  John  166,  274,  Robert  56,  166, 

212,    220,    229,    240,    274,    323,    388, 

492,  Tho.    142,  Tim.   468,  Mr.    361, 

492. 
Sorwell,  Eliz.  153,  Wm.  153. 
Sotone,  Mary  513. 
Souch,   Hugh   339. 
Soule,  Wm.  260. 
Souleman,  Margt.  564. 
South,    Abram    458,    Christ.    93,    John 

204,    318,    334,    Sarah    491,    Tobias 

453,  Wm.  324,  358,  Za.  501. 
South  Hampton  Company  126. 
Southby,  Jane  552. 


736 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Southell,    Elizabeth   61,    Henry    51,    61, 

124,  125,  Mr.  45. 
Southerby,  Dan.  286. 
Southerne,  Edw.   170,   183,  414,  Henry 

16,    62,    John    8,    271,    Judith    380, 

Sarah  312,  380,  Thomas  24,  232,  339, 

390. 
Southerne  Colony  of  Va.  1. 
Southerland,    Alex.    299,    Gilbert    306, 

308. 
Southerwood,  Isaac  141,  268. 
Southfeild,  James  482. 
Southwell,  Henry  34,  Eliz.  124. 
Sowards,  W.  226. 

Sowerby,  Francis  562,  563,  James  563. 
Sowsey,  John  273,  475. 
Spach,  Edw.  140. 
Spackford    Wm.  84. 
Spackman,  Dorothy  27,  Jon.  140,  John 

26,  Joyce  27,  Nath.  80,  Rich.  25,  69, 

Rosemond  27. 
Spaine,  Tho.  128. 
Spake,  Thos.  189. 
Spakeman,  John  26. 
Spakman,  Nicho.  195. 
Spalding,  Tho.  185. 
Span,  John  506,  Richd.  309,  368,  372, 

395. 
Spanish  fregat,  the  85. 
Spann,  Jno.  487,  Richd.  259,  266,  347, 

371,  373,   395,  424,  Tho.  470,   482, 
510,  514. 

Spark,  Ann  22. 

Sparke,  John  366,  447,  Samll.  430, 
Sarah  292. 

Sparkes,  Cutbert  196,  Eliz.  196,  Gartred 
404,  Grace  27,  Jon.  31,  John  27,  275, 
425,    520,    561,    Mary    27,    Michaell 

372,  Mr.   143,  Phill.  513,  Wm.  222. 
Sparks,  Francis  102,  Jon.  29,  John  283, 

478,  Thomas  101. 

Sparling,  Richd.  198. 

Sparr,  Walter  343. 

Sparrow,  Alice  291,  Chas.  181,  354, 
504,  Eliz.  371,  Jeremy  387,  John 
254,  Mr.  231,  232,  250,  543,  Silvester 
549,  Tho.  37,  66,  120,  125,  228, 
499,  560,  Wm.  348. 

Sparrowe,  Chas.  198,  John  378. 

Sparshott,  Edward  34,  45,  86,  93,  103, 
Susan  556. 

Spatch,  Edw.  161. 

Spayford,  Jno.  193. 

Speake,  Col.  350,  351,  352,  362,  363, 
364,  367,  405,  411,  Mr.  252,  397, 
Tho.  207,  219,  251,  252,  299,  301, 
304,  356,  371,  420,  474,  490,  523. 


Speare,  Robt.  257. 

Spearman,  Jam.   199. 

Speckman,  John  275,  411,  Tho.  236. 

Speechly,  Eliz.  196. 

Speed,  Edw.  453,  Jeffery  323,  352,  John 

469,  558,  Peter  209,  Robt.  137,  185, 

Wm.  23. 
Speede,  Henry  355. 
Speeke,  Thomas  520. 
Speevy,  Georp-  151. 
Speight,  Francis  129. 
Speilmans,  place  called  72. 
Spell,  Georg  335,  442,  Mary  514. 
Spence,  John  185,  Patrick  373,  Richard 

181,  Robt.  300,  Wm.  161,  228,  241, 

367. 
Spencer,  Abraham  89,  Alice  268,  Anto. 

456,    Edw.    162,    190,    Francis    152, 

266,  324,  James  271,  Jane  559,  Jon. 

94,    Jno.    339,    Johnson    559,    Kath. 

148,    Margery    513,    Mary    324,    484, 

427,  Nath.  404,  Nicho.  28,  81,  328, 

341,    395,    547,    Ralph    188,    Richd. 

222,  Robt.  214,  554,  Susan  246,  Tho. 

401,  472,  502,  Walter  559,  William 

3,  4,  16,  28,  29,  70,  81,  99,  123,  137, 

160,  241,  342,  442. 
Spencer's  Hole,  place  called  3. 
Spender,  Hannah  446. 
Spendlowe,  Ralph  276. 
Spensor,  Robt.  564. 
Spering,  Joseph  94. 
Spery,  Tho.  510. 
Spheere,  Bridgett  198. 
Spice,  Georg  102. 
Spicer,  Edw.  146,  179,  352,  452,  Peeter 

335,  Sam.  254,  Tho.  372,  444,  Wm. 

229,  289,  330,  361. 
Spicor,  Richd.  404. 
Spickman,  Ralph  459. 
Spie,  Francis  404. 
Spigh,  Wm.  559. 
Spight,    Edw.    484,    Francis    203,    301, 

388. 
Spike,   Francis   479,   491,   Hannah   528, 

Jane  517,  Mr.  479. 
Spiller,  Clemt.  366. 
Spillman,  Jno.  483. 
Spilman,  Anne  322,  Jno.  465,  Thomas 

6,   156. 
Spilmore,  Dorothy  547. 
Spiltamore,  Wm.  342. 
Spiltimber,  Antho.  562,  Goodman  176, 

John   25,    185,    243,    366,    505,   

374. 
Spincke,  Tho.  165. 
Spinke,  Robert  79. 


General  Index 


737 


Spire,  David  541,  Margtt.  541. 

Spite,  Wm.  557  . 

Spittlewood,  Sarah  164. 

Spooner,  Wm.  197. 

Spone,  John  375. 

Spragge,  Edw.  201,  Richard  533. 

Spore,  Alice  28. 

Spraggon,  Radulph  154. 

Spragon,  Ja.  242. 

Spraklin,  Robt.  183. 

Sprason,  Wm.  43. 

Spratlin,  Susanna  353,  356. 

Spratt,  Chas.  218,  Mary  397,  Sarah  500. 

Spreatt,  John  282. 

Sprie,  Oliver  117. 

Sprigge,  Barnaby  372. 

Spring,  Jos.  24,  Paul  236,  Ro.  239, 
Robert  23,  236,  540,  Rose  220,  332, 
Wm.  457. 

Spring  Bottom,  the  549. 

Springs:  Beech  323,  Green  465,  Han- 
cock's 566,  Indian  329,  Labour  in 
Vaine  284,  Porringers  334. 

Springer,  Herbert  452. 

Springwell,  Alice  285. 

Spritt,  James  369. 

Sprond,  Margt.  212. 

Sprons,  John  188. 

Spront,  Nich.  341. 

Sproud,  Margt.  212. 

Sprous,  John  188. 

Sprouse,  Alice  141. 

Sprout,  Nich.  341. 

Spruce,  Mary  404,  Nich.  404. 

Spry,  Oliver  167,  Mr.  241,  Wm.  172. 

Sprye,  Oliver  48,  73,  83,  99,  117,  155. 

Spuer,  Margt.  148. 

Spur,  Henry  453. 

Spurjoye,  Geo.  117. 

Spurnell,  Richd.  282. 

Spurrier,  Michaell  47. 

Spurstoe,  Jno.  480. 

Spurway,  John  62. 

Spuy,  Geo.  450. 

Square,  John  294. 

Squire,  John  294,  366,  Robt.  75,  Wm. 
339. 

Squires,  Nich.  300. 

Srevin,  Jno.  382. 

Srovell,  Sarah  176. 

Stacey,  Eliz.  493. 

Stacie,  Eliza.  145,  Geo.  143. 

Stackhowse,  Robt.  43,  47,  55. 

Stacy,  Geo.  47,  65,  339. 

Stafferton,  Peter  33,  88,  50. 

Staffleson,  Stoffle  198. 

Stafford,  Christo.  33,  Francis   164,  Mr. 


283,    499,    Peter    280,    Rebecca    33, 

William  20,  33,  41,  114. 
Stages,  place  called  35,  55. 
Stagg,  Fra.  502,  Robt.  514. 
Stainer,  Margtt.  562. 
Staines,Geo.247,509,Mary501,Tho.l53. 
Staininbrow,  John  300  . 
Stainoe,  Tho,  153. 
Stakes,  John  510. 
Stale,  John  276. 
Stall,  Nich.  501. 
Stalling^  Nich.  32,  103. 
"Stallinge,  Nich.  324. 
Stalls,  John  153. 
Stalmy,  Wm.  191. 
Stamfast,  James  264. 
Stamford,  Edwd.  525. 
Stammer,  Danll.  254. 
Stamp,  Thomas  95,  102,  110,  115,  128, 
144,  156,  168,  428,  457,  Wm.  441,  448. 
Stampe,  Thomas  102,  256,  426. 
Stan,  Paul  545. 
Stanawayes,  Mr.  393. 
Stanbye,  John  111. 
Standen,  Griff.  249. 
Standfast,  Jane  523. 
Standford,  Abra.  301. 
Standish,    Dorothy   35,    100,    Geo.    148, 

Ja.  171,  Stephen  72,  Wm.  405. 
Standley,  Thos.  564. 
Standly,  Alice  315. 
Standy,  Hugh  134. 
Stanes,  Ja.  481. 
Stanfast,  Mary  264. 
Stanfeild,  Lawr.  167,  Symon  23. 
Stanford,    Ann    78,    312,    Jeremy    554, 

Judith    523,    Martha   545,   Nell   279, 

Rich.    400,    Vincent    291,    293,    300, 

334,   335,   339,   350,   356,   365,   374, 

411,  443,  472. 
Stanfort,  Hugh  249. 
Stankey,  Francis  192  . 
Stanks,  James  131. 
Stanley,  Alice  275,  Christo.  259,  George 

334,  Hen.  341,  John  121,  Wm.  179, 

183,  482. 
Stanlin,  Darby  366. 
Stanly,    Adam    239,    Geo.    430,    Hugh 

225,  Jean  553,  Judith  311,  Tho.  399, 

555,  Wm.  302,  549. 
Stanmer,  Ann  205. 
Stannenite,  Anne  341. 
Stannerd,  Wm.  265. 
Stannes,  Geo.  247. 
Stanney,  Robt.  45. 
Stanning,  Ann  306. 
Stannop,  Mary  529. 


738 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Stannopp,  Isaack  381. 

Stanny,  Joan  154,  Thomas  554. 

Stanton,    Christopher    98,    Danll.    466, 

Henry  253,  Mary  232,  243,  309,  318, 

Rich.  307,  358,  520,  Robt.  137,  321, 

Tho.  152,  Wm.  321. 
Stanup,  John  471. 
Stany,  Henry  549,  Jno.  549,  Robt.  129, 

Tho.  393  . 
Stanly  Hundred,  (See  Hundreds)  81,  315. 
Staple,  Eliz.  512,  James  352,  Robt.  558. 
Stapler,  Robt.  517. 
Staples,    Alice    344,    Eliza.    215,    James 

325,    Jno.    353,    523,    Penelope    358, 

Richd.  196,  317,  428,  475,  492.         4 
Stapleton,  Tho.  430. 
Starch,  Wm.  116. 
Starchey,  Peeter  331. 
Stardy,  Edwd.  302. 
Stare,  John  245,  Tho.  385. 
Starford,  Margt.  122. 
Starkey,    Abram    499,    Peter    519,    Phi. 

268,  Wm.  463. 
Starky,  Peter  272,  Wm.  274. 
Starling,    Isaac    481,    James    269,    415, 

Rich.  489,  Wm.  170,  435,  534. 
Starlinge,  Richd.  228,  297. 
Starnell,    Richd.    123,    170,    172,    234, 

255,  269,  274,  286,  314. 
Starpe,  Tho.  428. 

Starr,   Ann   272,   Eliz.    133,   Susan   322. 
Start,  Wm.  549. 
St.  Andrew,  Gloyd  89. 
St.  Clare,  Neale  301. 
St.  John,  Tho.  519,  Wm.  353. 
State  Howse,  (See  Houses)   177,  305. 
Stafford,  Lowry  459. 
Stathard,  Pet.  198. 
Statherd,  Fra.  300. 
Statly,  Jona.  446. 
Stayle,  Rich.  31,  84. 
Stayres,  the,  place  called  189. 
Stead,  Doratha  536,  Geo.  558,  Jno.  363. 
Steal,  Susan  530. 
Steare,  Joan  296. 
Steares,  Tho.  462. 
Sted,  Susan  530. 
Stedman,  Robert  357,  434. 
Stee,  Francis  133. 
Steed,  David  368,  John  208,  558,  562, 

Rich.  430,  Thos.  189,  213,  226,  381, 

384,  400,  556. 
Steede,  Tho.  383. 
Steel,  Eliz.  428,  Richard  369. 
Steele,  Eliz.  189,  Henry  178,  Jane  520, 

562,    Jeffery    78,    378,    Margt.    506, 

Tho.    132. 


Steephens,  Thos.  Ill,  284. 

Steere,  John  244,  Thomas  544. 

Steeres,  Robt.  205. 

Steerman,  Tho.  245,  Wm.  366. 

Steers,  Robert  80. 

Steevens,  Amy  362,  Ann  212,  309, 
Antho.  216,  Edw.  303,  318,  John 
200,  209,  212,  282,  336,  Richd.  185, 
192,  Tho.  204,  254,  263,  274,  Wm. 
199,  280,  324. 

Steevenson,  And.  198. 

Stefferton,  Francis  24. 

Stegg,  Law.  353,  Thomas  52,  59,  118, 
119,    154,    230,   425,   478,   485,    537. 

Steines,  George  550. 

Stelet,  Tho.  195. 

Stell,  Clement  218. 

Stella,  Johanna  313. 

Stellson,  Andrewe  369. 

Stelington,  Jno.  452. 

Stelman,  Nich.  397. 

Stenninns,   Jno.   508. 

Stenton,  Wm.  450. 

Stensby,  Antho.  43,  47. 

Stensbye,  Anthony  55,  56,  Robert  56. 

Stephens,  Abra.  481,  Andrew  385,  462, 
Anne  324,  467,  526,  536,  Antho.  297, 
362,  363,  384,  388,  411,  425,  428, 
477,  519,  526,  550,  Archelass  65,  82, 
Capt.  21,  Daniell  374,  544,  Edw. 
296,  337,  426,  481,  Ellinor  516, 
Elizabeth  48,  50,  72,  108,  Fortree 
554,  Fra.  358,  Garrance  137,  Garrett 
127,  153,  Henrv  93,  559,  Isaack  462, 
Jon.  81,  138,  244,  John  24,  373,  375, 
454,  478,  564,  Margt.  306,  530,  Mary 
306,  334,  393,  401,  441,  468,  526, 
557,  Peter  65,  114,  536,  Phillipp  54, 
358,  Richard  2,  3,  16,  48,  62,  80, 
90,  97,  113,  144,  288,  398,  518,  526, 
Ro.  197,  Robt.  431,  Roger  370,  Samll. 
48,  113,  149,  250,  543,  Tho.  26,  52, 
100,  111,  112,  155,  170,  231,  293, 
304,  335,  340,  350,  370,  399,  401, 
411,  437,  440,  485,  491,  519,  521, 
Tobias  165,  Wm.  171,  173,  252,  288, 
314,  324,  339,  346,  358,  396,  401, 
415,  427,  524,  526,  527,  558. 

Stephenson,  Andrew  367,  Ann  49,  Edw. 
31,  86,  121,  Tho.  384,  Wm.  338. 

Stepping,  Danl.  196,  464,  Jonathan  464. 

Stereman,  Richard  546. 

Sterkey,  Peter  180,  181. 

Sterling,  James  269,  Tho.  317,  Wm.  329. 

Sterman,  Richard  546,   563,  Thos.   193. 

Sternall,  Richard  90. 

Sterne,  Henry  375,  Hen.  425. 


General  Index 


739 


Sternell,  Eliz.  386,  Richd.  477. 

Sternes,  Dorothy  212. 

Stersmore,  Ann  240. 

Stethell,  Elizabeth  61. 

Stetting,  Thomas  527. 

Steuard,  Joseph  291. 

Stevely,  Adam  21. 

Steven,  Richd.  220,  Wm.  44. 

St  event,  Mary  536. 

Stevens,    Andrew   402,    541,    547,    Ann 

527,  Antho.  411,  450,  Edw.  554, 
Elizabeth  72,  Henry  69,  463,  James 
397,  John  381,  Mary  426,  479, 
Mathew  527,  Mary  541,  544,  549, 
Mr.  408,  Peter  528,  Richard  67,  72, 
Susanna  546,  Tho.  270,  411,  Walter 
549,  Wm.  28,  71,  412,  442,  525,  537, 
542,  544,  545,  549,  553,  562. 

Stevenson,  Christ.  65,  David  520,  John 
428,  Phill.  278,  Ral.  362,  Wm.  551. 

Steward,  Alice  444,  Andrew  538,  Chas. 
42,  Chas.  106,  David  264,  Edw.  465, 
483,  Elinor  318,  James  218,  John 
111,  168,  216,  267,  443,  444,  452, 
Neal  309,  Pat.  308,  Roger  324,  Susan 

528,  562,  Tho.  428,  Wm.  545,  548. 
Stewardson,  Alice  170,  Alex.  183. 
Stewart,  Peter  401. 

Stewkly,  Alice  552,  Tho.  454. 

Stibbs,  John   170. 

Stiderick,  Robt.  157. 

Stidwell,  Thomas  46,  171. 

Stiff,  Jno.  545. 

Stile,  Hugh  168. 

Stiles,  Eliz.  293,  329,  562,  Nathl.  112, 

Robt.  147. 
Stillard,  William  311. 
Stillger,  Antho.   207. 
Stills,  Thomas  541. 

Stillwell,  Nicholas  135,  486,  land  of  133. 
Stilt,  Bar.  324,  352. 
Stilwell,  Roger  341. 
Stinett,  Richd.  129. 
Stinger,  Peter  142. 
Stingsby,  Robert  51. 
Stinson,  Mary  422. 
Stint,  Thomas  564. 
Stinton,  Henry  253,  Wm.  450. 
Stiples,  Wm.  377. 
Stipthorpe,  Hen.  178. 
Stirgies,  John  452,  515. 
Stith,  Geo.  419,  John  490,  493. 
Stoakes,   Amy  521,  Christopher  26,   29, 

65,  75,  81,  89,  Fra.  373,  Kath.  501, 

Law.  254,  Luke  431,  Peter  385,  Robt. 

28,  Walter  382  . 
Stockdale,  Edw.   123,  Rich.  439. 


Stockdell,  Edward  74,  John  25. 

Stockden,  Edw.  31,  Jonas  9,  12,  19, 
Tymothy  96. 

Stocke,  Danll.  121  . 

Stockeley,  Eliz.  454,  Francis  53,  73, 
Jno.  455. 

Stockell,  Jane  160. 

Stocker,  John  134,  146,  Wm.  3. 

Stockey,  Francis  535. 

Stockley,  Francis  52,  217,  John  217. 

Stockly,  Jno.  554. 

Stockton,  Jonas  12. 

Stockwell,  Lawr.  344,  Margt.  244,  Rose 
205,  Tho.  291. 

Stoddon,  Wm.  24. 

Stodon,  Wm.  54. 

Stoe,  Jane  252. 

Stoell,  John  364. 

Stogdell,  John  209. 

Stoicks,  Robt.  568. 

Stoile,  John  367,  382. 

Stoke,  Jno.  345. 

Stokeley,  Jno.  454. 

Stokely,  Francis  360,  363. 

Stokes,  Ann  419,  Christo.  53,  65,  69, 
75,  76,  81,  Eliz.  76,  342,  Henry  76, 
James  283,  Lancellott  81,  Robert  81, 
Silvester  378,  Thomas  102. 

Stoller,  Robt.  452. 

Stomer,Alexr.47,68,69,74,  97,  101,  108. 

Ston,  Andrew  358. 

Stonar,  Alexr.  28,  29. 

Stonard,  Joseph  291. 

Stone,  Abram  548,  Andrew  28,  400, 
401,  Ann  527,  Anthony  536,  Capt. 
123,  290,  Edw.  129,  196,  307,  554, 
Elizabeth  10,  Francis  65,  Geo.  255, 
Hannah  281,  Hen.  74,  444,  455, 
James  53,  169,  344,  527,  528,  Jere- 
miah 37,  Jerimy  63,  John  4,  403, 
437,  547,  557,  Joyce  142,  Mary  440, 
525,  527,  537,  559,  Mathew  213, 
Maxmillian  10,  Moyses  82,  Nicholas 
190,  Peter  541,  547,  549,  554,  Richd. 
254,  349,  Robt.  291,  316,  351,  440, 
Susan  442,  Susanna  527,  William  27, 
59,  77,  115,  135,  157,  183,  229,  264, 
268,  294,  312,  383,  396,  408,  414, 
419,  427,  431,  455,  480,  530,  545, 
549,  554,  555,  556,  558. 

Stonehill,  Anne  262. 

Stoner,  Alexr.  33,  145,  159,  162,  177, 
183,  James  554,  Jane  29,  Peter  527. 

Stonner,  Alexander  58,   266,  John   155. 

Ston  ward,  Jose.  405. 

Stoole,  Tho.  132. 

Stoops,  Jno.  561. 


740 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Stoout,  Anne  283. 

Stope,  Miles  517. 

Stoppee,  Sa.  220. 

Store,  Henry  562,  James  556,  John  548, 
Peter  549,  553,  554,  558,  559,  560, 
563,  566,  Wm.  549. 

Store,  Col.  Lee's  330. 

Stores,  Jno.  564,  Mary  544. 

Storey,  Wm.  129,  130,  160,  262,  Robt. 
201. 

Storie,  Peter  429,  Wm.   168,   327,  480. 

Storrey,  Jo.  197,  Wm.  197. 

Story,  Dorothy  174,  Edw.  559,  Eliz. 
484,  Francis  175,  525,  James  307, 
543,  John  133,  Peter  403,  484,  490, 
557,  Robert  25,  Tho.  448,  523,  559, 
Wm.  137,  160,  166,  169,  174,  489, 
518,  528,  530,  554. 

Stoton,  Anthony  70. 

Stott,  Brian  514,  Bryan  448,  458,  Bryant 
459,  Hen.  291,  Tho.  459. 

Stout,  Mary  302,  Tho.  83,  173,  202, 
230,  415. 

Stoute,  Jane  313,  John  28,  Ro.  369, 
Tho.  117,  141. 

Stoughton,  Samuell  162,  163. 

Stow,  John  300,  453,  Peter  547,  Tho. 
488,  Wm.  401. 

Stowe,  John  182. 

Stowell,  Jonath.  286,  Joseph  342,  Ralph 
129. 

Stowt,  Thomas  105. 

Stowther,  Phill.  279. 

Strader,  Richd.  171. 

Strahan,  Alex.  374. 

Straine,  Fardinando  514. 

Straing,  Wm.  100. 

Strand,  Abram  480. 

Strang,  Benj.  467,  516,  566,  Mary  556, 
Susan  556,  Tho.  432,  521. 

Strange,  Benj.  243,  270,  Jacob  464, 
472,  523,  Wm.  35,  127. 

Stranger,  Nich.  102. 

Stratboule,  Rich.  29. 

Stratbridge,  Tho.  296. 

Stratchy,   Edmond  214. 

Stratford,  Wm.   357. 

Strathen,  John  209. 

Stratlen,  John  209. 

Strattford,  Mary  357. 

Stratton,  A.  295,  Benj.  418,  Eliza.  192, 
Henry  125,  John  92,  111,  112,  141, 
210,  262,  328,  Joseph  25,  111,  225, 
391,  491,  Lucy  447,  Richd.  222, 
Sarah  188,  Sisley  170,  Tho.  295,  353, 

356,  418,  435,  Walter  307, 269, 

415. 


Strawberry  Bancke,  place  called:    8,  11, 

12,  18,  62,  70,  122,  127,  173. 
Strawberry  Land,  the  165. 
Stray,  Jno.  384. 
Streate,     Antho.     28,     81,     Kath.    459, 

William  7,  Capt.  372. 
Str eater,  Edward  358. 
Streatly,  Mary  232. 
Streaton,  Geo.  344. 
Strecher,  Andr.  45. 
Strechey,  Edmond  167,  Rose  39. 
Stretcher,  James  201. 
Stretchleigh,  James  201. 
Stretfild,  Tho.  254. 
Strettle,  James  389. 
Stretton,  Geo.  197. 
Streues,  Wm.  264. 
Strey,  Oliver  92. 
Street,    Antho.    452,    Eliza.    267,    271, 

Humph.    199,    314,   Jno.   492,   Robt. 

207,  Richd.  249,  Tho.  454,  525. 
Streete,   Elizabeth   369,   Fra.   268,   Tho. 

91,  245. 
Streets,  Ann  89. 
Stricland,  Walter  551. 
Stringer,    Ann    524,    Edwd.    339,   James 

172,  John   213,  418,  434,  435,   463, 

524,  533,  549,  551,  557,  Lettice  235. 
Strulton,  Wm.  81. 
Strutton,  Wm.  81. 
Stroake,  Roger  428. 
Strobridge,  Xtop.  454. 
Strong,    Andrew    542,    563,    Ann    480, 

Edw.  36,  80,  James   140,  254,  Mary 

198,   556,  Peter  425,  Wm.  327,  556. 
Stronge,  Abra.  252,  Alexr.  208,  Leonard 

324,    382,    William    322,    323,    364, 

387. 
Strood,  Wm.  375,  425,  468. 
Strotter,  Mathew  267. 
Stroud,  Jno.  430,  Tho.   199,   273,  426. 
Strouder,  Wm.  371,  435. 
Stroule,  Jane  209,  Walter  209. 
Strowd,  Tho.  139. 
Strowder,  Wm.  371. 
Strowther,  D.  450. 
Stuard,  James  220. 
Stuarson,  Peter  544. 
Stuart,    Henry    254,    Jno.    548,    Oneale 

275,  Robt.  262,  Walter  256. 
Stub,  Samll.  545. 
Stubb,  Jno.  341,  Simon  509. 
Stubberd,  Jon.  228. 
Stubbers,  Susan  363. 
Stubbert,  John  315. 
Stubbs,    Daniell    72,    158,    Georg    350, 


General  Index 


741 


Honford    61,    Izabell    60,    86,    Kath. 

552,  Wm.  464. 
Stuble,  Richd.  256. 

Stuchans,  Lin  (King  of  Eastern  Shore)  75. 
Stuckey,  Jno.  443. 
Stuckley,  Eliz.  455,  Jno.  454. 
Studdell,  Tho.  302. 
Studson,  John  413. 
Stukely,  James  113. 
Stunnerson,   Sarah   148. 
Sturdevant,  John  273. 
Sturdey,  James  273. 
Sturdivant,  Jno.  508,  Mary  561. 
Sturdge,  Ri.  196. 
Sturges,  Symon  55,   147. 
Sturman,    Ann   492,    Edm.    512,    Henry 

462,  Richd.  492,  546,  Tho.  492. 
Sturrupp,  Jno.  167. 
Styam,  John  181. 
Styles,  Jane  183,  John  140. 
Suaile,  Henry  76. 
Sualter,  Jellett  102. 
Suart,  Jno.  441. 
Suayle,  Henry  76. 
Substance,  Ann  290. 
Subtill,  Hen.  265,  304. 
Succor,  Henry  191. 
Such,  George  328. 
Sucker,  Wm.  203. 
Suckett,  Edwd.  393,  426,  John  481. 
Sudbury,  Robert  99. 
Suddon,  David  389. 
Sudwell,  Hen.  229. 
Sueale,  Alice  51,  Dorothy  51,  Eliz.  51, 

Henry  51,  John  51,  Mary  51. 
Suelgreene,  Susan  107. 
Suell,  Mary  386. 
Suellett,  John  141. 
Suellivant,  Dorman  552. 
Suer,  James  450,  Mary  546. 
Suite,  Robt.  427. 
Sulley,  Thomas  10. 
Sullivan,  Elizabeth  319,  Onory  336. 
Sully,  Thomas  3. 
Sumer,  Ben.  325,  Jane  388. 
Sumers,  Miles  68,  Robert  104. 
Sumerville,  Garrett   109. 
Summer,  Richard  99. 
Summers,  Alex.  85,  Edw.  559. 
Summons,  Jeff.  446. 
Sumner,  Eliz.  218,  Mary  249. 
Sumpson,  Alex.  300. 
Sunden,  Wm.  554. 
Sunkler,  Alex.  285. 
Suran,  Wm.  397. 
Sures,  Saml.  178. 
Surfleete,  Tho.  385. 


Surgis,  Jno.  452. 

Surlin,  Robt.  404. 

Surlinge,  Mary  385. 

Surlock,  Jno.  495. 

Surly,  Jno.  543. 

Surtue,  Wm.  214. 

Surtur,  Wm.  382. 

Surveyors:  70,  105,  143,  155,  160, 
325,  331. 

Susan,  Wm.  544. 

Sussett,  John  499. 

Sutor,  Peter  401. 

Sutten,  Ann  428. 

Sutton,  Annis  121,  Eliza.  254,  263, 
Geo.  133,  John  131,  271,  462,  Jon. 
244,  Nath.  512,  Rich.  83,  103,  108, 
109,  115,  Robt.  51,  251,  Tho.  143, 
331,  463,  Wm.  24,  54,  133. 

Sutch,  Geo.  251. 

Swadlin,  Kath.  189. 

Swaine,  Ann  97,  Pet.  194,  Stephen  23, 
Tho.  97,  256. 

Swallow,  Henry  453. 

Swam,  Samll.  61. 

SWAMPS: 

Acquintenokes  502,  Aposcoke  520, 
Aquintanio  409,  Aquintenocoe  542, 
Araciaco  347,  502,  Aracyaco  304, 
310,  314,  325,  338,  346,  517, 
Arrakeco  381,  505,  506,  Arrow 
Reed  40,  109,  295,  363,  494,  540, 
•543,  568,  Arsantan  335,  Assatiam 
394,  424,  Ashen  125,  166,  273, 
352,  549. 

Barren  Neck  286,  Beech  514,  Besses 
505,  Bigwood  449,  Birthin  202, 
Blacke  500,  Black  Water  302,  517, 
561,  562,  564,  Bloys  464,  Boyling 
Spring  428,  Breeman's  262,  Bridge 
484,  508,  Briery  246,  477,  Brushes 
357,  404,  Bryery  112,  133,  234, 
Burchen  238,  250,  339,  348,  385, 
386,  392,  404,  465,  470,  501, 
Burcher  219. 

Cattaile  241,  243,  270,  347,  433,  528, 
Cattayle  342,  Chichahominy  348, 
360,  386,  403,  408,  458,  464,  465, 
467,  470,  484,  485,  502,  505,  513, 
Cole's  202,  Court  157,  439,  458, 
Cowpen  393,  467,  516,  Coxes  514, 
550,  Cranage's  444,  Crany  505, 
Crooked  262,  517,  Cross  534, 
Cypress  80,  125,  248,  365,  393, 
434,  450,  475,  514,  562,  566. 

Deep  255,  416,  Diascan  342,  360, 
386,    403,    409,    464,   470,    Divills 


742 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Woodyard  380,  Doctors  154,  Drag- 

gon  408,  475,  478,  506,  520,  527, 

541,  545,  568,  Drinking  151,  310, 

406,  474,  517. 
Elme  475,  Exalls  541,  Exolls  541. 
Flinton's   547. 
Galcknie    512,    Gallowes    154,    Great 

391,  408,  474,  Green  88,  89,  137, 

228,   239,  462,   511,   566. 
Gutter  333. 
Hackadays  243,  Hartquack  476,   541, 

Hoarcock    370,    409,    466,    Hocca- 

dayes   367,   Hoppole  521. 
Horseleys  305,  Hucklebury  49. 
Indian  303,  323,  329. 
Julians  329. 
Kenecock  137,  Killmans  Beaver  Dam 

472,  Kings  Creek  502,  Kiscohonsicke 
336. 

Lime  Hill  40,  68. 

Maiden  141,  216,  267,  511,  Marra- 
quinoe  444,  Matchemeed  229,  496, 
Mattapony  357,  423,  Mattaquinces 
505,  Mattassux  399,  401,  Mayden 
95,  100,  117,  Middle  Way  22,  90, 
94,  Mill  140,  166,  253,  324,  399, 
440,  505,  508,  518,  520,  548, 
Milne  243,  330,  Montassup  386, 
387,  Muskemino  475,  Muzazin  528. 

Nansenin  565. 

Oaken  326,  443,  Ohoreek  303,  329, 
Old  Feild  547,  563,  Old  Mill  288, 
474,  Otterdam  151,  275. 

Paces  439,  Pascatticon  369,  370,  Pates 
157,  470,  Peanketanke  330,  359, 
366,  370,  376,  394,  401,  412,  433, 
448,  451,  467,  490,  515,  518,  566, 
Pease  Hill  564,  Pegion  465,  Pid- 
geon  386,  566,  Pine  504,  Piny  116, 
443,  Pitch  &  Tar  340,  356,  451, 
Poetan    173,    282,    294,    415,    428, 

473,  490,  Pohatan  389,  390,  414, 
Pond  179,  Pope's  545,  Poropotancke 
219,  300,  322,  323,  337,  377,  484, 
490,  508,  Powakei  440,  Powetan 
15,  97,  104,  143,  230,  246,  282, 
338,  Powhite  408,  458,  Pyanke- 
tanke  361,  394,  466,  494,  506, 
Pynie  116,  354. 

Rappa  Cr.  396,  Reedy  202,  267,  340, 
393,  458,  490,  515,  519,  564, 
Round  Island  152,  186,  the  Great 
511. 

Seward's  561,  Simpson's  318,  Sipres 
465,  Skemino  291,  311,  377,  473, 
Snake  341,  Stones  542,  Sympson's 
508. 


Tarpitt  341,  Tassitiomp  541,  Three 
Myle  151,  Timber  246,  285,  361, 
Tomacorecon  440,  Tottopottomoyes 
450,  Toweywick  409,  Towyent  484, 
485,  Tuccasion  559,  Tuckahow  500, 
Tutties  Neck  317,  Tyascun  342, 
411,  470,  506,  513,  548,  Tymber 
Neck  285,  511. 
Wanrrieoake  403,  Warreny  347,  404, 
458,  563,  Waynoke  493,  Weeke- 
noskeekicke  336,  Weir  River  488, 
Weyanoke  472,  Weywick  409, 
Whiteings  510,  White  Oak  526, 
Whorecock  366,  368,  369,  377, 
380,  381,  565,  Winkepin  370. 
Swamp    parting    Charles    City    &    Surry 

Counties  511. 
Swamp    parting    Surry    &    James    City 

Counties  492. 
Swan,  Alice  450,   Col.   519,   Edwd.   32, 
103,    Fra.    265,    Jane    542,    Jon.    32, 
John    103,   430,    Thos.    32,    90,    105, 
326,    402,    457,    520,    Tompson    110, 
Wm.  90,  103. 
Swane,  Samll.  61. 
Swaney,  Eliz.  352. 

Swann,  Ann  183,  Geo.  262,  Martha  25, 
Richd.    160,   Thomas    103,    148,    386, 
465,  348,  391. 
Swanson,  Robt.  118,  183. 
Swarfe,  Francisco  545. 
Swart,  Susan  541,  Tymothy  542. 
Swayne,  Sith  165. 
Sweet,   Geo.  249,  Jno.   538,  Mary  449, 

Wm.  290. 
Sweetaple,  Geo.  214. 
Sweete,  John  128,  140,  147,  Robert  13, 

Wm.   142. 
Sweeting,  Jno.  441. 
Sweetman,  Margaret  329. 
Sweett,  Wm.  525. 
Sweft,  Tho.  130. 
Swellfent,  Dennis  430. 
Sweney,  Elizabeth  318,  Mary  318. 
Sweno,  Tho.  276. 
Sweny,  Edmond  318,  Eliz.  318. 
Swett,  Robert  94. 
Swife,  Jon.  40. 
Swift,    Joan    448,    Jon.    69,    Jno.    523, 

Tho.  105. 
Swillevant,  Ann  439. 
Swilliams,  Corn  131. 
Swillivan,  Cornelius  62. 
Swillivant,  Dennis  443,  460,  502,  Dor- 
man  551. 
Swinborne,  Barth.  31,  Barthol.  84,  Wm. 
479. 


General  Index 


743 


Swinburne,  Wm.  311. 

Swindall,  Tho.  291. 

Swingleton,  John  267. 

Syacknell,  Wm.  359. 

Syarlocke,  Mary  270. 

Sybley,  Chas.  196. 

Sybsey,  John  179. 

Sydney,  John  155. 

Syer,  Tho.  197. 

Sykamore,  Jon.  78. 

Sykes,  John  57,  Jon.  140. 

Syler,  Robert  70. 

Sym,  Fra.  220. 

Symbee,  Wm.  62. 

Symcocks,  Alex.  220. 

Symds,  Thos.  245. 

Symes,  Wm.  388. 

Symker,  Tho.  172. 

Symkins,  Tho.  266. 

Symmonds,  Jno.  526. 

Symmons,  Edw.  136,  Francis  526,  Gil- 
bert 77,  Roger  58,  136,  Symon  78, 
495,  518,  543,  Thomas  58,  77,  155, 
383,  522. 

Symon,  Eliz.  195,  Jon.  28. 

Symonds,  Gilbert  20,  156,  Richard  182, 
Symon  148,  197,  Thos.  152,  177, 
Wm.   198,  219,  566. 

Symons,  Arthur  432,  Francis  99,  149, 
185,  208,  235,  379,  503,  Gama.  177, 
Gilbert  38,  133,  Hen.  85,  89,  Jane 
363,  James  492,  Jon.  57,  150,  John 
327,  526,  Richard  81,  209,  271,  364, 
383,  Robt.  491,  Roger  375,  Sarah 
130,  Symon  172,  237,  316,  317,  327, 
396,  463,  497,  Thos.  41,  42,  54,  57, 
58,  82,  96,  103,  115,  156,  258,  261, 
304,  397,  468,  Thompson  358,  Wm. 
236,  238,  283,  501. 

Sympson,  Anna  381,  Dan.  190,  Edw. 
204,  Jno.  394,  458. 

Syms,  Benjamin  21,   52,  98,  Wm.   368. 

Symson,  Edw.  216,  John  207,  Seth  218, 
Susan  378,  Thos.  157,  183,  213, 
Wm.   376. 

Synsbury,  Ro.  294. 

Sypsey,  John  7. 

Sysone,  John  282. 


Tab,  Humphrey  333,  Mary  449. 

Tabb,  Ann  461,  Humphry  77,  90,  135, 
159,  175,  223,  263,  297,  333,  396, 
442,  505,  521,Tho.  150,  505,  Wm.  480. 

Taberer,  Anne  277,  Joshua  278  ,Tho. 
277,  278,  504. 

Tablet,  Fra.  476. 


Tabolt,  Wm.   526. 

Tabor,  John  120. 

Tabott,  Geo.  57,  Wm.  526. 

Tabrer,  Ann  247. 

Tacker,Danll.223John208,Michaell359. 

Taffe,  John  296. 

Tagle,  William  319. 

Tahall,  Derman  229- 

Tailor,  Henry  399,  437,  Wm.  286. 

Takes,  Margt.  216. 

Talbot,  Ann  488,  Rich.  429. 

Talbott,  Ann  305,  Henry  375,  Hercules 
300,  John  138,  259,  Peter  130,  225, 
Sarah  309,  381,  Tho.  369,  Wm.  259, 
266,  348,  397,  Jon.  138. 

Taliafro  (or  Talifer)   Robert  548. 

Tallifro,  Robert  548. 

Talin,  Mich.  428. 

Talker,   Geo.   212    . 

Tall,  Jaco.  469,  Wm.  281,  332  . 

Tallin,  Patr.  275. 

Talley,  Eliza.  88. 

Tailing,  Patrick  97. 

Tallock,  James  99. 

Tallott,  John  191. 

Tally,  Elias  79,  Eliza.  41,  Jno.  359, 
Tho.  493  . 

Tarn,  Martin  92. 

Tame,  Henry  140. 

Tanco,  Tho.  432. 

Tandey,  Wm.  196. 

Tandy,  Willi.  149. 

Tane,  Henry  149. 

Taner,  Jno.  486,  Marg.  464. 

Tanner,  Ann  446,  Barbary  29,  Daniell 
75,  111,  156,  175,  327,  329,  331, 
Edwd.  358,  433,  562,  Elizabeth  355, 
James  339,  390,  John  364,  412,  444, 
Mary  325,  Richard  437,  Thomas  354, 
504,  Tobias  129,  Wm.  375,  426. 

Taplady,  John  182. 

Tapp,  Tho.  147  . 

Tappahannah,  place  called  8,  143. 

Tappahanna  Marsh  25,   55,   167. 

Tappahannah,  Territorie  of  8. 

Tapper,  Ed.  538. 

Tappin,  Ann  520,  Hen.  142,  365,  519, 
Jno.  402,  520,  538. 

Tapt,  John  429. 

Taram,  Jno.  558. 

Tarbooke,  Robt.  140. 

Tard,  Ro.  342. 

Tarin,  Tho.  563. 

Tarley,  Tho.  497. 

Tarling,  Richard  48,   124. 

Tarlinge,  Richd.  267. 

Tarlton,  Roger  433,   Stephen  472,   506. 


744 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Tarner,  Jno.  388,  Tho.  388. 

Tarp,  Tho.  440,  Wm.  430. 

Tarpin,  Simon  486. 

Tarpley,  James  431. 

Tarrey,  Tho.  118,  Elizabeth  339,  390. 

Tarsey,  Nicho.  342. 

Tart,  Elnathan  430,  Hanan  549,  Jno. 
554,  Tho.  528,  Wm.  547. 

Tarton,  Amey  514. 

Tarvy,  Tho.  391  . 

Tasker,  Goodman  228,  441,  John  249. 

Taslett,  Fran.  431. 

Tassell,  Robt.  27,  65. 

Tassiopumps,  457. 

Tassue,  Isab.  255. 

Tassy,  Wm.  508. 

Tate,  James  275,  John  535. 

Tatem,  John  559,  563. 

Tatlar,  Eliz.  513. 

Tatman,  Silvester  366. 

Tatnam,  Silvester  17. 

Tatne,  George  549. 

Tattapottomoyes,  393. 

Tattapaixsack  Spring,  542. 

Tattopecksick  Feild  366. 

Tatton,  Mary  528,  Jno.  554,  Robt.  538, 
Thomas   541,   559. 

Tatum,  Ann  93,  Mary  93,  Nathaniell 
89,  93,  94,  116,  117,  128,  186,  281, 
298,  466,  469,  472,  505,  Ralph  137. 

Taultry,  Tho.  525. 

Taverne,  Francis   139,  262. 

Tavernor,  Dan.  290,  Giles  121,  209, 
288,  522,  Jno.  456,  Wm.  459. 

Tawkerd,  Ann  528. 

Tawney,  Ann  318. 

Tawson,  Eliz.  308. 

Tawtan,  Tho.  349. 

Tayloe,  Joseph  281,  Wm.  122. 

Taylor,  Abra.  291,  Agness  425,  Alice 
281,  An  562,  Anna  119,  Ann  163, 
251,  293,  294,  378,  Anthony  72,  341, 
Arthur  55,  137,  517,  Capt.  216,  284, 
Col.  519,  Ed.  562,  Edith  184,  460, 
Edmond  350,  Elias  110,  119,  130, 
163,  172,  199,  Ellin  311,  Eliz.  125, 
153,  559,  Fra.  311,  479,  552,  Georg 
57,  112,  192,  197,  201,  223,  246, 
320,  337,  530,  557,  Giles  89,  Guy 
69,  Henry  27,  Hugh  429,  476,  Isabell 
399,  Jacob  476,  James  91,  148,  156, 
183,  193,  205,  455,  552,  Jane  150, 
452,  John  5,  28,  33,  42,  75,  76,  89, 
100,  171,  176,  198,  203,  218,  221, 
259,  263,  274,  289,  300,  301,  310, 
315,  322,  336,  343,  361,  382,  437, 
442,   461,   475,   476,   479,   494,   499, 


505,  508,  513,  520,  545,  Jone  458, 
Katherin  191,  Major  307,  Margt. 
153,  Mary  190,  294,  422,  426,  464, 
521,  Mathew  278,  Mr.  167,  225,  401, 
491,  554,  Nicho.  192,  Peter  135, 
Phil.  150,  Phillip  74,  259,  313,  Ralph 
142,  518,  Richard  88,  198,  213,  249, 
315,  449,  516,  548,  565,  Robert  79, 
110,  141,  148,  166,  203,  211,  334, 
518,  520,  Samll.  57,  280,  452  ,456, 
533,  553,  555,  Stephen  153,  314, 
439,  Symon  194,  Thomas  4,  24,  37, 
54,  58,  65,  67,  109,  116,  122,  129, 
138,  141,  149,  158,  198,  216,  276, 
326,  374,  429,  439,  460,  485,  523, 
538,  Walter  307,  336,  Wm.  40,  76, 
89,  94,  97,  98,  99,  100,  109,  115, 
122,  125,  142,  172,  176,  186,  208, 
213,  215,  218,  230,  276,  330,  331, 
357,  376,  387,  400,  410,  412,  419, 
455,  468,  507,  508,  516,  Xtopr.  158, 
Zachariah  66,  95,  434. 

Taylor,  a  19. 

Taylor's  Feild  434. 

Taylour,  Abra.  405,  455,  Edmond  391, 
Edw.  484,  George  424,  431,  John 
400,  437,  Joane  453,  Phillip  434, 
435,  Stephen  422,  Thomas  434,  471, 
510,  Walter  419,  Wm.  405,  407, 
413,  419,  435,  493. 

Teage,  John  358,  416,  Mary  406. 

Teagg,  Geo.  272,  John  273 . 

Teages,  John  244. 

Teagle,  Brian  331,  Tho.  264,  276,  338, 
357,  412,  413,  418,  532. 

Teague  Dennis  312,  Geo.  426,  Jno.  472. 

Teakby,  Judith  528. 

Teakle,  Tho.  260. 

Teale,  Edw.  488. 

Tealter,  Walt.  189. 

Tedman,  Ralph  558. 

Tedmund,  Edm.  176. 

Teddy,  Richard  543. 

Tee,  Abigail  528. 

Teeling,  Francis  309. 

Teexwell,  Robt.  463. 

Telgate,  Humiliation  183. 

Telyo,,  Phill.  533. 

Temperance,  John  131. 

Tempest,  Edw.  253,  454,  Robt.  30. 

Temple,  Ed.  553,  James  430,  Jno.  514, 
Mary  240,  Thomas  446. 

Tenches,  Edward  58. 

Tengood,  Richd.  225. 

Tenman,  Robert  51. 

Tennant,  Christopher  27. 

Tenner,  Benja.  153. 


General  Index 


745 


Tennian,  Phill.  220. 

Tenricke,  James  245. 

Tentford,  Br.  154. 

Teppett,  Robt.  25. 

Tero,  John  207. 

Terrall,  Tho.  501. 

Terrell,  Edward  369,  386,  Katherine 
190,  Rich.  386,  392,  Richmond  465, 
Robt.  342,  Tho.  55. 

Terrill,  Arthur  447,  Jane  268,  Rich- 
mond 342,  403. 

Terry,  Dor.  228,  Gabriell  215,  Glan- 
nell  328,  John  132,  152,  182,  Richd. 
559,Sarah285,Thos.565,Wm.280,315. 

Tett,  Wm.  373. 

Teverton,  Bridgett  563. 

Tew,  John  207. 

Teye,  Kath.  218. 

Thacker,  C.  C.  232,  Dorothy  404,  Edm. 
347,  Hen.  141,  213,  264,  John  195, 
Silvester  150,  197,  404. 

Thamnes,  Ralph  153. 

Tharnam,  Xtopr.  548. 

Tharpp,  William  312. 

Thacher,  Silvester  190,  192,  202,  315, 
319,  376,  384,  429,  430,  442,  557, 
Wm.  248,  305,  308,  311,  333,  399, 
431,  435,  436,  439,   462,   487,   569. 

Theboult,  Clemt.  149. 

Thelaball,  James  221. 

Theriott,  Dominick  359. 

Thetcher,  Silv.  419. 

Thicketts:  Hull's  331,  369,  Huttlebury 
(or  Hucclebury)  468,  the  Long  342, 
Northward  Neck  564,  the  179. 

Thickpenny,  John  290. 

Thinn,  Frederick  435,  William  524. 

Thimbleby,  Rich.  32,  103. 

Thistlewite,  Samll.  517. 

Tholinson,  Tho.  280. 

Thomas,  Abra.  182,  239,  544,  Ailce 
201,  Alice  443,  Ann  506,  558,  Arinde 
328,  Capt.  357,  Christ.  75,  106, 
Danl.  196,  David  398,  463,  512,  545, 
Edmd.  190,  Edwd.  189,  207,  214, 
559,  562,  Elin  190,  Eliza.  56,  74, 
260,  352,  472,  233,  Evan  236,  238, 
Fra.  277,  326,  403,  Gabrell  175, 
Geo.  254,  271,  Grace  292,  316, 
Griffin  359,  Hen.  60,  148,  Hoell  312, 
Hugh  376,  Humphry  546,  548,  James 
220,  453,  Jane  435,  Jenken  516, 
Joane  253,  John  45,  65,  73,  99,  102, 
110,  128,  144,  171,  178,  181,  182, 
185,  220,  230,  267,  282,  284,  295, 
297,  326,  377,  405,  416,  417,  450, 
468,    475,    480,    507,    546,    Jon.    78, 


133,  Kath.  220,  Lazarus  91,  317,  350, 
Lowry  94,  Marke  41 6,  Margaret  60, 
Mary  148,  381,  429,  456,  547,  562, 
568,  Maudlin  384,  388,  Morgan  197, 
$46,  Nath.  10,  Nich.  341,  Phillipp 
69,  238,  261,  Richard  25,  107,  133, 
190,  214,  243,  291,  377,  443,  Robt. 
24,  54,  110,  137,  194,  296,  Roger 
190,  319,  Rowland  383,  Sarah  238, 
Stephen  536,  Susan  455,  Sym.  175, 
Thomas  56,  196,  Tho.  ap  563, 
Thorand  290,  Walt.  479,  Wm.  33, 
107,  138,  144,  148,  175,  177,  180, 
187,  196,  213,  214,  227,  229,  237, 
250,  253,  257,  263,  268,  278,  281, 
283,  300,  301,  304,  308,  309,  312, 
325,  332,  339,  352,  372,  373,  375, 
386,  395,  398,  403,  409,  420,  423, 
424,  428,  433,  436,  451,  462,  463, 
485,  502,  514,  531,  532,  548,  549, 
553,  558,  559,  564,  565. 

Thomason,  William  59,   196. 

Thomblin,  Sara  198. 

Thomkin,  Richd.   171. 

Thomlin,  Sara  197. 

Thomlins,  Patience  210. 

Thomlinson,  John  207,  Tho.  280. 

Thompson,  Alice  500,  Ann  205,  235, 
318,  382,  513,  Chas.  341,  Clare  258, 
Danll.  199,  Edward  399,  Eldred  152, 
Elinor  382,  Eliz.  261,  312,  Francis 
242,  Geo.  247,  258,  357,  501,  Henry 
186,  562,  Ja.  167,  Jam.  199,  Jane 
202,  John  183,  255,  266,  288,  296, 
483,  506,  Lawrence  333,  Makum  254, 
Margt.  165,  Mary  382,  482,  492, 
Maurice  224,  Rice  282,  Richd.  178, 
269,  Robt.  204,  269,  318,  418,  441, 
Sara  198,  220,  Stephen  153,  Theo. 
196,  Tho.  162,  169,  385,  Wm.  227, 
324,  383,  404,  422. 

Thomson,  Jno.  404,  486,  Wm.  136,  429. 

Thonall,  Edw.  484. 

Thordall,  Peter  490. 

Thornborough,  John  448, Thomas 71,  212. 

Thornbury,Rich.86, 194,Thomas21,  118. 

Thornbush,  Jno.  455. 

Thorncomb,  Wm.  40,  68. 

Thorndon,  Robt.  184. 

Thorne,  Ann  218,  Henry  70,  455,  Jere. 
323,  Thomas  90,  201,  Wm.  233,  284, 
296,  306,  336,  377,  412,  417,  424, 
551. 

Thorneborough,  Thomas  71,  Land  of  89. 

Thornebury,  Thomas  20. 

Thornecroft,  Edw.   119. 

Thorneford,   Samll.  78. 


746 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Thorneton,  Rich.  58,  Thomas  65,  Wm. 

132. 
Thorngton,  Jno.  459. 
Thornninge,  Tho.  264. 
Thornton,  Adam  213,  Hen.  351,  Martha 

430,  Wm.  422,   545. 
Thorogood,   Adam   36,    50,    52,    59,    62, 

70,    71,    79,    80,    92,    182,    221,    502, 

Capt.  129,  Sarah  71,  Symon  239. 
Thorowgood,    Adam    21,    22,    38,    Capt. 

173,  186,  224,  270,  Elinor  220,  John 

202,    Saml.    209,    Symon    209,    510, 

Tho.   322. 
Thoroughgood,  Adam  22,  23,  299,  Jno. 

462,  Sarah  22,  Tho.  22,  452. 
Thorp,   Ann   289,   Jone   372,   Tho.   455. 
Thorpe,    Antho.    403,    Christo.    40,    63, 

Danl.    150,    Gabriell    560,   John    204, 

208,    245,    453,    Moyses    322,    Richd. 

257,    Ri.    560,    Tho.    246,    303,    382, 

Walter    246,    Wm.    147,    195,    314, 

344,  413. 
Thorrogood,   Adam    21,    Capt.    34,    110, 

136,   143,   145,  Mary  102,  Tho.   112. 
Thorroughgood,  Adam  38. 
Thorrowgood,Adam  143,  l47,Chas.  341. 
Thowsend,  Edw.  129. 
Thraile,  Tho.  303. 
Thrallop,  Timothy  170. 
Thrasher.  Ann  204. 
Thresh,   Clement   517. 
Thresher,  Ann  216,  Issabell  54,  Robert 

34,  39,  54,  116,  Wm.  184. 
Thrickmorton,  Robt.   164. 
Thrift,  James   116. 
Thrim,  Wm.  524. 
Throckmorton,  Robert  77. 
Throgmorton,  Robt.  177. 
Thrope,  Mary  264. 
Throught,  Jno.  358. 
Throughtgood,  Rice  192. 
Thrush,    Clement    17,    259,    268,    293, 

347,   500,   Fra.   230,   458,  Wm.   325. 
Thruston,  Robt.  548. 
Thuck,  Virgill  217. 
Thucker,  Henry  213,  John  195. 
Thunder,  Peter  139,  262. 
Thurland,  Edward  524. 
Thurlby.  Hen.  198. 
Thurle,  David  453. 
Thurloe,  Mary  428. 
Thurriot,  Dom.  383. 
Thurston,  Edw.  203. 
Thurten,  Tho.  51. 
Thwats,  Wm.  546. 
Tiballs,  Edw.  273. 
Tibaults,  Robt.  150. 


Tibball,  Peter  319. 

Tibbs,  Michaell  75. 

Tibbut,  Henry  481. 

Tibols,  Mary  517. 

Tice,  Hanna  291. 

Ticknar,  Tho.  150. 

Ticknard,  William  108. 

Ticknor,  Tho.  268. 

Tidderson,  Richd.   231. 

Tidner,  Wm.  230,  284,  437. 

Tidney,  Richd.  236. 

Tidway,  Capt.  326. 

Tidy,  Robt.  521. 

Tie,  Richd.  504. 

Tiffeney,  John  101. 

Tiffiney,  Jon.  73. 

Tignall,  Jno.  399. 

Tigner,  Wm.  198,  319. 

Tignor,  Danll.  517,  Wm.  462. 

Tilcock,  Wm.  139. 

Tildamus,  Ann  294. 

Till,  Daniell  307,  John  194,  Wm.  109. 

Tiller,  Ales   351,  Rich.   348,  Tho.  352, 

Wm.  371. 
Tillett,  John  171,  422,  Margt.  242,  286, 

Tho.  374. 
Tillison,   Gideon   170. 
Tillney,  Jno.  356,  Symon  112. 

Tilly,  Antho.  303,  286. 

Tilman,  Christo.  118. 

Tilney,  John  353,  413,  435,  455,   549, 

552,  562. 
Tilnsy,  Wm.  481. 
Tilsby,  Tho.  386. 
Tilsey,  Tho.  204,  212,  471. 
Tilsley,  Thomas  102. 
Tilson,  Edward  403,  Richd.  203. 
Tilt,  Wm.  469. 
Time,  Susan  509. 
Timber  Slash,  the  429. 
Timkins,  Robt.  214. 
Tinason,  Richard  315. 
Tinch,  Anthony  438. 
Tine,  Susan  550. 

Tingey,  John  378,  379,  484,  Mr.  430. 
Tingie,  John  351. 
Tingle,  John  191. 
Tinglebuge,  Wm.  254. 
Tingy,  Jon.  50,  352. 
Tinker,  Ann  354. 
Tinley,  Richd.  222,  Robt.  222. 
Tinse,  Wm.  387. 
Tinslie,  Tho.  323. 
Tinston,  Richd.  530. 
Tinwell,  John  61. 
Tinzey,  Wm.  476. 
Tiplad,  Jon.   142. 


General  Index 


747 


Tiplady,  John  116. 

Tipper,  Thomas  370. 

Tippin,  Fran.  456. 

Tire,  Alex.  509. 

Tirrall,  Mr.  331,  Morrice  289. 

Tirrell,  Edw.  249,  Mr.  379. 

Tirrill,  Jno.  453. 

Tirvill,  Jno.  453. 

Tisdale,  Richard  145. 

Tisdall,  Richard  103,  119,   149. 

Tisdell,  Richard  93,  98,  103. 

Tiskin,  Robt.  204. 

Tisley,  Rich.  93. 

Tisoe,  Edw.  526. 

Tistall,  John  326. 

Titbury,  Nich.   352. 

Titcocke,  Wm.  341. 

Titloe,  Jos.  51. 

Titton,  William  90. 

Titterton,  Robt.  350. 

Titton,  Wm.  530. 

Titus,  Tho.  301. 

Tix,  Wm.  472. 

Tixton,  John  129. 

Tizar,  John  447. 

Tobate,  Row.   568. 

Tockwood,  Eliz.  151. 

Tocwrick,  Mary  196. 

Todd,  Elizabeth  65,  Geo.  191,  Mary 
264,  Mathew  167,  Richard  527, 
Robert  91,  164,  206,  241,  474,  555, 
Thomas  65,  92,  129,  136,  167,  171, 
174,  219,  253,  263,  265,  274,  417, 
438,  462,  485,  527,  534,  Wm.  216, 
302,  369,  386,  555. 

Toffy,  Wm.  457. 

Toft,,  Ann  406,  425,  456,  546,  556. 

Tofthead,  Eliz.   501,  Tho.   501. 

Toles,  Edward  332. 

Tolliver,  Robt.  417. 

Tollock,  Henry  385. 

Tollon,  Margtt.  527. 

Tolson,  Jno.  172. 

Tolston,  John  152. 

Tolter,  Thomas  558. 

Tomahun,  place  called  299. 

Tombs,  Rich.  52. 

Tomkeson,  John  72. 

Tomkins,  Grace  384,  Henry  260,  Law- 
rence 447,  Richd.  416,  Robt.  382, 
Wm.  432. 

Tomkinson,  John  510. 

Tompkins,  Hump.  272,  John  98,  Richd. 
227,  Robt.  283,  Tho.  44,  62,  William 
452. 

Tompkinson,  John  33. 

Tomlin,    Geo.    361,    Henry    101,    119, 


Jon.  134,  Jno.  538,  563,  Mary  444, 
Martha  27,  84,  Mathew  75,  236,  371, 
517,  518,  527,  538,  569,  Robt.  227, 
281,  387,  389,  431,  523,  545,  557, 
Wm.  265,  286,  412. 

Tomling,  Stephen  514. 

Tomlinson,  Edward  78,  Joane  68,  Jon. 
40,  68,  82,  Thomas  543. 

Tomlyn,  Martha  27,  Mathias  491, 
Robert  398,  491. 

Tompson,  Ann  82,  David  328,  Edwd. 
59,  207,  245,  456,  Elizabeth  52,  447, 
522,  532,  Fug.  403,  Georg  4,  5,  53, 
234,  247,  363,  461,  Giles  459,  Grace 
257,  Henry  28,  85,  144,  423,  546, 
Humph.  Ill,  411,  James  54,  120, 
438,  450,  Jane  207,  440,  John  148, 
217,  245,  405,  454,  466,  506,  Judith 
94,  Joseph  322,  Margt.  396,  548, 
Mary  396,  454,  480,  Maurice  4,  53, 
Millisent  204,  Paule  5,  Rich.  77,  369, 
377,  532,  Robert  318,  334,  431, 
Samll.  530,  Sarah  332,  362,  532, 
Step.  552,  Tho.  60,  148,  333,  388, 
the  Widdow  32,  79,  William  5,  7, 
24,  29,  52,  150,  366,  381,  383,  403, 
462,  484,  490,  555,  556,  559,  563, 
Xttopr.   546. 

Toms,  Eliz.  543,  Fran.  563,  Jno.  545, 
Mary  526. 

Tonevy,  Fra.  291. 

Tonge,  Connise  558. 

Tonie,  Jacob  437. 

Tonne,  Richd.  189. 

Tonstall,  Edward  50,  87,  144,  Martha 
51,  Mr.  186. 

Tony,  Wm.  554. 

Tood,  Henry  385. 

Toogood,  Edward  339,  Ja.  345,  Joseph  302. 

Tooke,  James  16,  81,  280,  481,  484, 
John  16,  391,  Mr.  130,  134,  Nicholas 
554,  Tho.  484,  509. 

Toole,  Jno.  326. 

Toolye,  Thomas  86,  300. 

Toomes,  Ailce  208,  Ann  309. 

Tooslv,  Rich.  311. 

Tooth,  Eliz.  548. 

Top,  Edwd.  552. 

Toppin,  Henry  52,  357,  540,  John  268. 

Toprell,  Mary  257. 

Tops,  Susan  520. 

Torme,  John  253. 

Torner,  Sa.  273. 

Torringe,  Geo.  254. 

Torrington,   Robt.    264. 

Torrowgood,  Tho.  338. 

Tortrutt,   Dorothy  430. 


748 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Totnam,    Henry    85,    Silvester    25,    29, 

66,  137,  Susan  537. 
Totapotama,  land  of  194. 
Totopotomoy  Fort,  235. 
Totoskey,  place  called  392,  508. 
Toulson,  Georg  48,  124,  John  286,  357, 

412,  413,  517. 
Tounsend,  Josias  539. 
Tourner,  Tho.  498. 
Tover,  Thomas  491. 
Tovey,  John  253. 
Towardy,  Alice  355. 
Towell,  Jon  .79. 
Tower,  Robt.  290,  Tho.  566. 
Tower  Hill,  place  called  515. 
Towerman,  Ann  233. 
Towers,  Andrew  463,  Eliz.  303,  Francis 

21,  22,  50,  64,  James  295,  Tho.  450, 

Wm.  60,  463. 
Towerson,  James  492. 
Towlin,  John  414. 

Towlson,  John  119,  130,  164,  294,  295. 
Towmes,  John  275. 
Town,  James  221. 
Town  Harbor,  the  195. 

TOWNS: 

Appamattucke     136,     Assaticon     324, 

457. 
Cheescake    264,    Chetank    208,    Chis- 

kiake  79. 
Doegs,  446. 
Indian  77,  279,  509. 
James  25,  287,  468. 
Little,  the  79,  178,  466. 
Mattchotiq  223,   290,   373,   421,  490, 
Matomkin  393,  Mattoones  Indian  77. 
New,    the    2,    3,    Nansatiquond    346, 
519,    Nanzemond    291,    293,    300, 
310,  316,  318,  340,  344,  346,  350, 
355,  356,  360,  362,  371,  373,  381, 
435,  501,  512,  515,  519. 
Old,    the    138,    145,    188,    202,    239, 

250,  316,  452,  504,  535,  556. 
Patomeck   377,  Poretobacco  497. 
Rappahannock  254,  259,  354,  472. 
Warisquock  324,  457,  Waranye  162, 
558.    (See  Towns  under  Indians). 
Townd,  Edmond  207. 
Towne,  John  190,  Jonathan  562,  Phillip 

536,  Wm.  466. 
Townell,  Tho.  386. 
Townend,  Wm.  29. 
Towner,  Tho.  387,  484,  502. 
Townes,  Jno.  563. 
Towney,  Isaac  301. 
Towning,  Giles  397,  Tho.  65. 


Townesend,  Anne  410,  Richard  63. 

Townsen,  Richd.  259. 

Townsend,  Ann  548,  Capt.  291,  Frances 

120,  Job    272,   John    221,    385,    456, 
Jonathan  444,  Josias  539,  Richd.  120, 

121,  160,  Robt.  150,  Wm.  250,  499. 
Townshed,  Edm.  482. 

Townshend,  Francis  208,  271,  Jon.  242, 
John  331,  Mrs.  235,  Richd.  248, 
Richd.   271. 

Townsin,  Rich.  536. 

Tows,  Robt.  153. 

Towson,  Hen.   144,  John  158. 

Towton,  Anto.  290. 

Trace,  John  279,  Joyce  512. 

Tracy,  Mary  293,  Robt.  227,  250,  Tho. 
565. 

Trade,  Tho.  146. 

Trallop,  Timothy  329,  435. 

Tramps,  Jno.  557. 

Tramwell,  Mary  515. 

Traneere,  James  22. 

Trapp,  Stephen  362. 

Trasey,  Robt.  300. 

Trassy,  Teague  307. 

Travabin,  Alice  263. 

Traveere,  James  22. 

Traveler,  Geo.  173,  Wm.  452. 

Traveller,  Georg  20,  119,  130,  353, 
356,  418. 

Travel  or,  Geo.  346. 

Travellor,  Alice  43,  74,,  Georg  43,  74,  91. 

Travernor,  Wm.  519. 

Travers,  Abra.  426,  468,  Edward  340, 
450,  503,  504,  Rawleigh  241,  300, 
374,  430,  436,  469,  Raughley  333, 
Richd.  177,  Wm.  463,  541. 

Traverse,  James  248,  Jone  543,  Raleigh 
535. 

Traviell,  John  162. 

Travillian,  Jno.  520. 

Travilor,  George  534. 

Travis,  Edward  57,  83,  104,  107,  108, 
124,  224,  231,  270,  503,  Tho.  459, 
551,  Walter  83,  104,  Wm.  385. 

Tray,  Jno.  563. 

Trayillis,  Richd.  216. 

Trayton,  Kath.  230. 

Treale,  Jno.  484. 

Treamer,  Jacob  293. 

Treason,  Wm.  528. 

Treasurer  of  Va.,  1,  13,  15,  127,  165, 
226,  321,  402,  410. 

Treasurer  Councell  &  Co.  of  Adven- 
turers 1,  2. 

Treasurer,  place  of  8. 

Treaton,  Wm.  367. 


General  Index 


749 


Treble,  Wm.  123. 

Treddar,  Jno.  325. 

Tredescant,  John  135. 

Trediskin,  John  303. 

Tree,   Geo.  463,   Humph.    151,   Richard 

4,  12,  81,  95,  103. 
Tree,  the  Choice   100,   Four  Mile   149, 

Look  out    173,    the  Mile   480,   Pow- 

hetan's  19. 
Treedle,  Eliz.  200. 
TrefTe,  Joyce  293. 
Trelbeck,  Miles  201. 
Trelawney,  Robt.  147. 
Trelton,  Andrew  359. 
Trenchard,  Hen.  551. 
Trencher,  Symon  61,  Wm.  369. 
Trendall,  Paul  46. 
Trendale,  Paul  56. 
Trenor,  John  210. 

Trent,  Humphrey  96,  John  172,  248. 
Tresh,  Jno.  210. 
Tresilian  Kather.  144. 
Tressum,  Ed.   394. 
Trevannion,  Tho.  158. 
Trevell,  Eliza.  139. 
Treveman,  Jno.  223. 
Trevett,  Fortune  476,  Geo.  119,  Jno.  376. 
Treverton,  Bredgett  535. 
Trevers,  Rowland  358,  Wm.  388. 
Trevill,  Eliza.  262. 
Trevis,  Jacobin  330,  Wm.  330. 
Trevitt,  Frances  539. 
Trevor,  John  210,  Tho.  454. 
Trew,  James  512. 
Trewell,  John  225. 
Trewett,  Geo.  405. 
Trewicks,  Jno.  562. 
Trewin,  Wm.  548. 
Trewit,  Wm.  483. 
Trice,  Wm.  480. 
Trick,  Francis  99. 
Trigg,    Ellianor    107,    Paul    302,    Samll. 

25,  107. 
Triggs,    Elianor    124,    Law.    213,    Saml. 

124,  Wm.   107,   124. 
Trilly,  Jno.  538. 
Trinball,  Lydia  280. 
Tripe,  Tho.  463  . 
Tripland,  Tho.  245. 
Tripp,  Edwd.   184. 
Tritter,  Hutton  355. 
Trobury,  Sam.  386. 
Troliver,  Robt.  224  307. 
Trollock,  Jon.  134. 
Troloders,  Wm.  141. 
Trotman,  Jno.  434,  Mary  483,  551. 
Troton,  Nicholas  92. 


Tross,  Tho.  123  . 

Trott,  Edward  556,  Phillipp  559,  Susan 

553. 
Trotter,  Ann  555,  Joane  281,  Jon.  243, 

Mary  479,  Tho.   94,    132,    181,    262, 

457,  Wm.  536,  542. 

Trottham,  Ed.  556. 

Troutts,  James  554. 

Troyes,  John   150. 

Truce,  Abig.  299  . 

True,  Anne  284,  Walter  278. 

Trueman,  Robert  338,  Wm.  127. 

Truett,Geo.>4l3,  327,  329,  4l9,Tho.487. 

Truherne,  John  101. 

Truhett,  Geo.  217. 

Truitt,  George  553,  Jon.  134. 

Truloe,  Thomas  470. 

Trumbell,  Andrew  368. 

Truman,  Jno.  291. 

Trunchfeild,  Tho.  32. 

Trupsha,  Jno.  476. 

Trush,  Fra.  283. 

Trussell,    Col.    362,    422,    486,    James 

482,  524,  John  32,  88,  185,  205,  382, 

460,  486,  510,  Jon.  79,  Mary  205. 
Trustall,  Robert  109. 
Truth,  Fra.  283. 
Trutton,  Geo.  281. 
Tryar,  Edward  524. 
Tuata,  Tho.  186. 
Tuck,  Robt.  347,  Wm.  347,  Woodham 

134. 
Tucke,  Robert  359. 
Tucker,  Ailce  187,  Alex.  24,  Alice  49, 

Allen    88,    Barthol.    Ill,    Jon.    141, 

John  148,  268,  341,  394,  Joseph  544, 

Leonnidon    209,    Margt.    348,    Saml. 

262,   355,  Tho.   291,  405,   520,  Wm. 

5,  7,   10,   16,   27,  53,   115,   141,  143, 

150,    159,    198,    332,    348,   497,    558. 
Tucker's  Hole,  place  called  8,  109. 
Tucknor,  Tho.  268. 
Tudman,  Richd.  240. 
Tuett,  Geo.  413. 
Tuffes,  Tho.  335,  386. 
Tuffnell,  John  202. 
Tuffy,  Wm.  468. 
Tufton,  Richd.  259. 
Tuggell,  Thomas  314. 
Tuggins,  Daniel  37. 
Tuke,    Edmond    388,    453,    James    522, 

Wm.  522,  Mr.  140. 
Tull,  Rich.  517,  Tho.  291,  405. 
Tullenson,  Wm.  208. 
Tulos,  Cloud  460. 
Tune,  James  506,  Jno.  506. 
Tunstall,    Edward    65,    104,    111,    134, 


750 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


404,  452,  537,  Martha  65,  Mr.  140, 
472,  Rich.  502,  542,  Robt.  201. 

Tunstead,  Jno.  358. 

Tupp,  Edwd.  234. 

Turbis,  John  348. 

Turbuck,  Willi.  125. 

Tureton,  Robt.  245. 

Turfe,  Jno.  427. 

Turfry,  Richd.  136. 

Turges,  Robert  425,  Symon  55. 

Turk,  Anne  329. 

Turke,  John  214,  379,  Malhote  440, 
Motshooto  535,  Phugh  440,  535, 
Robt.  245,  Wm.  171. 

Turks:     24,  218. 

Turkey  Hill,  place  called  166. 

Turkey  Cock  Hills,  place  called  409. 

Turkey  Ridge,  place  called  302,  504. 

Turlinge,   Richd.   267. 

Turloe  Kill,  land  of  82. 

Turne,  Mr.  290. 

Turner,  Abigail  309,  Abraham  135,  323, 
Alex.  446,  Alice  551,  Ann  31,  84, 
223,  559,  Bryan  255,  305,  Edmond 
391,  Eliz.  195,  Eliz.  254,  371,  392, 
Em.  305,  Evan  255,  Fr.  58,  Geo.  142, 
153,  203,  276,  Harman  55,  Henry 
198,  397,  James  32,  118,  205,  271, 
314,  379,  415,  509,  510,  546,  558, 
Jane  196,  Job.  396,  John  80,  89, 
107,  113,  118,  144,  197,  198,  210, 
221,  244,  248,  283,  291,  349,  400, 
431,  464,  476,  479,  482,  513,  Judith 
509,  Margarett  339,  Martin  4,  Mary 
138,  276,  314,  492,  500,  Moses  365, 
Noah  391,  Nicho.  208,  Richd.  120, 
294,  Robert  60,  77,  465,  483,  520, 
Samll.  24,  54,  476,  514,  Sarah  325, 
446,  Simon  258,  Thomas  54,  157, 
274,  309,  393,  426,  466,  467,  487, 
492,  512,  Walter  514,  559,  565, 
Wm.  121,  150,  377,  427,  453, 
Zacharias  23. 

Turnery,  James  272  . 

Turnes,  Jno.  492. 

Turney,  Richd.  218,  496,  533,  land 
called  490. 

Turny,  Richd.  534. 

Turpin,  Hugh  482,  James  499,  Michaell 
317,  561. 

Turpey,  John  249. 

Turrey,  Elizabeth  394. 

Turrough,  Mary  356. 

Turry,  Thomas  551. 

Turtley,  Avis  42,  91. 

Turton,  Miller  261,  Tymo.  181,  Timothy 
243,  273. 


Turton's   Feild   533. 

Tute,  James  275. 

Tutmarsh,   Asable  369. 

Tutton,  Henry  87,   104. 

Tutty,  Tho.  249. 

Turvell,  Tho.  426. 

Turvey,  James  272,  Peter  John  83. 

Turvey,  Land  of  490. 

Turvor,  Thomas  428. 

Turvy,  Jon.  104. 

Tushan,  John  339. 

Tustall,  Robt.  201. 

Twelves,  Stephen  558,  562. 

Twice,  Wm.  480. 

Twiford,  Thomas  446. 

Twig,  Tho.  558. 

Twiggs,  Jno.  432. 

Twiller,  Robt.  454. 

Twilly,   Hump.   220. 

Twillye,  Hum.  332. 

Twiman,  Fran.  455. 

Twinn,  Ann  305,  Tho.  279. 

Twiney,  Richd.  299. 

Twisden,  Francis  554,  Margt.  556,  Tho. 
525,  Wm.  555. 

Twoale,  Jno.  338  . 

Twysden,  Wm.  538. 

Twy,  John  176,   129. 

Tyas,  John  19,  Richd.  563. 

Tyascond,  place  called  289,  306,  317, 
378,  388,  392,  503,  505,  513. 

Tyball,  Edw.  181,  Ralph  441. 

Tybatt,   Edward   181. 

Tydder,  Hugh  59. 

Tye,  John  523,  530,  Jonathan  556, 
Margtt.  537,  Mary  396,  451,  527, 
553,  556,  Richd.  138,  188,  198,  202, 
316,  354,  456,  Suan  528,  Wm.  528. 

Tyler,  Ann  25,  Anth.  69,  Ed.  394, 
Edith  523,  Eliz.  300,  543,  Henry 
272,  479,  538,  559,  562,  James  306, 
308,  347,  Jo.  375,  Jno.  425,  501, 
Mary  221,  272,  Mr.  316,  544,  Robt. 
315,  Tho.  25,  61,  Wm.  300. 

Tylley,  John  123. 

Tyman,  Sarah  135,  Wm.  135. 

Tymon,  Wm.  203. 

Tyngle,  Antho.  176. 

Tynns,  Bernard  379. 

Typladye,  Jno.   157. 

Typper,  Tho.  470. 

Tyrrill,  James   184,  Mr.  537. 

Tysdell,  Richard  98. 

Tysley,  Richard  49. 

Tyson,  Edw.  346,  Gregory  140. 

Tyzard,  John  425. 


General  Index 


751 


U 

Udall,  John  44,  Tho.  360. 

Udday,  Sanders  218. 

Uert,  Wm.  258. 

Uggins,  Edw.  283,  Tho.  253. 

Umpton,  Emll.  513. 

Underfeild,  Wm.  318. 

Underhill,  Henry  282,  John  218,  313, 
401,  444,  472. 

Underwood,  Anne  195,  481,  Cassander 
22,  Geo.  195,  Giles  542,  Jon.  235, 
John  169,  277,  307,  Major  546, 
Margery  157,  Mary  191,  195,  Robert 
65,  Sarah  195,  Tho.  195,  497,  519, 
Wm.  47,  65,  143,  190,  191,  195, 
299,  343,  384,  392,  397,  429,  489, 
505. 

Undrix,  Brown  490. 

Unger,  Joell  283. 

Union,  Geo.  151,  243,  Joell  97,  Mary 
296. 

Upchurch,  Mich.  290,  300. 

Uprence,  Ri.  196. 

Upshott,  Arthur  286,  330,  357,  412, 
443,  452,  482,  507,  515,  545. 

Unwin,  Elizabeth  58,  Georg  58,  116, 
117,  201,  Katherine  58. 

Unwyn,  Geo.  138,  141,  168. 

Upton,  Capt.  158,  440,  535,  Dorothy 
303,  John  25,  69,  71,  72,  73,  76,  98, 
104,  126,  140,  143,  145,  147,  158, 
162,  164,  391,  420,  Margt.  237,  Mrs. 
270,  Peter  431,  476,  Wm.   119,  484. 

Urlin,  Jane  342. 

Ursly,  John  43. 

Urwin,  Wm.  134. 

Usher,  James  112,  157,  Mary  444,  Tho. 
294. 

Ushullevan,   Daniell   339,   Derman   339. 

Usklye,  Wm.  227,  250. 

Ussulevan,    Dorman    394,    Daniell    394. 

Usulavan,  Derman  390. 

Uteley,  James  144. 

Uti,  John  168. 

Utopia,  place  called  168. 

Uty,  Capt.  63,  John  117,  168,  179,  278. 

Utye,  Capt.  37,  John  3,  16,  22,  90,  93, 
102,    117,    122,    168,   Mary   122,    139. 

V 
Vaberitt,  James  90. 
Vahan,  Rebecca  265,  Wm.  553. 
Vahane  Edward  393. 
Vaine,  John  225. 
Vaker,  Martin  164. 
Valence,  Wm.  282. 
Valentine,  John  310,  421. 


Valerie,  James  484. 

Valker,  Dan.  314. 

Vallentine,  John  139. 

Valler,  Wm.  195. 

Vallett,  John  121. 

Vallin,  Joane  279. 

Vallys,  Val.  460. 

Valleys:  Deer  Bone  225,  336,  Dog- 
wood 502,  Persimon  270,  Spring  219. 

Vanche,  Kath.  210,  Oliver  210. 

Vand,  Hump.  184,  Thos.  184. 

Vandermillen,  Lewis  343. 

Van  de  Powke,  Augustine  Johannes 
318. 

Vandsable,  P.  568. 

Vandulett,   Henrick  404. 

Vanerick,  James  540. 

Vanerit,  James  50. 

Vanham,  John  77. 

Vanheck,  Oliver  62. 

Van  Hicks,  Oliver  220. 

Vankes,  Peter  210. 

Vanlondegon,  Michaell  367. 

Vann,  John  553. 

Vanner,  James  369. 

Vanpuck,  Maudlin  379. 

Vans,  Mr.  222,  Richard  73,  Robt.  216. 

Vanson,  Rich.  144. 

Vansum,  Eliz.  265. 

Varblow,  Christian  244. 

Varbread,  Peter  294. 

Vardale,  Richard   105. 

Vardall,  Richd.  112. 

Vardie,  Richard  521. 

Vardtrue,  Edw.  480. 

Vardy,  Eliz.  282,  Richd.  230,  246,  282, 
298,  377,  473,  521. 

Vargan,  James   196. 

Varina — Verina,  place  called:  15,  18, 
19,  36,  40,  45,  59,  60,  61,  64,   151. 

Varina  Court,  556. 

Varley,  James  404. 

Varling,  Rich.  513. 

Varloe,  Peter  68. 

Varlow,  Peter  23. 

Varly,  Symon  199. 

Varnell,  Jno.  351. 

Varnham,  John  337. 

Varny,  John  362. 

Vartlow,  Christian  244. 

Vasatican  Path,  the  246. 

Vase,  Rich.  45,  65. 

Vasler,  Eliz.  34,  John  34,  77,  146. 

Vasler's  Neck,  place  called  73. 

Vassae,  John  197. 

Vassal,  John   197. 

Vaughan,  Alexr.  386,  Ann  482,  Christ. 


752 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


138,  David  56,  Edwd.  153,  387,  563, 
568,  Eliza.  155,  303,  396,  Francis 
153,  Geo.  177,  Jane  552,  John  45, 
62,  114,  153,  187,  275,  331,  379, 
422,  432,  446,  447,  464,  471,  Jon. 
97,  Lewis  37,  65,  Mary  112,  368, 
455,  Maudlin  442,  Morrice  431, 
Patrick  28,  99,  Richard  183,  184, 
217,  Row.  50,  557,  Sam  384,  Symon 
213,  Thomas  83,  252,  284,  Wm.  447, 

551,    Xtopher.    255,    270,    309,   

279. 

Vauche,  Kath.  210,  Oliver  210. 

Vaukes,  Peter  210. 

Vaultres,  John  339. 

Vaultry,  Tho.  525. 

Vaulx,  Alice  119,  Eliz.  410,  Humphry 
336,  Mr.  349,  Robert  311,  322,  344, 
410,  496,  Thomas  366,  410. 

Vauner,  James  369. 

Vaus,  Eliza.  295,  299,  Hump.  295,  299, 
John  93,  Mr.  222,  295,  567,  Richard 
73,  Robt.  132,  216,  278,  284,  295, 
299,  Sarah  382,  Susan  299,  Tho.  208, 
214. 

Vause,  David  318,  Mr.  257,  271,  Robt. 
166,  277,  Tho.  171,  172,  249,  387, 
342. 

Vauson,  Richard  49. 

Vauston,  Richard  75. 

Vazey,  James  363. 

Veach,  James  314. 

Veale,  Jane  42,  Wm.  420. 

Veare,  Mary  143. 

Veceto,  Hugon  322. 

Vehen,  Danl.  278. 

Vein,  Tho.  567. 

Velayne,  Jeremiah  129. 

Velley,  Wm.  200. 

Velsey,  Geo.  209. 

Venable,  Richard  29. 

Venison,  Ben.  297. 

Venne,  John  429. 

Venner,  Wm.  284. 

Venice,  Wm.  116,  142. 

Venicomb,  Anne  201. 

Vennalls,  Richard  378. 

Vensey,  Weymouth  34. 

Vere,  Horatio  350. 

Vereto,  Hugon  322. 

Vernon,  Edward  525,  Henry  452. 

Vert,  Wm.  258. 

Vessell,  Josias  254,  Joyce  158. 

Ventris,  Jno.  552. 

Vevery,  Ann  195. 

Vezie,  Geo.  345. 

Vezey,  Georg  438,  514,  539,  526. 


Viccars,  Bryan  108,  Francis  113,  Mary 
122. 

Vicard,  Wm.  178. 

Vicares,  Tho.  460. 

Vicaris,  Peter  218. 

Vicars,  Thomas  545. 

Vickars,  Dorothy  538. 

Vickory,  Edmond  534. 

Vicount,  Thomas  26. 

Victsorrell,  Morris  349. 

Vigeo,  Gesper  311. 

Vignorones:     11,  14,  18. 

Vikory,  Edmond  534. 

Villecott,  Walter  204. 

Vina,  Jone  452. 

Vincen,  Wm.  270. 

Vincent,  Abraham  425,  Bagnell  397, 
441,  459,  Eliz.  291,  330,  Elyas  213, 
Fran.  454,  532,  Henry  30,  351,  353, 
358,  368,  372,  401,  404,  405,  423, 
447,  492,  James  236,  Jno.  432,  Mary 
532,  Mr.  352,  Tho.  46,  56,  371, 
William  87,  111,  210,  214,  296. 

Vines,  Abram  541,  John  414,  483. 

Vining,  Jon.  29. 

Vinkles,  Michaell  76. 

Vinon,  Geo.  151,  Joell  97. 

Vinoyn,  Geo.  168. 

Vinquit,  Walter  225. 

Vinson,  Benja.  485,  Phill.  265,  Wm.  77. 

Vintner,  Jno.  481,  499,  Tho.  448. 

Vintua,  Benj.  452. 

Virer,  James  286. 

Virgany,  Edw.  33. 

Virgitt,  Job  524. 

Virgin,  Robert  77. 

Viriam,  Richd.  200. 

Virosse,  Ann  182. 

Viser,  James  286. 

Vissell,  Francis  41. 

Vivell,  Robt.  455. 

Vizard,  Joane  245. 

Vodin,  Abram  400,  Isack  400,  Jno.  400, 
Marice  400. 

Vonibly,  John  282. 

Voscombe,  John  385,  Wm.  385. 

Vose,  Henry  294. 

Voyce,  Jonathan  225. 

Voyle,  John  260. 

Vynall,  Alice  160. 

W 
Waad,  Edward  505,  508,  Eliz.  426,  468, 

Mary  503,  Tho.  426,  467. 
Wacmott,  James  261. 
Wad,  Alice  226. 
Waddelow,  Nicho.   170. 


General  Index 


753 


Wadden,  Phillip  362. 

Waddilow,  Jno.  456,  Nicholas  183,  242, 

285,    296,    305,    321,    337,    339,   406, 

412,  414,  423,  485,  513,  532. 
Waddington,  Hanna  61,  John  215,  295, 

340,  Ralph  254,  Ra.  263. 
Waddilowe,  Nicholas  183. 
Wadding,  Geo.  253,  Phillip  567. 
Waddy,  Antho.  172,  John  210,  214. 
Wade,  Antho.  231,  Christo.  559,  Edward 

98,    459,    508,    568,    Eliz.    291,    John 

130,  Joseph  513,  Margarett  447,  Mary 

281,    Peter   390,    Phillipp    140,   Rich. 

134,  Robt.  347,  Thomas  59,  280,  355, 

390,  Wm.  339,  525. 
Wadeing,  George  313. 
Wadeing   Place,    the    11,    21,    89,    207, 

347. 
Wader,  Wm.  33. 
Wadilow,  Nicholas  260,  419,  473,  

215. 
Wading,     Geo.     238,    432,     461,     515, 

Phillip  567. 
Wadingham,  Phill.  304. 
Wadloe,  Michaell  404. 
Wadlow,  John  553,  554,  Nicholas  170. 
Wadlowe,  Tho.  279. 
Wadman,  Sarah  428. 
Wady,  Symon  272. 
WafTeild,  Morcop  (or  Morcos)   328. 
Wagett,  Tho.  256. 
Wagg,  Robt.  475,  Tymothy  476. 
Waggatt,  Tho.  120. 
Wagge,  Richard  377,  Timo.  377. 
Waggett,  Tho.  206. 
Wagstaff,  Mary  313. 
Wahab,  George  332. 
Wahoope,  Archiball  332. 
Wahop,  Arch.  220. 
Waid,  Edw.  512. 
Waight,  Edwd.  322,  Ursula  143. 
Waine,  John  70,  401,  Sergt.  383. 
Waines,  Geo.  254. 
Wait,  Rich.  459. 
Waite,  Edw.  348,  Jno.  497,  Math.  384, 

Sarah  513. 
Wake,  Giles  426. 
Wakefeild,    Geo.    314,    Jno.    23,    192, 

Tho.  58,  353. 
Wakeing,  Richard   171. 
Wakeland,  Anne  128. 
Wakeley,  Edward  376. 
Wakely,  Mathew  444. 
Wakeman,  Mary  466. 
Waker,  Lt.  Col.   (or  Walker)   303. 
Wakerly,  Tho.  425. 
Wakes,  Jonathan  38. 


Wakin,  Tho.  199. 

Wakins,  Edward  102. 

Waklin,  Anth.  54. 

Walbeck,  Kath.  256. 

Walbridge,  John  114. 

Walbroke,  Nich.  429. 

Walbrooke,  Joane  214,  Nicho.  456, 
Rebecca  454. 

Walby,  Henry  250. 

Walch,  Edm.  309. 

Walcoke,  Robert  144. 

Walden,  Edw.  213,  Wm.  298. 

Walder,  Tho.  422. 

Waldie,  Tho.  186. 

Walding,  Edw.  491,  James  567,  Jane 
567,  Ralph  567. 

Waldon,  Phillip  311. 

Waldrom,  Tho.  137. 

Waldron,  Henry  245,  Joice  280. 

Wale,  Edward  361,  Jeremiah  475,  525, 
528,  John  306,  444,  Wm.  40,  68. 

Waler,  John  367. 

Walers,  John  43. 

Walerson,  John  295. 

Walfe,  Robt.  476,  Sarah  492. 

Walford,  Jno.  459,  482. 

Waldgrave,  Chas.  256. 

Walgrave,  Edw.  256,  Tho.  336. 

Walgrove,  Geo.   195. 

Walke,  Henry  252,  Roger  396. 

Walker,  Adam  386,  Alexander  440,  510, 
Ailce  213,  Andrew  199,  273,  Chris- 
topher 397,  Col.  467,  527,  Danll. 
428,  Edw.  38,  153,  198,  246,  354, 
356,   364,   455,  491,   554,   556,   Eliz. 

307,  Evan.  404,  Geo.  388,  444,  512, 
546,  Henry  50,  90,  212,  250,  298, 
316,  352,  402,  473,  525,  543,  544, 
Isabel  196,  James  92,  548,  Jane  276, 
Jon.  40,  68,  John  69,  73,  167,  198, 
222,    223,    245,    267,    271,    272,    301, 

308,  316,  322,  323,  324,  346,  350, 
362,  365,  368,  381,  385,  449,  481, 
514,  520,  Jone  63,  Joseph  232,  Lawr. 
68,  Lt.  Col.  303,  306,  309,  310, 
Martin  377,  Mary  255,  275,  279,  444, 
Morris  99,  182,  Oliver  79,  Peter  159, 
225,  390,  534,  Phillipp  78,  Richd. 
199,  213,  289,  331,  384,  493,  516, 
537,  Robert  335,  538,  Roger  78,  250, 
380,  385,  462,  Samll.  120,  138,  188, 
Sarah  187,  198,  Simon  484,  Thos. 
182,  278,  506,  555,  Wm.  228,  235, 
269,  303,  316,  317,  333,  335,  386, 
400,    469,   486,   487,    491,    510,    569. 

Walkner,  Wm.  513. 

Wall,  George  311,  Jon.  86,   231,  John 


754 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


50,  115,  144,  183,  232,  286,  328, 
499,  Richard  45,  60,  185,  340,  Wil- 
liam 35,  425. 

Waller,  John  296,  Mich.  351,  378,  Paul 
358,  Robt.  504,  Samll.  510,  Wm.  61. 

Wallett,  Mary  567. 

Wallford,  John  72,  Rich.  453. 

Wallice,  Matt.   162. 

Wallingford,  Rebecca  552. 

Wallington,  H.,  454,  Jeffry  452. 

Wallinns,  Shadrack  388. 

Wallis,  Alex.  453,  Christo.  263,  Edmund 
22,  264,  Edw.  454,  482,  510,  Ellinor 
516,  Eliz.  26,  James  216,  544,  Jane 
404,  John  121,  391,  457,  481,  Jonah 
554,  Mathew  190,  Peter  194,  Rebecca 
133,  Rich.  381,  Robt.  133,  Teague 
457,  Thomas  94,  157,  Wm.  467. 

Wallon,  Jonny  328. 

Wallop,  Cornelius  486,  Emll.  500,  John 
455,  456,  553,  554. 

Wallton,  John  424. 

Wallwood,  Andrew  491,  492. 

Walpole,  Jno.  454. 

Walsgrave,  Chr.  183. 

Walsh,  Tho,  148. 

Walshway,  Chas.  274. 

Walsingham,   Edwin  429. 

Walson,  Andrew  286. 

Waken,  Jno.  496. 

Walter,  Ellynor  325,  Edmund  162,  Jane 
476,  Jon.  35,  Jone  349,  Jno.  496, 
Nicholas  365,  Richard  96,  359,  497, 
Roger  227,  Rowland  456,  Sibbill  96, 
Tho.  476,  Wm.  171,  307,  476,  479,484. 

Walters,  Elizabeth  212,  282,  Joane  61, 
John  443,  450,  476,  Major  353, 
Nathl.  263,  Rob.  428,  Roger  300, 
309,  352,  359,  375,  395,  398,  409, 
422,  531,  Tho.  134,  Wm.  142,  266, 
450. 

Walthall,  Mr.  549,  Wm.  352,  549. 

Waltham,  Hen.  76,  John  131,  139,  152, 
174,  183,  217,  280,  482,  522,  520, 
Samuell  60,  Wm.  110. 

Walton,  Daniell  94,  Edmond  562,  Geo. 
29,  Henry  568,  John  76,  106,  162, 
190,  196,  241,  290,  301,  315,  316, 
331,  338,  373,  385,  421,  447,  448, 
468,  490,  510,  Marg.  28,  83,  Richd. 
183,  Richd.  197,  349,  468,  Robt.  39, 
468,  567,  Rowland  431,  Samuell  81, 
222. 

Wamblin,  Anth.  120. 

Wambly,  James  68. 

Wand,  John  217. 

Waneman,  Ann  245. 


Wanes,  Richard  46. 

Wanklin,  Anth.  120,  Tho.  552. 

Wannan,  Mary  558. 

Wansworth,   Richard   331,  407. 

Wanton,  James  80. 

Waplett,  Thomas  109. 

Wapp,  John  296. 

Wapshott,  Jane  264. 

Waram,  John  325. 

Waraner,  Math.  60. 

Warberton,  Tho.  465. 

Warbeton,  Tho.  250. 

Warborow,  Henry  370. 

Warborton,  Jno.  476. 

Warburton,  Ann  338,  Thomas  428. 

Ward,  Ann  37,  216,  Barth.  222,  Capt. 
37,  Charles  510,  Chri.  50,  Edw.  465, 
472,  481,  483,  499,  Eliz.  40,  41,  347, 
521,  Ellin.  509,  Geo.  125,  Ger.  425, 
Grace  52,  Hen.  61,  James  202,  216, 
3J6,  458,  500,  Jane  399,  Jerimiah  55, 
Jeremy  468,  John  19,  37,  52,  64, 
275,  279,  358,  491,  498,  529,  537, 
Jon.  45,  65,  123,  Kather.  262,  Law- 
rence 164,  166,  Martin  63,  Mary  458, 
487,  494,  498,  512,  514,  Mathew 
120,  Nathl.  566,  Peter  315,  374,  388, 
Phillis  380,  Rich.  35,  61,  69,  428, 
447,  451,  456,  Robt.  76,  113,  119, 
138,  176,  190,  302,  429,  Roger  23, 
Sam.  165,  464,  491,  Seath  19,  40,  59, 
556,  Seth  65,  151,  239,  Silvester  119, 
427,  Susan  33,  72,  460,  523,  Tho. 
28,  47,  78,  82,  151,  187,  377,  458, 
475,  506,  510,  514,  William  56,  93, 
282,  333,  397,  399,  444,  486,  510, 
513,  559. 

Wardeefe,  John  226. 

Wardell,  Jobe  315,  Mathew  327. 

Warden,  Jon.  84,  Thomas  7,  31,  147, 
330,  Wm.  552. 

Warder,  Tho.  32,  385,  Wm.  149,  150, 
376,  464. 

Wardle,  Math.  351. 

Wardly,  Tho.  298. 

Wardy,  Roger  315. 

Ware,  Edw.  465,  Eliza.  347,  Fra.  236, 
James  178,  Jeremy  375,  John  236, 
255,  307,  Kath.  236,  Margt.  236, 
Mich.  166,  Nicholas  476,  Peter  374, 
527,  Tho.  259,  377,  Wm.  127. 

Wareham,  Eliz.  565,  John  265,  565. 

Warhamjohn  105,  Tho.  375. 

Wariner,  Susan  263,  Tho.   195   . 

Warington,  Eliz.  237. 

Warkeham,  Grace  147. 

Warleich,  George  402. 


General  Index 


755 


Warlett,  Tho.  470. 

Warman,  David  557,  Dorathy  536, 
Peter  557,  Stephen  536,  537,  564. 

Warne,  Francis  355,  Tho.  47,  99,  100, 
115,  152,  387  . 

Warner,  Augustine  22,  32,  38,  92,  142, 
227,  264,  301,  365,  385,  457,  Capt. 
303,  306,  Col.  550,  David  61,  Eliza. 
341,  Fra.  486,  Henry  43,  55,  323, 
428,  James  241,  411,  John  266,  314, 
348,  385,  397,  460,  523,  Lt.  Col.  456, 
Mary  92,  264,  460,  523,  Robert  367, 
Tho.  148. 

Warper,  John  443. 

Warradin,  James  268. 

Warradine,  James  74,  87,  168,  228, 
273,  494,  503. 

Warrall,  Joseph  258. 

Warrell,  Wm.  304. 

Warren,  Abra.  300,  Amos  131,  Anth. 
324,  David  441,  443,  Edm.  386,  Eliza. 
194,  Fra.  386,  Henry  77,  Jon.  97, 
John  185,  199,  324.  404,  Margaret 
373,  Mr.  76,  200,  355,  560,  Nath. 
292,  Robt.  183,  285,  Richd.  325,  353, 
356,  547,  Sam.  375,  426,  468,  Tho- 
mas 34,  139,  169,  176,  185,  393,  459, 
William  19,  114,  131,  164,  260,  292. 

Warrenford,  Peter  43,  55. 

Warrany-Warreny,  place  called  318,  376, 
390,  509. 

Warreny,  feilds  318,  old  landing  place 
47,  64,  98,  125,  230,  400,  Towne  162, 
175,  276,  404,  (see  Towns). 

Warrey,  Wm.  404. 

Warrick,  Tho.  334. 

Warrin,  Ann  460,  David  567,  Rebecca 
535,  563. 

Warriner,  Matthew  337. 

Warrington,  Tho.  334. 

Warrwicke,  Tho.  381. 

Warship,  Walter  152. 

Wart,  Tho.  391. 

Wartan,  Tohn  434. 

Warter,  Geo.  428. 

Wartrop,  Barnab.  430,  Ri.  553. 

Warwell,  Robt.  64. 

Warwick,  place  called  450,  451. 

Warwicksqueeke,  place  called  17,  33, 
34,  54,  140,  163. 

Was,  Wm.  22. 

Wasdall,  Thos.  373. 

Wase,  John  210. 

Wash,  Joseph  525. 

Washborne,  Daniell  125. 

Washbrow,  Tho.  369,  Wm.  301. 

Washbrough,  Mary  369. 


Washington,  Ann  449,  Capt.  429,  Edw. 
456,  Hen.  455,  John  446,  448,  449, 
471,  Law.  446,  Richd.  124. 

Wassail,  Wm.  258. 

Wassell,  Henry  342. 

Wastcoat,  Eliz.  493. 

Wastell,  Georg  433. 

Wasts,  Tho.   115. 

Watch,  Tho.  196. 

Watchepreag,  place  called  393,  429. 

Watchshott,  Richd.  204. 

Wate,  Jer.  525,  Math.  288. 

Water,  Hugh  499,  Wm.  305. 

Waterford,  Marmaduke  430,  Mich.  352, 
Peter  530,  Roger  460,  523. 

Waterhouse,  William  314. 

Waterhowse,  Samll.  138. 

Waterman,  Ann  45,  62,  100,  Georg 
117,  207,  234,  303,  336,  566,  Richd. 
267. 

Water  Mill,  a  182. 

Waters,  Edward  4,  8,  11,  12,  18,  39, 
158,  164,  260,  Eliz.  166,  201,  Evan 
465,  524,  542,  Georg  108,  136,  Hoell 
459,  Jon.  22,  John  55,  121,  279,  547, 
Kath.  184,  Lt.  Col.  455,  Major  418, 
419,  Margt.  225,  Mary  42,  Roger  82, 
Stephen  527,  Wm.  164,  166,  178, 
184,  260,  356,  382,  400,  405,  417, 
418,  448,  517. 

Waterson,  Ann  456. 

Waterton,  Will.  556. 

Wates,  Henry  568. 

Watford,  John  107,  172,  179,  459. 

Watkenson,  Cor.  562. 

Watkeyes,  Samuell  95,   100,   117. 

Watkins,  Alice  42,  91,  289,  David  7, 
15,  16,  369,  Dennis  404,  Dorothy 
183,  Edw.  130,  293,  Eliz.  300,  544, 
Foule  360,  Grace  481,  Henry  513, 
Jane  355,  John  54,  103,  176,  179, 
226,  254,  562,  Jon.  229,  Mary  297, 
453,  492,  Michaell  453,  Morgan  59, 
493,  Nich.  108,  Phillipp  329,  435, 
Richd.  152,  161,  313,  Saml.  112,  133, 
481,  Tho.  24,  80,  239,  350,  544, 
Wm.  144,  443. 

Watkinson,  Cornelius  452. 

Watley,  Eliz.  199,  Jno.  507. 

Watlins,  Ismael  452. 

Watney,  Damras  447. 

Watson,  Abraham  204,  343,  364,  Adam 
196,  Alexr.  257,  Alice  291,  327,  Ann 
244,  Arthur  179,  243,  David  341, 
Easter  467,  Edwd.  479,  Elizabeth  26, 
300,  Geo.  283,  391,  468,  Hanah  559, 
Henry    110,    178,    182,    Hester    517, 


756 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Isaac  312,  338,  512,  James  73,  283, 
Jeffery  190,  Joane  215,  John  26,  29, 
49,  65,  69,  154,  177,  288,  255,  311, 
358,  365,  385,  405,  443,  466,  482, 
521,  548,  Margt.  538,  Mary  236,  255, 
Mr.  305,  Nicho.  242,  Peter  568, 
Phillip  538,  Richard  182,  265,  Robt. 
413,  554,  564,  Saml.  29,Sara  411, 
Tho.  251,  403,  463,  468,  475,  476, 
525,  Wm.  500,  536,  548. 

Watte,  Jno.  497. 

Watten,  Margaret  354. 

Watter,  Peter  125. 

Watters,  Edwd.  554,  Wm.  450. 

Wattin,  John  54. 

Wattis,  John  112. 

Wattkins,  John  213,  Nicho.  161,  Phillip 
170,  183,  Tho.  169. 

Watton,  Henry  393,  Rich.  390,  Thomas 
110. 

Watts,  Abram  548,  Antho.  373,  Bryan 
355,  Charity  183,  Christo.  44,  Edm. 
263,  Edw.  126,  Eliza.  212,  Geo.  237, 
253,  292,  339,  344,  354,  362,  363, 
401,  Henry  148,  275,  368,  371,  373, 
375,  395,  396,  402,  411,  462,  468, 
Jeremiah  45,  86,  93,  Joane  352,  John 
183,  193,  194,  393,  419,  432,  433, 
434,  479,  538,  Lyddia  38,  Mary  501, 
Nich.  448,  Peter  233,  Richd.  139, 
419,  Robt.  263,  359,  372,  386,  Saml. 
567,  Sara  193,  Steph.  283,  526, 
Susan  181,  212,  Thomas  16,  19,  38, 
77,  92,  118,  142,  157,  158,  159,  175, 
181,  188,  212,  264,  278,  288,  325, 
489,  523,  Wm.  91,  95,  182,  195, 
267,  272,  337,  343,  372,  480,  511, 
558. 

Watt,  the  Plowman  197,  290. 

Wattson,  Alice  405,  Hugh  372,  Isaac 
154,  John  145,  Nicho.  122. 

Wattye,  Wm.  29,  65. 

Way,  Geo.  178,  Henry  265,  John  43. 

Wayder,  William  87. 

Waydon,  Hugh  192. 

Waye,  John  294. 

Wayne,  Ann  91,  John  91,  178,  270, 
276,  Mary  276,  Serjeant  80. 

Waytes,  Oliver  254. 

Waxell,  Tobias  38. 

Wazon,  Nich.  341. 

Weaborne,  Robt.  253. 

Weading,  George  432,  446,  447. 

Weall,  Jane  453. 

Weally,  Wm.  435. 

Weare,  Tho.  75. 

Wearott,  Jane  218. 


Weascock,  Edw.  411. 

Weath,  Edw.  454,  James  453. 

Weather,  Nich.  171. 

Weathers,  Wm.  207. 

Weatly,  James  553. 

Weave,  John  215. 

Weaver,  Eliz.  350,  Isaac  264,  372,  Jon. 
33,  87,  John  128,  Richd.  261,  Samuell 
24,  Sarah  445,  William  13. 

Weavor,  Isaac  211,  John  210,  Richd. 
255. 

Webb,  Alice  114,  116,  Anth.  430, 
Charles  535,  563,  Christian  411,  Clare 
103,  124,  Edw.  172,  380,  393,  429, 
448,  Eliza.  146,  Francis  338,  430, 
438,  Fayth  216,  George  508,  Giles 
27,  165,  274,  282,  329,  450,  459, 
464,  477,  Jane  405,  Joane  397,  John 
11,  435,  480,  491,  493,  Mary  115, 
543,  Michaell  160,  Mr.  203,  260, 
Richd.  151,  169,  426,  444,  468,  520, 
529,  Robert  103,  124,  365,  Stephen 
23,  48,  103,  124,  139,  219,  358, 
Thomas  292,  316,  397,  410,  447, 
Wm.  139,  140,  149,  184,  280,  299, 
358,  360,  396,  484,  Winifred  204, 
Wingfield  204,  Winfield  258. 

Webber,  John  22,  290,  323,  Margery 
342,  Rich.  29,  Tho.  512. 

Webberton,  Wm.  480. 

Webley,  Richard  430. 

Weblin,  Henry  24,  192. 

Webnott,  Rebecca  463. 

Webs,  Tho.  323. 

Webster,  Capt.  313,  Danll.  485,  Francis 
89,  107,  113,  Hen.  466,  Jane  161, 
Jno.  492,  Joseph  517,  Judith  161, 
Luce  140,  Lucy  161,  405,  Margt.  466, 
557,  Nath.  141,  Nicho.  280,  557, 
Pat.  557,  Richd.  116,  130,  Roger 
140,  161,  Susan  140,  161,  Tho.  140, 
257,  351,  352,  403,  535,  556,  565, 
Wm.  247. 

Weddge,  Robt.  403. 

Wede,  Henry  164. 

Wedge,  Margt.  241,  Robt.  547. 

Weding,  Geo.  446. 

Weed,  Hen.  234. 

Weeding,  George  549. 

Weedon,  Geo.  200. 

Weeker,  Henry  235,  263,  337,  461. 

Weekes,  Abra.  450,  Eliz.  419,  Fran. 
429,  475,  484,  490,  506,  546,  Henry 
460,  Hugh  397,  Robt.  302,  474,  Sam. 
506,  Thomas  67,  90,  212,  Walter 
559,  Wm.  29,  383. 


General  Index 


757 


Weeks,  Abraham  391,  392,  Jon.  150, 
Ralph  315. 

Weele,  Martin  342. 

Weeler,  Joane  545  . 

Weeles,  Antho.  162,  177. 

Wegans,  Robt.  378. 

Weinne,  Tho.  236. 

Weir,  Capt.  469,  Jno.  344,  424,  431, 
465,  481,  484,  485,  488,  557,  562, 
Robt.  433,  Walter  488. 

Weire,  Capt.  523,  John  394,  557,  560, 
567. 

Welbeloved,  Math.  253,  271. 

Welbon,  Wm.  38. 

Welborough,  Richd.  283. 

Welbourne,  Math.  282,  Robt.  264. 

Welby,  Alice  293. 

Welch,  Daniell  101,  277,  359,  438, 
David  300,  Edmond  216,  290,  505, 
Elk.  443,  Gilbert  290,  James  383, 
Jane  194,  397,  Joane  187,  219,  306, 
Jno.  219,  255,  Mary  61,  Morgan  86, 
194,  Nicholas  99,  Rice  196,  Rich. 
290,  300,  430,  454,  Robt.  105,  476, 
Saml.  404,  Sarah  453,  Thomas  99, 
264. 

Welchman,  Jno.  194. 

Welchman,  a:    311,  385,  536,  548. 

Welchurch,  Henry  164. 

Weld,  George  435,  Jno.  456. 

Welden,  Anth.  479,  Peter  178. 

Welding,  John  422,  Saml.  218. 

Weldy,  Mr.  566,  Wm.  531. 

Welldon,  Wm.  428. 

Wellfleet,  Ja.  429,  James  456. 

Wellington,  James  452,  Natha.  228. 

Wellingworth,  Jon.  140. 

Wellman,  Joseph  345,  Richard  40,  109. 

Wellmay,  Alice  532. 

Wells,  Dan.  372,  Edward  166,  400, 
409,  Edmond  138,  Eliz.  258,  265, 
Francis  543,  Geo.  157,  Greg.  29,  241, 
327,  541,  565,  James  291,  Jon.  64, 
137,  John  90,  105,  318,  388,  425, 
436,  449,  544,  558,  Joseph  486, 
Lewis  453,  Mary  46,  56,  300,  301, 
426,  469,  492,  Mount  426,  Nich. 
404,  Pru.  303,  Richard  60,  71,  208, 
228,  292,  315,  316,  378,  453,  460, 
492,  528,  Robert  66,  340,  Sarah  546, 
Silv.  386,  Stephen  441,  468,  Tho. 
172,  199,  204,  282,  456,  535,  547, 
558,  Walter  150,  Wm.  41,  164,  190, 
199,  218,  355,  400  . 

Well,  the  Plackett,  a  place  called  70,  188. 

Welsh,  James  263,  John  257,  Mary  26, 
Nich.  26. 


Welshe,  Robt.  31. 

Welson,  Jone  348. 

Welton,  Margt.  345,  Thomas  329,  Wm. 
38,  167. 

Wench,  Henry  355. 

Wenefrith,  Jane  517. 

Wenet,  John  324. 

Wenham,  Wm.  476. 

Wenn,  John  366. 

Wenne,  Hen.  388. 

Wennell,  Richard  443. 

Wenters,  Crestlean  425. 

Wentworth,  Hen.  268,  Tho.  388. 

Werden,  Geo.  208. 

Wernner,  Tho.  32. 

Wesby,  John  131. 

Wescomb,  Geo.  185. 

Wescome,  Wm.  38. 

Wescott,  Ellen  523. 

Wesgate,  Ellen  332,  Henry  332. 

Wesh,  James  252. 

Weslike,  Ann  129. 

Wesson,  Eliza  183,  Mary  325. 

West,  Ann  185,  213,  214,  449,  Anthony 
185,  509,  550,  Col.  359,  Edw.  271, 
385,  Eliz.  275,  567,  Francis  9,  10,  18, 
70,  Geo.  194,  252,  345,  390,  Giles 
458,  Grace  38,  Henry  16,  190,  198, 
339,  Humphry  82,  140,  James  248, 
430,  554,  John  14,  21,  44,  54,  70, 
72,  80,  104,  119,  152,  160,  185,  212, 
213,  214,  232,  244,  249,  258,  268, 
295,  297,  336,  347,  359,  401,  403, 
407,  413,  450,  454,  528,  551,  567, 
Joane  270,  501,  Joseph  367,  Kath. 
185,  Marg.  468,  Mary  270,  339,  514, 
Peter  557,  Phillip  245,  Richard  33, 
72,  190,  253,  345,  435,  454,  521, 
Robert  38,  98,  111,  112,  113,  141, 
175,  198,  268,  339,  373,  523,  Susan 
448,  Susanna  268,  Tho.  190,  198, 
264,  276,  286,  426,  430,  455,  493, 
Toby  232,  286,  361,  Wm.  143,  339, 
376,  420,  427,  436,  447,  458,  523. 
525,  543,  545. 

Westake,  Jon.  133. 

Westall,  Richd.   197. 

Westbery,  Richd.  160. 

Westbrooke,  James  282. 

Westby,  Edward  525. 

Westerfield,  Jane  22. 

Westerhouse,  Adrian  294,  Barbery  294, 
Ledia  294,  Peter  294,  Wm.  294,  412, 
517. 

Westerin,  Andrew  158. 

Westerlin.  Martin  169. 

Westerlincke,  Martin  169,   243   . 


758 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Westgate,  James  425. 

Westhead,  Peter  171. 

Westhrop,  Dorothy  324. 

Westhrope,  John  250. 

Westinscott,   Margery  446. 

Westlock,  Ann  122,  John  406,  407. 

Westlocke,  John  324. 

Westly,  Ann  51,  Edw.  536. 

Weston,  Alex.  277,  Christo.  176,  Francis 

454,  Henry  375,  426,  Jam.  195,  John 

27,   45,    271,    375,   Jon.   62,   Mr.    16, 

Phillip   171,   274,  Rich.   58,  94,    196, 

277,  Thomas  24,  80,  220,  383. 
Westover,  place  called  52,  53,  59,  104, 

430. 
Westray,  Richard  433. 
Westrill,  James  237. 
Westropp,  John  201. 
Westwary,  Wm.  517. 
Westwell,  Robert  23. 
Westwood,   Robt.    148,   237,   Tho.   202, 

Wm.  61,   105. 
Westwray,  Wm.   569. 
Wethell,  Tho.  268. 
Wetherall,  Robt.  173,  203. 
Wetherbat,  Edwd.  459. 
Wetherhorne,  Edw.  397. 
Wetherley,  Mr.  343. 
Wetherlie,  Mr.  400. 
Wetherrell,   Ann    384,   Robt.    160,    294, 

297,  415. 
Wethersby,     Barthol.     164,     175,     258, 

Tho.  24. 
Wethersbye,   Bartholomew   105. 
Wetheasbye,  Mr.  159  . 
Wetherbve,  Tho.  80. 
Wetts,  Thomason  175. 
Weworth,  Wm.  284. 
Weyan,  Jon.  78. 
Weydon,   Humph.   178. 
Weyfield,  Phillip  340. 
Weymarke,  Margt.  167  . 
Weyne,  Sergt.  24. 
Weyr.  John  303  . 
Weyre,  John  291,  360,  368,  373. 
Weyanoake,  place  called  32,  50,  72,  74, 

86,  88,  150,  183,  203,  535,  542,  566. 
Weyanoake,  place  called  32.  50,  72,  74, 

86,  88,  150,  183,  203,  535,  542,  566. 
Weyanoake    Marsh    152,    Town    of   98, 

198,   (See  Towns). 
Weyanoake.  Territory  of  68. 
Whadsey,  Peter  45  . 
Whale,  Geo.  384,  400. 
Whaley,   Tohn  376. 
Whalle,  Geo.  305. 
Whallv,  Edw.  453. 


Whalps,  Leo.  250. 

Whaly,  John  241. 

Whalye,  Lewis  453. 

Wharton,  Geo.  150,  Tho.  361,  453,  547. 

Wheafeby,  James  200. 

Wheatley,  David  164,  217,  241,  Eliza. 
184,  Wm.  165. 

Wheatly,  Ellis  325,  John  202,  Lydia 
184,  William   102. 

Wheelden,  Robt.   350. 

Wheeley,  Tho.  272  . 

Wheeler,  Dorothy  22,  Edw.  134,  Elinor 
214,  382,  Francis  135,  214,  270,  382, 
Hester  5,  Hum.  366,  John  294,  Jone 
387,  Richd.  37,  66,  338,  477,  Robt. 
375,  426,  Tho.  40,  68,  74,  98,  103, 
118,  138,  145,  198,  202,  316,  456, 
555,  Wm.  38,  184,  234,  315. 

Wheler,  Francis  378,  Jane  558,  John 
388. 

Whenham,  Tho.  456. 

Wherwood,  Nich.  54. 

Wherry,  Robt.  142,  231. 

Whetherell,   Eliza.   294,    297. 

Whetle,  Robt.  36,  80. 

Whetson,  John  486. 

Whetston,  John  546. 

Whetstone,  Jno.  546. 

Whettam,  James  455. 

Wheydon,  Clement  49. 

Whidon,  Clement  203,  301,  499. 

Whiscomb,  Ben.  436. 

Whiskin,  Nicholas  491. 

Whiston,  John  464,  537. 

Whitacre,  Ann  51,  William  317. 

Whitaker,  Edw.  106,  113,  Georg  97, 
John  114. 

Whitbie,  Mr.  443. 

Whitby,  Danll.  241,  338,  Edw.  291, 
Jeffry  482,  Jno.  338,  Kath.  315,  Mr. 
403,  Richd.  300,  446,  Tho.  315,  Wm. 
158,  209,  258,  263,  300,  305,  350, 
555. 

Whitby's  old  landing,  443. 

Whitbye,  Wm.  229. 

Whitchurch,  Hen.  453. 

Whitcroft,  Jno.   531    . 

White,  Adry  385,  Alice  541,  Anne  192, 
220,  223,  276,  278,  280,  476,  530, 
Blanch  66,  Blanka  95,  Charles  79, 
121,  Cicily  256,  Daniell  446,  441, 
471,  487,  Edward  56,  121,  279,  553, 
Eliza.  56,  356,  403,  509,  550,  552, 
Francis  62,  182,  184,  222,  234, 
George  27,  34,  66,  78,  95,  125,  145, 
162,  165,  166,  168,  170,  180,  264, 
385,  432,  560,  Grace  194,  Guy  378, 


General  Index 


759 


Hanah  367,  447,  Henry  134,  144, 
146,  161,  183,  197,  239,  261,  426, 
428,  502,  525,  539,  James  133,  152, 
294,  393,  426,  Jasper  397,  Jeffery 
453,  Jeremiah  445,  Jon.  32,  80,  86, 
122,  230,  233,  240,  John  56,  105, 
107,  109,  HI,  117,  126,  128,  140, 
141,  145,  149,  154,  177,  192,  213, 
227,  230,  234,  261,  287,  292,  334, 
349,  385,  435,  447,  501,  502,  504, 
520,  525,  539,  556,  560,  569,  Joan 
233,  Jos.  213,  Judeth  529,  Richard 
529,  Kath.  129,  257,  Lawr.  150, 
Lewis    164,    Lucy    378,    Margt.    166, 

453,  Martin  385,  Mary  213,  261,  307, 
378,  436,  525,  Mathew  435,  Michaell 
204,  326,  425,  Mr.  127,  Morris  310, 
Murael  233,  Nath.  125,  153,  173, 
Neale  266,  513,  Niccodemus  29, 
Nicholas  40,   63,   82,   176,   397,  443, 

454,  Oliver  129,  Patrick  230,  Peter 
23,  66,  95,  207,  252,  287,  316,  352, 
397,  528,  530,  Phillip  133,  Ralph 
493,  Richd.  114,  119,  157,  173,  183, 
185,  213,  215,  221,  257,  300,  346, 
355,  358,  374,  378,  381,  403,  451, 
509,  516,  517,  524,  527,  545,  Robt. 
122,  253,  264,  290,  444,  480,  Rose 
441,  Saml.  456,  Simon  263,  Solomon 
447,  Step.  367,  Susan  445,  Theo.  482, 
Tho.  84,  85,  119,  176,  245,  247,  301, 
315,  329,  358,  385,  400,  451,  469, 
479,  482,  502,  537,  Tim.  476,  Wm. 
54,  66,  120,  140,  195,  214,  230,  262, 
272,  283,  287,  309,  313,  345,  355, 
397,  402,  445,  455,  510,  525,  526, 
536,  556,  558,  559,  375. 

Whitebone,  James  384. 

Whiteby,  Wm.  420. 

Whitechurch,  Hen.  454. 

Whitecraft,  Robt.  242. 

Whitefare,  Robt.   327. 

Whitehaire,   Robt.   538. 

Whitehand,  Georg  10. 

Whitehart,  Wm.  112. 

Whitehead,  Arth.  225,  Eliz.  493,  Fran. 

377,  George  23,  James  88,  Robt.  484, 

Tho.  232,  318,  Wm.  307. 
Whitehurst,  Richd.  179,   188,  222,   332, 

540,  564,  Wm.  50,  564. 
Whiteing,  James   144,  Peter  252,  Robt. 

254. 
Whitelige,  Robt.  349. 
Whitell,  Geo.  290. 
Whitelock,     Anne    278,    Thomas     319, 

376. 
Whiter,  Wm.  426. 


Whiteredge,  William  65    . 
Whiteside,  Hellin  521. 
Whitethorne,  Ann  23. 
Whitewell,  Eliz.  227. 
Whiteworth,  Alice  259,  Robt.  318. 
Whitfeild,  Eliz.  430,  Gilbert  78,   Rich. 

34,  Wm.  44  . 
Whithorne,  An.  541,  Arunges  282. 
Whiting,  Ann  144,  Chri.  51,  Edw.  316, 

James    30,    94,    144,    Owen    147,   Re- 
becca 30,  Richard  60,  Wm.  541,  555, 

557. 
Whitinge,  Edw.  352,  Tho.  233. 
Whitington,  Wm.  296. 
Whitle,  Geo.  197. 
Whitley,  Randall  94,  Richd.   167. 
Whitliffe,  Alice  194,  David  194,  Robt. 

194. 
Whitlock,    Ann    211,    Tho.    104,     190, 

192,  315,  397,  430,  442,  557. 
Whitlocke,  Tho.  202,  384. 
Whitloke,  Mary  465,  Thomas  429. 
Whitly,  David  241,  Jeffery  454,  482. 
Whitmore,    Mary   65,   Robt.    255,    Tho. 

456. 
Whitselwhite,  Will.  210. 
Whitson,  Ann  294. 
Whitsorrell,  Morrice  338  . 
Whittacre,  Capt.  8,  Isaac  464  . 
Whittaker,  Jno.  456. 
Whittecur,  Geo.  207. 
Whitter,  Tho.  329. 
Whitticar,  Wm.  471. 
Whitting,  Richd.  205. 
Whittingham,  Wm.  355. 
Whittington,    Eliza.    191,    Francis    191, 

Mary  294,  Susan  170,  Tho.  274,  Wm. 

170,  294,  414. 
Whittle,    An.    525,    James    344,    Robt. 

525. 
Whittson,  Dobson  369. 
Whitty,  Jno.  338,  409,  531,  Percy  427, 

Richard  428. 
Whitton,  Fra.  465. 
Whitway,  Edwd.  207. 
Whitwell,  Barneby  433. 
Whoman,  Jno.  519. 
Whone,  Ann  348. 
Whoop,  John  271. 
Whoorewood,  Nich.  24. 
Whorson,  Matt.  195. 
Whyting,  Tho.  304. 
Wiatt,  Geo.  161,  Wm.  280,  337. 
Wiccocomoco,    place   called:    248,    309 

350,    369,    383,    384,   400,   404,   462^ 

(See  Towns). 
Wichard,  James  302. 


760 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Wichkam   (or  Wickkam),  Jno.  435. 

Wickam,  Christian  514,  Jno.  501. 

Wickars,  Henry  462. 

Wicke,  Remor  328. 

Wickenfield,  Wm.  410. 

Wickham,  Xpian  565. 

Wicker,  Henry  281,  461. 

Wickers,  Henry  209. 

Wickes,  Stephen  430. 

Wicklesworth,  Wm.  80. 

Wicklife,  John  77. 

Wickliffe,  John  118,  134. 

Wicks,  Patriak  404. 

Wickwa  Bridge,  217. 

Wictor,  Mich.  268. 

Widnell,  Michaell  249. 

Wiere,  Jno.  344,  345. 

Wiffon,  Robt.  263. 

Wigg,  Ann  202,  Edward  87,  Robert 
102,  361,  Thomas  566,  Timothy  361, 
William  80,  102,  105,  107,  108,  124, 
126,  143,  295,  391,  453,  507. 

Wiggan,  Fra.  247  . 

Wiggen,  Martha  293    . 

Wiggin,  Jane  566. 

Wiggins,  Mary  401. 

Wigginton,  Jno.  525. 

Wiggmore,  Eliz.  444. 

Wiggs,  Eliza.  247,  277,  Mr.  394,   515. 

Wigmore,  Elias  78. 

Wignall,  Alex.  170,  329,  435,  Tho. 
170,  435,  Wm.  197,  384. 

Wignoll,  Margarett  91,  Wm.  290. 

Wight,  Marke  195,  Tho.  415,  497. 

Wightman,  Anto.  287. 

Wike,  Alex.  132. 

Wikell,  Sarah  391. 

Wilard,  Margtt.  562,  Nicholas  562. 

Wilbis,  Margtt.  567. 

Wilborne,  William  56. 

Wilbourn,  Sam.  294. 

Wilby,  John  337,  Tho.  370. 

Wilch,  Ann  167. 

Wilchin,  Rachell  295,  Richd.  295,  368. 

Wilcock,  Georg  73,  Wm.  262  . 

Wilcocke,  Tymothy  208. 

Wilcocks,  John  8,  50,  Jon.  240,  Math. 
309,  507,  Richd.  49,  Tho.  240. 

Wilcockes,  John  271. 

Wilcox,  Ann  539,  Cap.  9,  145,  Elianor 
162,  163,  Grace  139,  262,  Henry  309, 
322,  John  286,  298,  444,  Margt.  314, 
Mary  248,  Michaell  125,  139,  165, 
232,  262,  385,  Richard  97,  126, 
Roger  138,  Tho.  444,  Wm.  538. 

Wild  de,  Ann  353. 

Wild,   Dan.    291,    474,   486,    510,    518, 


Hanah  555,  Martin  377,  Mary  385, 
397,  Peter  345,  Robt.  117,  185,  253, 
288,   310,  474,    517,  Tho.   454,    524. 

Wildblood,  Jno.  185. 

Wilde,  Robt.  262. 

Wilder,  Edw.  273,  474. 

Wilden,  Richard  356. 

Wildes,  Wm.  '358. 

Wildey,  Wm.  358,  501. 

Wildge,  Robt.  190. 

Wildon,  Wm.  204. 

Wilds,  Daniel   377. 

Wildy,  Wm.   138,   358,   359,   531,   566. 

Wildyes,  Wm.  363. 

Wilford,  Edwd.  29,  Tho.  252,  365. 

Wilken,   Fra.   172. 

Wilkenson,  Anne  339,  James  302,  John 
339,  479,  Mar.  291,  Marm.  307, 
Mary  293,  Phill.  446,  Robt.  33,  Tho. 
291,  295,  305,  311,  313,  447,  558. 

Wilkerson,  Jno.  479. 

Wilkes,  Jno.  324,  Thomas  314,  530. 

Wilkeson,  James  508,  521,  Jno.  152. 

Wilkey,  Mary  248. 

Wilkin,  Wm.  404. 

Wilkins,  David  284,  Edw.  284,  Henry 
517,  Humph.  146,  Jeffry  425,  John 
46,  56,  66,  68,  84,  95,  162,  170,  225, 
353,  356,  Katherine  83,  108,  Mary 
558,  Mr.  152,  554,  Richd.  272,  276, 
293,  Roger  358,  Tho.  155,  Wm.  486. 

Wilkinson,  Antho.  221,  252,  Henry 
201,  James  207,  351,  Jervis  375, 
Joane  120,  John  79,  120,  149,  264, 
364,  390,  Joyce  302,  Mary  178,  430, 
Matt.  232,  Naomy  34,  52,  59,  Robt. 
118,  186,  Richd.  169,  Tho.  62,  82, 
144,  201,  238,  240,  326,  334,  361, 
375,  378,  432,  469,  William  34,  52, 
59,  112,  154,  165,  345. 

Wilks,  Jno.  180. 

Wilky,  Patrick  492. 

Willard,  Nicholas  557,  Richard  315, 
Wm.  433. 

Willblood,  Wm.   378. 

Willbourne,  Wm.  47. 

Willbrooke,  James  454,  Wm.  482. 

Willcox,  Capt.  79,  110. 

Willcoxe,  Michael  162. 

Willdey,  Wm.  501. 

Wille,  Anne  182,  Eliz.  282,  Eman.  282. 

Willeford,  William  103  . 

Willes,  Eliz.  316,  James  303. 

Willess,  Thomas  313. 

Willett,  Abraham  553,  David  304,  Edw. 
304,  Elizabeth  389,  Geo.  268,  Hen. 
123,    James    45,    66,    263,    446,    Jno. 


General  Index 


761 


248,  284,  312,  Peter  97,  185,  Robt. 
253,  Sarah  304,  Thomas  370. 

Willey,  Robert  104. 

Willford,  John  288,  Thomas  374. 

Williams,  Alexr.  568,  Alice  107,  An- 
drew  555,    Ann    26,    173,    199,    276, 

315,  352,  431,  481,  508,  Antho.  457, 
Chas.  195,  Christ.  93,  128,  142, 
Corn.  133,  Danl.  404,  David  204, 
216,  263,  304,  327,  341,  446,  556, 
Doris   391,  Dorothy  432,  Edm.   199, 

316,  352,  554,  Edwd.  24,  36,  54,  78, 

80,  128,  133,  162,  190,  252,  310, 
351,  352,  361,  378,  467,  492,  495, 
509,  554,  556,  557,  560,  Elias  359, 
Elinor  199,  236,  562,  Ellin  37,  65, 
Eliz.  209,  251,  304,  352,  365,  459, 
476,  502,  560,  Esebius  366,  Evan  28, 

81,  470,  Ezekell  428,  Fenet  440, 
Finolia  512,  Francis  221,  464,  Garnett 
191,  Geo.  207,  502,  Gilbert  229, 
Hanah  559,  Hannard  525,  Henry  45, 
46,  53,  101,  135,  231,  241,  249,  400, 
430,  546,  554,  Holland  41,  Hugh 
35,  197,  Humphry  88,  243,  510,  Ja. 
304,  James  208,  212,  222,  253,  258, 
304,  335,  443,  536,  Jane  164,  192, 
291,  322,  330,  351,  430,  469,  Jenkin 
182,  Jero.  441,  Jinkin  99,  Joan  191, 
201,  322,  562,  John  49,  61,  85,  92, 
106,  120,  125,  145,  146,  158,  160, 
166,  169,  174,  176,  181,  186,  189, 
195,  200,  208,  213,  214,  253,  256, 
263,  267,  271,  276,  296,  301,  304, 
307,  315,  322,  323,  329,  330,  338, 
344,  349,  352,  356,  357,  368,  369, 
373,  376,  378,  386,  388,  401,  403, 
405,  406,  407,  411,  413,  414,  419, 
433,  440,  441,  443,  459,  466,  479, 
481,  483,  488,  489,  490,  492,  503, 
506,  517,  519,  524,  526,  536,  545, 
549,  552,  553,  558,  559,  569,  Jona- 
than 526,  Jon.  54,  93,  134,  142,  144, 
234,  238,  Jost  334,  Judeth  128, 
Katherine  382,  Lewis  209,  467,  517, 
Mack  328,  Mar.  190,  Margaret  426, 
444,  468,  529,  541,  556,  Margery 
101,  Marke  427,  547,  Martha  541, 
549,  553,  Martin  282,  Mary  178,  188, 
240,  244,  265,  283,  286,  296,  383, 
393,  394,  401,  412,  429,  442,  445, 
450,  456,  466,  481,  482,  525,  533, 
536,  540,  544,  546,  547,  548,  559, 
561,  562,  563,  567,  Masser  190, 
Math.  289,  364,  389,  403,  454,  482, 
494,  565,  Michaell  112,  164,  Mr. 
443,    Morgan    li2,    150,     166,    192, 


336,  427,  493,  Morris  228,  333, 
Nicholas  89,  169,  267,  380,  487, 
Norman  32,  Norton  556,  559,  Obed. 
314,  497,  Oliv.  427,  Owen  204,  216, 
242,  286,  425,  555,  Pearsie  367, 
Perregrine  192,  Peter  549,  Phillip 
207,  246,  304,  Ra.  347,  Rach.  169, 
444,  Rice  268,  541,  Richard  40,  53, 
68,  93,  100,  128,  129,  133,  137,  144, 
169,  234,  241,  247,  301,  306,  315, 
323,  330,  380,  397,  451,  475,  491, 
499,  510,  537,  Robt.  120,  168,  183, 
Roger  26,  99,  133,  258,  295,  427, 
446,  Rowland  87,  370,  501,  Samuell 
181,  Sarah  164,  366,  Stephen  524, 
Susan  549,  554,  556,  557,  560,  Tem- 
perance 378,  Thomas  23,  32,  33,  60, 
66,  100,  103,  110,  120,  136,  147, 
171,  177,  178,  189,  203,  207,  213, 
1216,  231,  244,  260,  263,  278,  279, 
286,  299,  313,  314,  347,  361,  362, 
382,  391,  397,  404,  436,  440,  450, 
453,  454,  462,  466,  479,  497,  499, 
516,  527,  528,  535,  541,  560,  563, 
Walter  85,  404,  Wm.  82,  218,  224, 
260,  275,  298,  309,  449,  451,  454, 
459,  527,  539,  546,  Xpher.  508, 
Xpian.  173,  415. 

Williamson,  Alice  195,  An  245,  Andrew 
290,  Antho.  136,  509,  562,  David  69, 
110,  554,  555,  Edw.  203,  391,  524, 
Eliz.  427,  Francis  196,  Isaac  285, 
James  190,  191,  251,  277,  291,  298, 
310,  343,  353,  362,  384,  442,  489, 
495,  531,  Jeff.  257,  Joane  558,  Jon. 
144,  John  123,  Jos.  190,  Mathew  37, 
63,  295,  317,  Margarett  429,  527, 
Mary  429,  Mr.  332,  Peter  524,  Richd. 
125,  229,  Robert  79,  558,  561,  Roger 
353,  Susanna  26,  Tho.  179,  476,  478, 
527,  545,  Wm.  245,  441,  560. 

Willie,  Wm.  366. 

Willimot,  James  267. 

Willinger,  Antho.  208. 

Willington,  Mary  253,  Michaell  526. 

Willins,  John  371. 

Willis,  Abigail  386,  Ann  255,  282,  362, 
512,  515,  Daniell  567,  Edw.  26,  149, 
421,  Eliz.  50,  59,  86,  Francis  188, 
404,  522,  547,  565,  Godfry  300, 
Henry  265,  412,  463,  James  181, 
207,  210,  234,  256,  430,  Jane  263, 
281,  500,  John  141,  201,  282,  336, 
339,  385,  433,  465,  483,  Joseph  120, 
Margery  300,  Margt.  567,  Mary  369, 
382,  425,  541,  Rachell  266,  378, 
Randall   453,   Richd.   207,   Ruth   453, 


762 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Sarah  549,  Stephen  527,  Tho.  74, 
80,  99,  150,  244,  325,  377,  385,  498, 
507,  Walter  70,  103,  115,  Wm.  294, 
,429,  486. 

Willison,  Ed.  564. 

Willmod,  Rich.  370 

Willmott,  Jno.  555. 

Willmouth,  Bart.  536. 

Willmude,  Marg  331. 

Willom,  Eliz.  512. 

Willott,  Richd  256. 

Willoughby,  Alice  302,  Eliz.  302,  374, 
Fr.  250,  John  254,  349,  Peter  29, 
Robt  453,  Thomas  10,  54,  84,  92, 
112,  119,  134,  302. 

Willoughbie  Jacob  461,  476,  Tho.  532. 

Willow,  Merra  134. 

Willowby,  Kath.  291. 

Willowbye,  Thomas  34. 

Wills,  Abigail  361,  Barnaby  511,  Danll. 
404,  Edw.  272,  374,  486,  512,  Eliz. 
93,  Henry  370,  John  272,  Kath.  272, 
Mary  531,  Mich.  375,  467,  468, 
Nich.  425,  Susana  272,  Tho.  24,  465, 
Xtopr.  562. 

Willsford,  Mary  354. 

Willshaw,  John  135. 

Willshire,  Jno.  446. 

Willson,  Edward  354,  Eliza.  195,  Gab- 
riell  195,  Henry  73,  293,  James  373, 
Jeffry  293,  Mary  378,  Robert  176, 
355,  Richard  370,  Tho.  164,  357, 
Wm.  172,  337. 

Willus,  Sarah  566. 

Willy,  Joan  337. 

Wilmot,  Ann  203,  286,  Edwd.  28,  81, 
516,  Jane  557,  Jo.  557,  Mary  557, 
Sarah  557,  Tho.  178,  355. 

Wilnutt,  Susan  452. 

Wilox,  John  286. 

Wiloxes,  John  285. 

Wilsford,  Bridget  236,  Tho.  221,  229, 
235,  236,  262,  312,  345,  375,  379, 
501. 

Wilshere,  Wm.  63. 

Wilshin,  Richd  416. 

Wilshire,  Wm.  37. 

Wilson,  Alice  165,  482,  Ann  508,  526, 
567,  Arth.  172,  Daniell  519,  Edw. 
345,  448,  561,  Ellen  228,  508,  Eliza. 
207,  468,  501,  Gabriel  243,  270, 
Geo.  181,  265,  351,  Giles  342,  Grace 
411,  441,  Hardrop  563,  Henry  53, 
238,  276,  293,  440,  485,  501,  521, 
524,  535,  Hugh  344,  Isaack  454, 
James  180,  255,  268,  275,  302,  342, 
393,  459,  464,  467,  483,  516,  561,  John 


117,  177,  178,  249,  278,  290,  345, 
499,  508,  515,  516,  519,  537,  556, 
558,  Joan  312,  Jon.  231,  239,  Jude 
427,  Laur.  57,  Luke  183,  Mar.  315, 
Margtt.  463,  548,  Mary  173,  192, 
203,  386,  449,  547,  Mathew  339, 
Nich.  375,  425,  468,  Peter  195, 
Richd.  268,  Robt.  260,  262,  263,  280, 

343,  359,  370,  395,  471,  Sanders 
327,  Sarah  501,  Su  362,  Susan  249, 
Thos.  193,  254,  288,  325,  357,  390, 
434,  445,  Wm.   258,   261,   274,   293, 

344,  362,  388,  390,  394,  494,  544, 
547,  556,  Xpian.  176,  Xtop.  397. 

Wilsonn,  Alice  108,  Edward  108,  Eliz. 

37,    138,   Gabriel  41,   Henry   53,    73, 

109,    121,   James    22,   John   27,    117, 

Mary  30,  Nath.  150,  Richard  43,  77, 

Sarah  253. 
Wilton,  Henry  567,  John  79,  454,  Wm. 

213,  469,   558. 
Wimbleton,  Eliz.  241. 
Wimpey,  John  315. 

Win,  Jon.  237,  John  366,  Stephen  396. 
Winard,  Tho.  45,  62. 
Wincen,  Wm.  270. 
Winch,  Tho.  552. 
Winchell,  Robert  314. 
Winchester,  Awdrey  112,  John  40,   59, 

112,  Theodor  112,  Jon.  58. 
Winchett,  Ja.  180. 
Winchly,  Mary  275. 
Wincill,   Robt.   160. 
Winckle,  Anth  501. 
Wincock,  Dorothy  239. 
Windam,  Edward  23. 
Windell,  Edw.  201. 
Winders,  Jane  133. 
Windeth,  Fickler  157. 
Windett,  Edward  93,  Ficler  274. 
Windley,   Robt.  407. 
Windmill,  Christopher  12,  19,  156. 
Windon,    Howell    565. 
Window,  Howell  565. 
Windsmore,  Michael  299. 
Wines,  Enoch  549. 
Windsor,  Jno.  456. 
Winfield,  Wm.  216. 
Wing,  Rich.  456. 
Wingate,  Edw.  387. 
Wingatt,  Jno.  554,  Roger  171. 
Wingfield,  Thomas  49,  Xph.  364. 
Winifrett,  Wm.  44,  62. 
Winkeford,  Jos.  144. 
Winkle,  Xphian.  333. 
Winley,   David   28,   77,  Jone  77,   Robt. 

267. 


General  Index 


763 


Winly,  Nash  266,  Nath.  315. 

Winn,   Ann    200,    261,    286,    338,   Eliz. 

286,   338,  Hugh  121,   125,   168,  Tho. 

279,  290,  370,  395,  Will.  552. 
Winnall,  Jon.  28. 

Winne,  Eliz.  346,  Hugh  346,  Kath.  279. 
Winnfrye,  Wm.  106. 
Winshaw,  Roger  276. 
Winshew,  Constant  336. 
Winslow,  Tho.  485. 
Winster  Fax,  land  of  178. 
Winthrop,  Paul  453. 
Wintell,  Charees  395. 
Winter,    Ann    39,     183,    Charles    395, 

John  258,  Mary  453,   542,  Rich.  77, 

182,     Robt.     187,     221,     516,     Roger 

359,  Tho.  388,  Wm.  28 
Winter  Harbor,  place  called   223,   244, 

265,  274,  285,  289,  417,  438 
Winterne,  Charles  370,  375. 
Wintercome,  James  483. 
Winterton,  Marg.  198,  Wm.  339. 
Wirrall,  Edw.  297. 
Wiscaponson,  place  called  75. 
Wise,  Arthur  442,  Edward  393,  Grizell 

235,   Hannah    327,   Henry   543,   John 

327,  413,  414,  480,   559,  Mary  437, 

527,    556,    Nicholas    99,    343,    Tho. 

464,  Wm.  543,  558. 
Wiseman,   Edwd.   396,  John  275,  Mary 

538,  540,  563,  Rich.  527,  Robt.  112. 
Wiser,  Joyce  151 
Wishart,  Patrick  92,  319. 
Wisson,  Robt.  263. 
Witby,  Wm.  293. 
Witcher,  Hen.  134. 
Withall,  Mary  391. 
Witham,  Jno.  501. 
Witherby,  David  43. 
Witheredge,  William  65 
Withers,    Fr.    28,    83,    331,   Henry   540, 

Jon.  23,  142,  John  92,  312,  315,  359, 

383,  489,  536,  Stephen  23,  Wm.  383. 
Withey,  August.  411,   444,  468,   Isham 

468. 
Withnell,  Xtop.  520. 
Witney,  Thomas  26 
Wittaker,  Robt.  507,  Sara  551. 
Wittingington,  Wm.  131,  528. 
Witts,  Wm.  337. 
Witty,  James  566. 
Witwell,  Barnsby  433. 
Wixe  ,Tho.  153. 
Woad,  Eliz.  529,  James  500,  Jno.  500, 

Tho.   529. 
Woaker,  Lawrence  40. 
Woford,  Nich.  427. 


Woldridge,  John  167,  Timo.  190. 

Wolfe,  Geo.  353,  Rice  337,  Richd.  167, 
Robt.  280,  476,  Wm.  269,  335,  342. 

Wolfe's  Snare,  the  107,  528,  a  place 
called. 

Wollard,  Saml.  206. 

Wolly,  Wm.  172. 

Wolman,  Richd.  182. 

Wolmesley,  Tho.  342,  548. 

Wolmsly,  Roger  328. 

Wolstone,  Saml.  263. 

Womball,  Tho.  509. 

Wombnell,   (or  Wombwell)   Capt.  318. 

Wombrell,  Thomas  538. 

Wombwell,  Ann  427,  Thomas  89,  141, 
151,   176,  202,  221. 

Womesly,  Thomas  548  . 

Womsley,  Roger  475. 

Wond,  Jane  147. 

Wonell,  James  203. 

Wongan,  Isaac  125. 

Wood,  Abraham  88,  95,  110,  111,  137, 
255,  301,  388,  411,  Alex.  393,  517, 
Arthur  23,  66,  Charles  505,  Edw. 
166,  172,  181,  448,  455,  505,  Eliz. 
230,  363,  444,  476,  515,  529,  Fran. 
520,  Geo.  386,  397,  Henry  5,  23, 
184,  430,  Hugh  519,  539,  James  500, 
526,  Jane  281,  445,  501,  Joane  332, 
John  31,  45,  51,  132,  199,  228,  233, 
246,  269,  292,  335,  344,  348,  350, 
351,  352,  353,  362,  363,  366,  375, 
381,  388,  398,  401,  403,  404,  420, 
430,  453,  461,  491,  500,  507,  514, 
529,  531,  547,  Jon.  34,  Kath.  204, 
216,  Leo.  Ill,  Marg.  209,  Major  247, 
Mary  184,  386,  404,  430,  448,  453, 
503,  Marg.  288,  Math.  493,  Paul  384, 
Peter  173,  215,  266,  R.  287,  Ralph 
61,  557,  Richard  433,  Robt.  133, 
Silvanus  339,  Stafford  486,  Susan 
502,  Thomas  86,  89,  172,  260,  290, 
300,  355,  393,  399,  404,  426,  486, 
500,  506,  529,  Walter  144,  267,  286, 
412,  443,  Wm.  86,  112,  121,  125, 
192,  194,  198,  228,  229,  315,  392, 
393,  426,  468,  513,  Xpian.  547,  Xpr. 
403. 

Woodall,  John  47,  79,  85,  Tho.  40, 
109. 

Woodars,  Wm.   302. 

Woodart,  Rich.  427. 

Woodbridge,  Elinor  404,  Eliza.  135, 
223,  442,  Mary  370,  527,  Paul  440, 
485,  521,  527. 

Woodby,  John  506,  Robert  339. 


764 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Woodcock,  Georg  50,  John  114,  Tho. 
24. 

Woodcocke,  Jon.  81,  John  108. 

Woodcroft,  Robt.  190,  Robt.  293. 

Wooddard,  Christo.  33. 

Wooderd,  Mary  346. 

Woodfield,  Tho.  264,  286,  455. 

Woodford,  Jon.  82,  Phill.  404,  Ralph 
462,  Roger  261,  305,  Richd.  216. 

Woodgate,  Wm.  35,  100. 

Woodgear,  John  254,  349. 

Woodham,  Tho.  341. 

Woodhouse,  Hamond  352,  535,  Henry 
181,  287,  Jon.  232,  Jno.  528,  Mr. 
276,  328,  Nich.  300,  Tho.  153,  176, 
179,  245,  313,  317,  347,  366,  375, 
488,  491,  519,  562. 

Woodhowse,  Elizabeth  57,  Henry  57, 
90,  98,  Mary  57,  Tho.  129,  150,  Wm. 
136 

Woodington,  Chas.  344,  346,  409,  430, 
John  299,   346,   362,   383,   386,   409. 

Woodland,  William  370. 

Woodley,  Capt.  25. 

Woodlief,  John  226. 

Woodliffe,  Capt.  60,  157,  John  93,  130, 
Martin  404. 

Woodlife,  John  68. 

Woodman,  Richd.   182. 

Woodmint,  Mary  261. 

Woodnoale,  Henry  526. 

Woodnutt,  Mary  262  . 

Woodroofe,  Gran.  279. 

Woodrow,  Joseph  212,  282. 

Woodruff,  Jno.  446,  Richard  144. 

Woodruff e,  Robt.  171. 

Woods,  Eliz.  460,  Hugh  330,  Jno.  411. 

Woodson,  John  203,  334. 

Woodstock,  Ellinor  377,  Robt.  250. 

Woodsworth,  Richd.  245. 

Woodwar,  John  314. 

Woodward,  Christopher  54,  69,  140, 
Dorothy  54,  69,  169,  Eliz.  546,  John 
306,  330,  368,  Joseph  368,  Katherine 
426,  Margaret  54,  69,  Nicholas  425, 
Philarete  426,  Saml.  206,  508,  Tho- 
mas 391,  420,  427,  428,  Vincent  35, 
Wm.  143,  388,  390,  533,  534,  Xpher. 
428. 

Woodward's   Labour,   place  called   478. 

Woody,  Robt.  242,  243,  327. 

Woodyard,  Tho.  280,  Vincent  35. 

Woodyard,  place  called  the  20,  124, 
299. 

Woodyer,  Jno.  455. 

Woofe,  Dorothy  287. 

Woofed,  Nich.  119. 


Woolard,  Ann  206,  Geo,  206. 

Woolaston,  Geo.  215. 

Woolbridge,  Elizabeth  357. 

Woolcot,  John  182. 

Woold,  Kath.  399. 

Wooldrige,  Tho.   144. 

Wooles,  John  298,  Robt.  37. 

Woolest,  Tho.  277. 

Wooleston,  Ann  107. 

Wooley,  William  65. 

Woolfe,  Michael  157,  Wm.  47,  56. 

Woolgate,  Sarah  109. 

Woolierine,  Humphry  70. 

Wollerton,  Robert  380. 

Woolley,  Wm.  45,  82. 

Woolly,  William  100,  248. 

Woolman,  Richd.  174,  182,  283. 

Woolmer,  Tho.  332. 

Woolock,  Henry  558. 

Woolrich,  Joane  34,  Timo.  199. 

Woolritch,  Wm.  34. 

Wools,  Saml.  31. 

Woorgen,  Isaac  50. 

Woorke,  William  65. 

Wooton,   Eliza.    218,   Richd.    169,    210, 

523. 
Wootton,  Richard  92,  142,  Wm.  112. 
Woover,  Robert  102. 
Worden,  Wm.  404. 
Worgan,  Isaac  276. 
Worke,  Wm.   114. 
Workeman,  Jno.  349  . 
Worker,  John   190. 
Workman,  John  254,  Richd.   149,   172, 

294,  William  312. 
Worldridge,  Geo.   152. 
Worlech,  Jno.  404. 
Worleich,   Geo.   258,   Henry   186,   John 

195,  Mary  186,  Wm.  158,  186,   195, 

380. 
Worleidge,  Wm.  148. 
Worley,  Eliz.  262. 
Worlich,  Wm.  358. 
Worlidge,  Mr.  38. 
Worlitch,  Wm.  39. 
Wormeley,  Agatha  182,  Capt.  132,  156, 

164,  239,  256,  Coll.  215,  Christopher 

99,  200,   206,  Mary  182,  Ralph  181, 

182,    200,    206,    215,    220,    Xtopher. 

182. 
Wormley,    Capt.    185,    Christopher    91, 

115,  118,  Ralph  288. 
Wormenton,  Jno.  546. 
Wormewell,  Mary  34. 
Worminger,  William  94. 
Wormington,  Jno.  310. 
Wormslend,  Jno.  458. 


General  Index 


765 


Wormsley,  Roger  170. 

Wornall,  Robert  105. 

Worrall,  Wm.  385. 

Worrell,  Wm.  383. 

Worricke,  place  called  334. 

Worshipp,  Magdalin  482,  Pru.  281, 
Walter  115. 

Worsley,  Henry  217. 

Worsnam,  Geo.  238,  556,  Wm.  238, 
239,  556. 

Worster,  Richard  28. 

Worth,  Ann  381,  Mary  311,  Peter  304, 
Roger  263. 

Wortham,  John  378. 

Worthing,  Richd.  264. 

Worthington,  Jno.  538. 

Worthy,  Dammaris  425. 

Wortman,  Ann  147,  Jon.  147,  Mary 
147,  Tho.  147. 

Worton,  Jno.  512. 

Worts,  Mary  516,  Wm.  541. 

Wosencroft,  Mandelin  (or  Maudeiin) 
126. 

Woster,  Richd.  156. 

Wosye,  Ann  356. 

Wotten,  Jenken  294. 

Wotter,  Eliz.  153. 

Wotton,  John  388,  Mary  567,  Rebecca 
430,  Wm.  244. 

Wottson,  Wm.  298. 

Wouden,  Jno.  555. 

Would,  Margarett  435. 

Wovell,  James  203. 

Wrack,  Miles  453. 

Wragg,  Benj.   140,  Wm.  302. 

Wranton,  Wm.  383. 

Wrath,  Edw.  454,  James  453. 

Wrauton,  Wm.  383. 

Wray,  Jon.  10,  Jno.  375,  395,  548, 
Thomas  38,  42. 

Wren,  Eliz.  403,  James  184,  234. 

Wrench,  Ann  129. 

Wrenn,  Fra.l96,Nicho.263,Thomas  102. 

Wright,  Abram  403,  547,  Alexander 
546,  Antho.  202,  Arthur  547,  David 
311,  Edw.  189,  225,  258,  468,  Eliza- 
beth 59,  244,  291,  435,  509,  Fra. 
233,  302,  Gilbert  289,  Giles  218,  313, 
Henry  199,  James  453,  Jane  73,  117, 
145,  559,  Jesper  431,  Jon.  31,  Joane 
252,  258,  316,  352,  John  47,  98, 
116,  118,  119,  143,  167,  194,  198, 
256,  276,  290,  300,  384,  428,  566, 
Martha  292,  325,  352,  Mary  450, 
Mr.  569,  Phillis  193,  Phil.  512,  Roger 
36,  569,  Richd.  38,  50,  198,  219,  260, 
375,   401,   434,   442,   492,   Robert   8, 


133,  291,  322,  330,  370,  395,  Samll. 
188,  Sarah  509,  Symon  74,  Tea.  296, 
Thomas  21,  27,  166,  172,  195,  202, 
217,  228,  234,  238,  269,  297,  364, 
384,  424,  429,  463,  466,  489,  509, 
514,  526,  Wm.  61,  73,  117,  166,  170, 
268,  277,  291,  292,  314,  324,  326, 
327,  338,  392,  393,  453,  454,  456, 
482,  500,  524,  527,  529,  541,  543, 
547,  548,  568,  Win.  180,  Xpher.  395. 

Wrightwell,  John  251. 

Wring,  Samll.  452. 

Wrist,  Mutton  328. 

Wristone,  Nath.  244. 

Writt,  Edw.  47,  John  22. 

Wrong,  Mary  483. 

Wroth,  Wm.  506. 

Wroughton,  Wm.  439,  478,   510,   526. 

Wrych,  Rich.  28. 

Wrye,  Peter  128. 

Wyaneford,  Dorothy  187. 

Wyat,  Wm.  229,  240,  241. 

Wyatt,  Andrew  294,  Ann  288,  Anth. 
430,  534,  Edward  398,  402,  523,  537, 
554,  Edwin  148,  Francis  1,  2,  16,  25, 
67,  71,  86,  118,  119,  123,  126,  145, 
148,  177,  Geo.  160,  161,  402,  Henry 
126,  John  389,  Martin  374,  Ralph 
95,  Richd.  141,  178,  427,  553,  Robert 
110,  433,  Thos.  131,  287,  306,  414, 
482,  520,  553,  Wm.  276,  283,  284, 
306,  307,  309,  310,  328,  379,  494, 
520,  522. 

Wye,  Geo.  146,  191,  Roger  554,  Walter 
192. 

Wyere,  John  299,  306. 

Wyes,  Robert  354. 

Wygood,  Kath.  146. 

Wyld,  Jon.  246. 

Wylds,  Daniel  311  . 

Wyn,  Anth.  428. 

Wyne,  Jon.  73. 

Wynell,  Wm.  164. 

Wyner,  James  348. 

Wynn,  Anne  270,  Christopher  90,  Gar- 
rett 166,  Hugh  16,  74,  81,  115,  118, 
142,  Mathew  49,  Richd.  264. 

Wynter,  Tho.  304  . 

Wyre,  John  293. 

Wyse,  John  327. 

Wywell,  Wm.  164. 

Wyyon,  Antho.  54. 


Yallop,  Robt.  465,  483. 
Yardley,   Anne   264,    Col.    269,    Francis 
179,  Geo.  226. 


766 


Cavaliers  and  Pioneers 


Yardlie,  Col.  415. 

Yardly,  Argoll  289,  549,  555,  Capt. 
173,  251,  Fra.  296. 

Yarmouth,  place  called  119. 

Yarnell,  Tho.  509. 

Yarnar,  Ann  171,  191. 

Yarratt,  424. 

Yarrett,  Adam  360,  459,  461,  463, 
Wm.  118,  126,  168,  191,  202,  304, 
319,  346,  350,  390,  430,  439,  503, 
519. 

Yartest,  John  226. 

Yateman,  Wm.  213. 

Yates,  James  264,  316,  345,  Johanna 
273,  415,  547,  Joane  51,  106,  270, 
Jon.  35,  100,  John  38,  51,  72,  106, 
111,  157,  184,  288,  319,  355,  529, 
546,  Henry  37,  65,  Margaret  184, 
Mary  38,  156,  461,  483,  Rebecca 
541,  Richard  51,  106,  479,  Robt.  35, 
100,  276,  Saml.  280,  358,  Steeven 
282,  Wm.  541. 

Yealke,  Tho.  160. 

Yeardley,  Argoll  81,  96,  126,  Francis 
81,  Georg  7,  10,  11,  18,  50,  70,  96, 
126. 

Yeardly,  Argoll  136,  Georg  2,  4,  8,  29, 
44,  68,  88,  109. 

Yearkey,  Jenkin  347. 

Yearwood,  Wm.  465. 

Yeates,  James  350. 

Yelding,  Wm.  426. 

Yellow,  Eliz.  269,  Marg.  275. 

Yenny,  Robt.  153. 

Yeo,  Capt.  234,  Clare  258,  Coll.  481, 
Heugh  555,  Hugh  259,  297,  321, 
418,  513,  John  61,  452,  Lea.  506, 
Leonard  62,  224,  258,  Mr.  249,  360, 
Robt.  201,  237,  292,  351,  446,  500, 
510,  531,  Step.  357. 

Yeocomoco,  place  called  246,  309,  325, 
357. 

Yeoman,  Cesar  264,  James  329,  Tho. 
72. 

Yeomans,  Amy  362,  Cesser  286,  412, 
Doro.  467,  Edw.  261,  270,  288, 
Georg  32,  103,  Mary  457,  506,  Xtop. 
454. 

Yeomen:    3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  11,  71. 

Yeowell,  Thomas  335. 

Yepe,  John  70. 

Yetman,  Rosamar  56,  Rosomae  46. 

Yoe,  Robt.  297,  Wm.  297. 

Yoell,  Mrs.  371. 

Yong,  Alice  434,  Mary  427,  Tho.  528. 

Yonge  de,  John  387. 

Yongue,  Robert  334. 


York,  John  180. 

Yorke,  Ann  108,  Charles  525,  Edw.  23, 
66,  Eliz.  291,  405,  Katherine  40,  69. 

Yorke,  156,  194. 

Yorke  Court,  173,  264. 

Yorke  Plantation,  161,  164,  Yorke 
Ridge  244. 

Yorkshire,  Kath.   240. 

Yorkesheire,   Lawrence   369- 

Youall,  Thos.  245. 

Youel,  Tho.  237. 

Youell,  Mrs.  435,  Richd.  352,  Tho. 
352,  442. 

Youl,  Math.  440,  Tho.  237,  246,  249, 
Wm.  492. 

Youle,  Thomas  315. 

Young,  Ailce  188,  445,  And.  497,  Ann 
396,  483,  484,  Antho.  176,  526, 
Arthur  555,  Christo.  47,  92,  Ciceley 
149,  Cornelius  506,  Da.  484,  Dorcas 
548,  Dorothy  51,  Dilly  156,  Edward 
40,  94,  393,  457,  485,  517,  563, 
Edwin  127,  Ellis  129,  Francis  120, 
450,  Georg  548,  Gowyn  481,  Jacob 
500,  James  392,  510,  568,  Jane  377, 
John  108,  257,  405,  429,  432,  459, 
464,  481,  Leo.  487,  Marma.  466, 
Martha  212,  Mary  396,  399,  428, 
440,  484,  510,  Minion  483,  Mrs. 
269,  Pharoah  77,  147,  Phill.  430, 
Rich.  25,  51,  69,  77,  90,  127,  145, 
147,  162,  198,  462,  488,  501,  536, 
Robt.  110,  117,  255,  256,  258,  281, 
Sam.  296,  484,  485,  Step.  169,  Susan 
512,  Tho.  148,  225,  361,  364,  391, 
420,  481,  483,  510,  Vincent  470, 
Walter  561,  William  55,  130,  391, 
393,  412,  432,  464,  469,  475,  486, 
494,  500,  501,  516,  Xpher.  465,  514. 

Younge,  Ann  302,  Joane  245,  John  265, 
288,  367,  369,  506,  Renold  266,  Rice 
230,  Robt.  303,  358,  368,  370,  Sam. 
357,  Stephen  117,  Tho.  293,  326,  336. 

Youngman,  Jno.  430. 

Yowell,  Ann  315,  319,  Tho.  206,  219, 
260,  297,  304,  315,  319,  William  315. 

Yowens,  John  255. 

Yowers,  John  255. 

Yowill,  Ann  207,  Tho.  207,  Wm.  207. 

Yowin,  John  206. 


Zacher,  Manus   119. 
Zaines,  Wm.  492. 
Zaizes,  John  519. 
Zamis,  John  519. 
Zouch,  John  90,  137,  554. 


Addenda  767 


Addenda 


CORRECTIONS 

Page     46     3rd  Line:    Under  Thomas  Gaskins:  olf  should  be  old  plantation. 
Page  137     5th  Line:    Under  Abraham  Wood:   inculding  should  be  including. 
Page  139     3rd  Line:    Under  John  Ewens:  Bristal  should  be  Bristoll. 
Page  201  Under  Thomas  Wilkinson:   18  Oct.,  1650,  page  257. 

Page  203      1st  Line:    Under  John  Holmswood:  should  be  Holmewood. 
Page  203   15th  Line:    Under  Stephen  Hamelin:  Janos  Alport  should  be  Jonas. 
Page  203   17th  Line:    Under  Stephen  Hamelin:  Jab.  Robinson  should  be  Gab. 
Page  203   19th  Line:    Under    Stephen    Hamelin:     Edward    Thurston    should    be 

Thruston. 
Page  216     last  Line:    Under  Anthony  Johnson:  Jno.  Gesorroro  should  be  Gesorrow. 
Page  362   10th  Line:    Under  Nicholas  Jernew:   Gilbert  Coop  should  be  Cooper. 
Page  368     5th  Line:    Under  Lt.  Col.  Walker:  John  Smith  should  be  Smithy. 
Page  427     8th  Line:    Under  Wm.  Jennings:    Samll.  Henricke  should  be  Henrike 
Page  430  12th  Line:    Under  Richd.   Webley   et   als:    Fritzwith   Parsly   should   be 

Frizwith. 
Page  431     last  Line:    Under  Richd.  Webley  et  als:    Symon  Culberton  should  be 

Tubberron. 


ADDITIONS  TO  INDEX 

Page  50  4rh  Line:  Under  Mrs.  Eliz.  Srephens:  Flowerdeu  Hundred. 

Page  202  lasr  Line:  Under  Edward  Knighr:  Richahock  Parh. 

Page  513  5rh  Line:  Under  John  Beachamp  er  als:  Col.  Owins  Quarrer. 

Page  513  7rh  Line:  Under  John  Beachamp  er  als:  Cow  Taile  Quarrer  Run. 

Page  538  lasr  Line:  Under  Wm.  Crump  er  als:  Mary  Underwood. 

Page  539  3rd  Line:  Under  Henry  Whire:  John  Urron. 

Page  556  18rh  Line:  Under  Major  Thos.  Walker:    Arrhur  Upshorr. 

Page  250  5rh  Line:  Under  Joseph  Croshaw:  Ricohack  Parh. 

Negroes:    23,  25,  26,  30,  31,  32,  33,  35,  41,  45,  46,  54,  56,  61,  62,  65,  66,  69, 

73,  81,  83,  84,  94,  96,  97,  99,  101,  102,  104,  105,  109,  112,  113,  115,  118,  120, 

121,  129,  130,  132,  133,  135,  139,  141,  146,  148,  152,  154,  158,  169,  170,  173, 

181,  182,  185,  190,  195,  199.  200,  208,  210,  213,  214,  215,  216,  218,  220,  221, 

235,  237,  240,  245,  247,  249,  251,  254,  258,  259,  260,  261,  262,  263,  264,  265, 

267,  269,  270,  275,  276,  278,  279,  281,  282,  286,  288,  289,  291,  293,  296,  297, 

298,  300,  301,  304,  305,  307,  311,  313,  315,  316,  318,  322,  324,  328,  335,  336, 

338,  339,  346,  349,  350,  355,  358,  361,  362,  363,  367,  369,  373,  374,  375,  378, 

385,  386,  387,  390,  391,  392,  394,  395,  396,  397,  399,  400,  401,  403.  404,  406, 

411,  413,  414,  428,  429,  435,  437,  438,  439,  441,  443,  444,  446,  450,  451,  459, 

460,  462,  463,  465,  466,  468,  472,  475,  476,  479,  481,  484,  492,  493,  498,  499, 

500,  508,  511,  512,  514,  517,  518,  523,  525,  526,  527,  528,  529,  530,  532,  536, 
537,  542,  547,  548,  549,  551,  553,  554,  558,  559,  564,  568. 

Servanrs:  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  11,  15,  16,  17,  21,  22,  25,  26,  27,  28,  29,  30,  31,  32, 
33,  34,  35,  36,  37,  38,  40,  41,  42,  43,  45,  46,  47,  50,  51,  52,  53,  55,  58,  59,  60, 
61,  63,  64,  65,  66,  61,  69,  70,  72,  73,  75,  76,  77,  78,  79,  81,  83,  84,  85,  87,  88, 
89,  90,  92,  93,  97,  99,  100,  102,  106,  107,  110,  114,  117,  119,  122,  124,  125, 
126,  127,  128,  129,  132,  133,  135,  136,  137,  138,  144,  156,  166,  213,  219,  226, 
230,  254,  261,  272,  276,  287,  304,  315,  330,  333,  340,  348,  349,  363,  385,  411, 
451,  516  521. 


Of  this,  the  First  Edition, 

One  Thousand  Copies  have  been  printed, 

and  this  Copy  is 


No.  ?&3 


.    ■:;       ^  ■■'■:-.;;.i!.v;^:;;s 


UNIVERSITY  OF  ILLINOIS-URBANA 

■m  1N894C  C0Q1  V001 

CAVALIERS  AND  PIONEERS  RICHMOND  VA. 


mini 


1 1  ii  hi  i  ii  n  !'ii  in  i  hi  1 1 

3  0112  025291482 


