# IIIFScribe Transcript

## Document Information

- **Title**: HCFC_Colonial Landgrants and Their Owners or Tenants
- **Attribution**: Unknown Source
- **Description**: Colonial Landgrants and Their Owners or Tenants
- **License**: Unknown License
- **Total Pages in Original**: 43

## Additional Metadata

- **Title**: Colonial Landgrants and Their Owners or Tenants
- **Type**: ["Text"]
- **Subject**: ["Falls Church, VA","United States History Colonial period, ca. 1600-1775"]
- **Rights**: All reproductions from the Mary Riley Styles Public Library Falls Church History Collection are by default for personal, one-time "fair use" in accordance with United States copyright law (Title 17, U.S. Code). The copyright of certain materials in the Falls Church History Collection is not held by the library itself. The individual requesting any reproduction is solely responsible for ensuring that permission for use has been properly obtained. Use the following attribution when citing: "Mary Riley Styles Public Library, Falls Church History Collection, Falls Church, VA." Mary Riley Styles Public Library reserves the right to refuse or limit reproduction of any item as required by donor agreement, law, or if reproduction could result in physical damage to the material.
- **Publisher**: Falls Church Historical Commission
- **Language**: ["English"]
- **Location**: Mary Riley Styles Public Library Local History Collection | Aisle A, Shelf 11
- **Identifier**: HCFC_Colonial Landgrants and Their Owners or Tenants
- **Description**: The Historical Commission of Falls Church "provides information and advice on historical matters for the city government, develops criteria for the identification of historic buildings and sites, and makes recommendations on recognizing and preserving such structures and sites." (http://www.fallschurchva.gov/266/Historical-Commission) The Historical Commission members and other invited speakers presented seven symposiums, one or two a year, from 1994 to 1998.
- **Date (Searchable)**: D:00 M:00 Y:1994
- **Date**: 1994
- **Creator**: ["Camp, Shirley W."]
- **Place**: ["Falls Church, VA"]
- **Contributor**: ["Falls Church Historical Commission"]
- **Format**: ["Speeches"]
- **Date Created**: 2024
- **Collection**: ["Falls Church Historical Commission Symposiums"]

## Extraction Information

- **Tool**: IIIFScribe v1.0.0
- **Date Extracted**: 2025-04-19T14:01:36.190Z
- **Pages Processed**: 43 of 43
- **OCR Engine**: Tesseract.js
- **Source Manifest**: https://iiif.quartexcollections.com/mrspl/iiif/f9931e99-76a2-4fce-a6bc-1f5f8678e5e5/manifest
- **Page Numbers**: Included

## Support the Developer

If you find IIIFScribe useful, consider supporting the developer:
- **Venmo**: @ryanmio

---

---- PAGE 01 ----
i Co
4

Ross:
Hope this does it, but if something needs revision, let me know.
Would like Ric's illustration overlaying the original grants onto
the present city map and the two surveys showing the Pearson
patent and Hurst's portion of it. Also some photos of early
surveying instruments, if they're not to be placed with some
material on surveying.
What about some photos of items used in the house or farm, ie. hoes?
If you have any suggestions as to sources I should pore over for
possible sketches, let me know.


---- PAGE 02 ----
23 JIBS RARE Ct = jl ps &
EA Vga d CO SECTS Oy
Seems Hae As Tosa
em! EE =e =e CAE INA Ay
Hem nee a RY
i Ee Si 3D INS 22% 8 SEK TT
{l fd as NS = No NOL SY \
Ne Beis Res Ss <9 RN XBR
EE SK EER
fitl= | nt tv GFL) 2%, 7 pn
= i Bsn dp Tilstae
n= SEE A RON
AE me oo OR OX NESE
i CERI SNES Sale a
= NL TE
Jet x WP 8 5 ou =) Rts (BIE
N= Fo 3 & iY BEE y woz
TV E20 SEN && NS ~~ aa EAN oo —
: 2. Ae PSS La) Elia =
Ss TA > | AE —— [4
REY. < e, Re Ho wo ll
; Falls ANY S74 00% SEN ng
© STAT BAS Her = ¥ 3
ESE ESSN (HEE © ©
A [ NY b NE TE = Eu Er
ZH INES SON Ce es A LE
/ 4 LA J: = 00 ; = Fu
AY LS SENS Ch
ST od] AIRL Sie®. Gales ~~ %y
a (9 Ca > <5 r Qe - 5 P Va 5 Ls z
AGERE a SOE TR SL a0 : H
ed & x ol \ SX TX #115833 + mex g : S i o
DEPT NY NS Frain BEES =)
2] Qi EXON DN hn gs TEER EE i =<
fo ST 48) ne SE Ee HEHE REE
= > are K&R pc Z \ AN ~ 3 F. z ©z2:im sis
7 ARES et < IRI 9ppU tiv riHED
*-0 Ll Edie NERVES ENG ¢ ‘ § 2 ba ER i i; fi; iE
fe ames STATE dT isl
SE essential == Popes fete fel sipfil'z
=| = a (TU = +3 czsL 3 Lod ui:2 it
AE Ee ETE Seppe alg
Soe XT rrpy’ dsc in iT
®) MN AST Re La ==] ed z i2 EH


---- PAGE 03 ----
COLONIAL LAND GRANTS AND THEIR OWNERS OR TENANTS
by Shirley W. Camp
May, 1994

Early settlement occurred along the rivers as people could
travel more easily by boat than on foot through the forests.
However, boat travel ended where falls blocked passage upriver.
In this area the Potomac was navigable as far as the mouth of
Pimmit Run. At that point there was an Indian path from there to
the spring near the present Falls Church. Another trail from
Alexandria to Winchester intersected the first trail in the
vicinity of the spring. The first white men followed these
trails as they hunted game.

Hunting parties chose to camp on hillsides out of the lee of
the wind and near a spring or stream of water. When possible the
favored campground faced the southwest. The ridge road, an early
name for the trail from Alexandria to Winchester, meandered along
the south side of the ridge dividing the watersheds of Four Mile
and Holmes Runs. It was essentially parallel to Virginia Route 7
and occasionally crossed over the present highway.

At that time no traveler would have passed up an opportunity
for a drink of water, either for himself or his horse. A hunting
party would have found the location a convenient place to set up
camp for a few days. The Indians had a practice of burning over
a hunting area to flush out the game. It resulted in a tract of
ground with no full-grown trees or undergrowth. White men

1


---- PAGE 04 ----
COLONIAL LAND GRANTS AND THEIR OWNERS OR TENANTS
by Shirley W. Camp
May, 1994

Early settlement occurred along the rivers as people could
travel more easily by boat than on foot through the forests.
However, boat travel ended where falls blocked passage upriver.
In this area the Potomac was navigable as far as the mouth of
Pimmit Run. At that point there was an Indian path from there to
the spring near the present Falls Church. Another trail from
Alexandria to Winchester intersected the first trail in the
vicinity of the spring. The first white men followed these
trails as they hunted game.

Hunting parties chose to camp on hillsides out of the lee of
the wind and near a spring or stream of water. When possible the
favored campground faced the southwest. The ridge road, an early
name for the trail from Alexandria to Winchester, meandered along
the south side of the ridge dividing the watersheds of Four Mile
and Holmes Runs. It was essentially parallel to Virginia Route 7
and occasionally crossed over the present highway.

At that time no traveler would have passed up an opportunity
for a drink of water, either for himself or his horse. A hunting
party would have found the location a convenient place to set up
camp for a few days. The Indians had a practice of burning over
a hunting area to flush out the game. It resulted in a tract of
ground with no full-grown trees or undergrowth. White men

1


---- PAGE 05 ----
assumed the lack of foliage meant the Indians had poisoned the
land. An early deed for Simon Pearson (1724) notes a boundary of
an Indian poison field along one leg of the patent. It’s
probable the first structure in the location of Falls Church was
a hunting lodge.

Prior to 1724 there were no registered grants within the
boundaries of the City of Falls Church. However, there was
nothing to prevent a squatter from tilling the soil wherever he
chose, just as the hunters had gone to areas where game was
plentiful, although they were not the owners of the land on which
they hunted. Sampson Darrell made reference to his frontier
plantation at Pimmit’s (Run) in 1692, but did not record a
grant until 1715. Persons who did apply for a grant were
sometimes in residence two or three years prior to the
application. Other applicants did not live on their grants, but
leased the property to another. It was common to interchange the
terms grant and patent, although legally they had different
meanings.

The property between the Rappahannock and Potomac Rivers was
in a proprietorship held by Lady Catherine Fairfax, the sole heir
of Lord Culpeper. When she died the Sixth Lord Fairfax inherited
these vast holdings. An agent in the colony managed the Fairfax
estate. During the first century of Virginia history there was a
minor amount of settlement on Fairfax lands, chiefly in the
Northern Neck. Many of the settlers were younger sons of wealthy
English families, who came as planters and adventurers.

2


---- PAGE 06 ----
The planters secured a labor force by paying the passage of
men and their families who could not afford the cost. These
persons repaid their debt by serving as indentured servants for
seven years or an agreed upon period to the planter paying their
passage. Three-fourths of the persons who came to Virginia
before 1700 were indentured servants.

In 1700 there were about 50,000 persons in Virginia. By
1720 the population was estimated to have doubled.? As the good
land along the rivers had been taken, persons then began to move
inland where there was arable land. It became increasingly more
difficult for the land agents to ensure the proper fees were paid
to the proprietor. Lord Fairfax visited the colony in 1736,
probably to see to his interests, although he had appointed his
cousin, William Fairfax, as his agent. He settled permanently in
Virginia in 1743 and appointed George Washington and others to
survey boundaries of his lands for persons applying for grants.

To secure a patent or grant the legal process included
obtaining a deed of lease, a deed of release, and a survey before
the appropriate document was issued. The deeds of lease and
release were usually recorded on succeeding days. The first
noted a payment of five shillings and the second recorded a
purchase price.®> The grant or patent recorded the name of the
surveyor.

Surveys accepted for the issuance of a grant had to have
been made by a surveyor certified by the College of William and
Mary. One-sixth of the fee charged by the surveyor went to the

3


---- PAGE 07 ----
college.* Surveyors then had an opportunity to locate good land
for their own use. County clerks, who recorded the deeds, also
had opportunity to locate wasteland not taken up and apply for a
grant or patent for it. Catesby Cocke, who served at varying
times as clerk of the court for Stafford, Prince William and
Fairfax Counties, applied for grants so often on unclaimed tracts
that he was one of the better-known land speculators of the
period. He often held land just long enough to find a buyer

for the property.

During a thirty-year period (1690-1720) there were ninety-
six applications for grants. In the period from 1721-1735 there
were applications for one hundred and eighty-three grants or
nearly twice as many as in the previous thirty years. In order
to avoid overlapping claims survey markers were slashed on trees.
However, in a thick woods it was possible to miss another man’s
mark and overlapping did occur resulting in a defective grant.

Processioning was the term used for verification of lines
defining a patented land. The vestrymen of the parish appointed
two or three men living in the area to confirm the lines and
renew the markings at points where a line changed direction.
James Robertson (sometimes spelled Robinson) was appointed to
procession the grants between Four Mile and Pimmit Runs in 1751.

After a period of three or four years a processioner would
reconfirm the markings. In 1755 Robertson was appointed to
procession the tracts which had their beginnings between the road
from Awbrey’s Ferry (Wilson Blvd.) to the Upper Church (Falls

4


---- PAGE 08 ----
Church), the road from the Upper Church to Difficult Run, the run
to the Potomac River and then back to Awbrey’s Ferry.® After
three affirmations and no overlapping claims the boundaries were
declared correct.

The first recorded grant within the City of Falls Church was
to Captain Simon Pearson (c. 1688-1733) on August 1, 1724 (NN
Grant, #108). Although Captain Simon’s will was proved in
Stafford County a part of the Pearson patent shows a house and
identifies it as having been his residence.” (See facsimile).

He apparently spent enough time in Falls Church to have built a
house, albeit a brief period before moving to a plantation near
the Potomac at Aquia Creek.

Pearson held grants for a number of land tracts in the area.
One for 660 acres on the road to Alexandria (NN Grant, #47) had
been made to his father. Another grant for 1409 acres (NN Grant,
#137) was held jointly with Fitzhugh, the owner of the gigantic
Ravensworth tract of nearly 22,000 acres. Pearson and Gabriel
Adams Sr., his uncle by marriage, jointly held a tract of 708
acres (NN Grant, #272). Another tract held jointly with Thomas
Going for 652 acres (NN Grant, #223) was within two miles of the
Falls Church.

Captain Simon’s second wife was Hannah Ball (c. 1683- c.
1748), a half-sister of George Washington’s mother, Mary. His
known children, three daughters and a son, Thomas, were by the
second marriage. Thomas, Margaret and Susannah lived nearby as
adults and inherited land in the vicinity of the Falls Church.

5


---- PAGE 09 ----
Captain Pearson’s will provided that funds in England be used to
purchase Negroes for his daughters, Susannah and Margaret. These
funds were likely to have been from profits on tobacco and
administered by the factor in London who supervised the selling
of his crop.

Captain Simon’s daughter, Margaret, married William Henry
Terrett. After his death about 1758 she married John West, Jr.
At the time of the marriage West held a prominent place in local
and state affairs. He was a colonel in the Virginia militia and
served as a burgess from Fairfax County in Williamsburg with
George Washington.

He was one of the few individuals in the Falls Church area
entitled to use "gentleman" after his name. West was the son of
Hugh West® and likely to have been of some relationship to John
West, Sr., who was mentioned in a deed for 1706 as a cousin of
Captain Simon’s father, another Thomas.®

Susannah Pearson married her cousin, John Alexander, which
was a desirable match. Besides connections with the West and
Alexander families, the Pearsons were related to the Adams family
through the marriage of Captain Simon’s aunt, Priscilla, to
Gabriel Adams, Sr. About 1716 the latter two were living on a
property owned by John West in Alexandria. Sometime after that
date Gabriel Adams began to take up grants of land, indicating he
was prospering in the tobacco trade.

Thomas Pearson (c. 1712-1744) was thought to have been a
doctor.’ He died aged about thirty-two and his widow, Anne

6


---- PAGE 10 ----
Amelia Markham (1709-1796) then married Charles Broadwater,

Jr.** William Henry Terrett was appointed guardian for Thomas’
son, Simon, who was not of age. Simon had a younger brother,
Thomas, but as the eldest male he inherited the estate. Estate
accounts in Fairfax Circuit Court records filed by Terrett listed
the expenditures he made in behalf of young Simon.

The inventory for the elder Thomas’ estate’ indicated he
had a comfortable life for that period. The listing included two
slaves and two indentured servants. Five feather beds, a corner
cupboard, fifteen plates and fifteen pewter spoons were on the
listing. A pair of pistols and a sword indicated his standing as
an affluent individual of the period and were appropriate
possessions for a justice in the county.

A surveyor’s compass is evidence he was one of the few
individuals capable of running a boundary line. There was
livestock which consisted of pigs (10), horses (7), cows (9),
sheep (3) and geese (22). Forty-two hundred pounds of tobacco
represented a substantial asset.

The estate accounts for the young Simon Pearson (c. 1737-
1797) contain many purchases of cloth and payments for making the
suits, shirts or breeches. Expenditures on behalf of the Negroes
owned by Simon, his schooling for which payment was made to
Charles Broadwater and quit rents on several thousand acres of
land were recorded.

However, he never achieved the position his family’s status
had made possible. His marriage to Milkey (Milcah) Trammell

7


---- PAGE 11 ----
ended in divorce after less than two years. Divorce was rare in
that era and only for the gravest of reasons. It’s probable that
both persons were underage as evidenced by the appointment of
Charles Broadwater as Simon’s guardian in 1758 and the terms of
John Trammell’s will in 1755. Marriage gave both parties legal
standing as adults.

The supposition of the length of the marriage is based upon
an item in the estate account for Simon Pearson submitted by
Charles Broadwater for payment of six pounds by Broadwater to
Joseph Hopkins in 1758 for "framing your (Simon’s) house."*®
There was one son, John T. Pearson. Simon appears to have been
generous as a lease with John Hurst directed him to convey 2,000
pounds to tobacco to Milkey Pearson annually.?*

A suit of 1759 alleged that Peletiah Grafford was living in
adultery with Simon Pearson, which would explain the condition of
the divorce allowing Milkey Pearson to keep the child. Other
suits in 1762 and 1769 alleged that Peletiah Grafford had a
baseborn child in each instance by Simon Pearson. Peletiah’s
father, Thomas, kept an ordinary on a tract owned by Michael
Reagan near the Falls Church. Simon gave Peletiah and her son a
portion of the Pearson tract in Falls Church, which she sold
shortly before Simon’s death. In the deed, Simon acknowledged
her son, John, as his son.®

Simon reportedly had children by other women.® However,
he mentioned none in his will and left his estate to his brother,
Thomas, who had gone to Kentucky sometime after the Revolutionary

8


---- PAGE 12 ----
War. Simon had made an earlier gift of a tract of land near the
Falls Church to Thomas in 1759,” but many tracts of land had
been sold by the time of his death and were owned by others,
including George Washington, Charles Broadwater and John Hurst.
He appears to have lived off the proceeds from slaves of the
lands he had inherited.

John Hurle (?-1749), whose surname is spelled Harle or Harl
in every other document, received a grant for land at Falls
Church on March 8, 1728 (NN Grant, #166). Due to Harle’s
oversight he neglected to pay the lease money for two years and
the land was granted to John Edy.** However, before Edy could
take possession Harle paid the amount owed and Edy’s grant was
cancelled.

A small portion of this tract was located in the present
city of Falls Church in the area of the George Mason High School.
Harle never lived on this tract, but resided on property near
Difficult Run, which adjoined the tract where John Trammell
resided. Harle’s will listed his heirs as his wife, Elizabeth, a
son, John, and a daughter, Frances.® All of them were willed
slaves, one of his daughter and two each to his wife and son.

His inventory indicated he enjoyed a relatively comfortable
life for the mid-eighteenth century person on a frontier farm.2°
Among his furnishings were listed "best" furniture (consisting of
a bed and all the necessary items for use on one), a desk and two
chests, two other beds and a looking glass. A pair of books
indicated he had some education. A spinning wheel, wool cards

9


---- PAGE 13 ----
and a linnen (sic) wheel was evidence the women in the household
spun wool for thread from the six sheep and from flax raised on
the plantation.

At the time of the inventory eight cows and heifers produced
milk, meat and butter for the household. There were six calves,
an indication Harle had chosen good quality stock to achieve a
good reproduction rate. Feathers from three geese and a pair of
mallards must have provided stuffing for good quality pillows.

Cooper’s tools for making casks and barrels, carpenter’s
tools and a copper still, tub and worm for making whiskey were
indications of a self-sufficient plantation. A pair of hand
millstones was probably used for grinding small quantities of
grain. Food was eaten with pewter utensils, but there was no
"good" pottery on the inventory, indicating Harle was of a lower
social status than the Harrisons and Pearsons. Plates could have
been made of woodenware. There were three pots, which were
probably used for a multitude of tasks, including cooking.

Harle owned two guns and a set of money scales and brasses.
The latter were rare on inventories of the period. A supposition
is that Harle’s possession of the scales is an indication he had
a good "head" for business and was financially successful in
making a profit from this plantation and in his dealings with
others. A parcel of clothes may have been best outfits for the
household in addition to working clothes worn by everyone on a
daily basis.

10


---- PAGE 14 ----
A team of horses, wagon and plow, and some hoes were used
for farm work in growing corn and tobacco, the main crops during
this period. A mare, which had a colt, and a saddle and bridle
were a means of travel for an individual who enjoyed a superior
financial status.

A landowner was expected to serve the parish as a vestryman,
if qualified by birth and position. However, the only mention of
Harle in the vestry minutes was when he and John Trammell were
directed to procession lands between Difficult and Broad runs in
1743. His name was not listed among those voting at the polls in
1744 or 1748. Voters, who were white male property owners, were
expected to take their duty seriously and in some cases were
fined for not voting. There must have been very good reasons as
to why Harle was not present to vote.

Benjamin Sebastian (?-1770), who occupied the Falls Church
tract owned by Harle, purchased it after Harle’s death.

Sebastian was an attorney who acted for John Trammell, Gerrard
Alexander and David Thomas, all local residents in the vicinity
of Falls Church. He had other clients in the eastern portion of
Fairfax County and may have been a teacher for one or more boys
from families with a high social status. This latter supposition
is based on a item, which noted Charles Broadwater was to pay a
year’s board. At the time Broadwater’s son, Charles Lewis, was
of an age to have been educated and could have been in
Sebastian’s home for that reason.

11


---- PAGE 15 ----
Sebastian was named as plaintiff or defendant in a number of
suits. At one time he had been a rent collector for Robert
Alexander’s tenants.* He brought suit against Charles
Broadwater, who had leased 900 acres from Simon Pearson. A
survey was made of the disputed lines and Broadwater was favored
in the judgment. Broadwater was then married to Simon Pearson’s
mother and had access to the Pearson papers which supported his
position.

Shortly thereafter, Sebastian and Broadwater joined in a
suit against Joseph and Ann Moxley for trespass.? Sebastian
also sued Thomas Moxley, a tenant for Gerrard Trammell, whose
tract adjoined Sebastian’s property. On different occasions
Moxley was accused of trespass and having cut down one hundred
oak trees.*

Sebastian engaged in a wide range of civic activities. He
was appointed tobacco inspector at the Hunting Creek warehouse in
1762, stood security for individuals applying for ordinary
licenses in Colchester and Alexandria, and was a surveyor for
tracts from Four Mile run to Alexandria.®* Some of these
actions may have resulted from his position as an attorney.

Sebastian had died by November of 1770 when his will was
presented in court. His wife, Priscilla, died just three years
later. Their daughters, Elizabeth and Beth, inherited after her
death.?® Elizabeth, who died shortly thereafter, willed her
portion to her friend, George McCormack, who sold the tract to
William Trammell of Loudoun County a year later.

12


---- PAGE 16 ----
Benjamin Sebastian, Jr. was not named in the will. The
younger Sebastian was a minister in the Anglican church with
parish assignments from Berkeley County (West Virginia after
1863) to Northumberland County. Beth Sebastian was in the latter

i county where her brother acted as her attorney when she devised
her portion of the tract to George McCormack in a deed of 20
October 1773.%¢ Benjamin Sebastian was then rector for St.
Stephens Parish and he appears to have been on an extended visit
after the deaths of his mother and sister. The will directed
that two other plantations in Fairfax and Loudoun Counties were
to be sold.

An inventory of Sebastian’s estate taken in May of 1772
before Priscilla Sebastian died listed a great deal of personal
property, including four slaves.?” Two of the four were named
as having one child each. A fifth female slave, two female
indentured servants, two male indentured servants and two male
orphans were also listed. One orphan was three years old and too
young to learn a trade; the other boy was listed by name and
would have been expected to work for his keep.

There was a great deal of intensive labor used in running
the plantation. Crops of tobacco and corn were on hand as
demonstrated by two hogsheads of tobacco, a corn barrel and hand
millstones. The plantation may have also provided a source of
pork for ships making trans-Atlantic voyages as there were
twenty-nine hogs listed. Twenty-six cows and calves and fifteen
sheep were enough to provide the household with beef and mutton

13


---- PAGE 17 ----
to eat and leather and wool for wearing apparel. An ox yoke on
the inventory indicated two of the cattle were oxen. Thirteen
horses, four plows and plow irons (shears) and fifteen hoes
categorized as grubbing, hilling and heading hoes, indicate
Montpelier was a working plantation.

Two saddles and one cart provided modes of transportation
locally. Trails were not often passable for wheeled vehicles and
travelers usually walked or rode horseback. A man with the means
to afford a riding horse rode, whereas the less affluent walked.
Ladies would have used the cart for transportation to church on
Sundays when the weather permitted such an outing.

The most important piece of furniture in a house was the bed
and its furnishings. The Sebastians were well supplied with five
beds, their coverings and two other old beds. In addition there
was a desk, chest, several chairs and two large oval tables. Six
knives and forks provided utensils for the family and one guest,
but servants and most guests had to provide their own. An iron
tea kettle and a coffee mill indicate tea and coffee were served
in the Sebastian household. There was some china, evidence of an
upper class status maintained by the family, and pewter. Among
the pewter items were two chamber pots. The only items for
entertainment were an old fiddle and five books.

Numerous iron pieces and brass nails and fittings, including
a lock and key, were listed. This plantation may have had a
smithy where nearby residents could acquire iron and brass
articles. No other inventory for the period in the Falls Church

14


---- PAGE 18 ----
area listed brass in such quantity and most iron items in other
inventories were limited to wedges, axes and a few utilitarian
items.

Some carpenter and shoemaking tools were on the inventory
and were common for self-sufficient planation. By the standards
of the day Sebastian was a wealthy man and provided his household
with a comfortable living in eighteenth century Northern
Virginia.

William Gunnell (?-1760) has been thought to have been an
indentured servant to Richard Lee in Westmoreland County. This
supposition was based on Lee’s estate inventory, which listed
William Gunnell and William Gunnell, Jr. as servants. Two
females were among the Gunnells listed on the inventory, one
having eleven months to serve. Lee’s will was dated 3 March
1741. If the length of servitude had been the usual seven-year
span, the arrival of the Gunnells in America would have been
about 1708.

A speculation was that the younger Gunnell was clerk to
Thomas Lee, who erected tobacco warehouses at the mouth of
Pimmit’s Run. This is unlikely in that the older and younger
William Gunnell were illiterate. However, there was other work
to be done in such a venture and the Gunnells could have been
employed in other ways.

After the flow of labor through indentures became
unreliable, landowners bought slaves transported from Africa.
The slaves were committed for a lifetime whereas an indentured

15


---- PAGE 19 ----
servant worked for seven or an agreed upon number of years to pay
his passage and then was free to begin his own land acquisitions.

Another source of labor was from convicts transported to
Virginia. These persons were considered undesirable and they
were eventually prohibited from entering the colony. In 1733 the
colony of Georgia was established for settlement of convicts.

In 1711 Thomas Lee was the acting authority for Lady
Catherine Fairfax, who was sole heir to the Fairfax
proprietary.* He was empowered to collect all the quit rents.

To do so he would have traveled widely over the area. It’s
likely Gunnell was thoroughly familiar with the country in which
Lee traveled as representative for the proprietress of the
Fairfax lands.

Gunnell received three grants in 1729. Two were partially
in the city of Falls Church. (NN grants 184, 185). At the time
of the deeds he was residing in Westmoreland County. He must
have moved to the Falls Church area shortly thereafter for he was
instrumental in the establishment of the upper church to become
known as The Falls Church, which was located near the joining of
the road from Thomas Lee’s warehouses on Pimmit Run and the road
to Alexandria. An early record of 1733 states Reverend Lawrence
DeButts was given liberty to preach at William Gunnell’s. The
location of the house where the worshippers first met is unknown,
but speculation places the site on the east side of Locust Ridge
Court just outside the city limits of Falls Church.

16


---- PAGE 20 ----
Gunnell appears to have been older than the average settler
in the vicinity of Falls Church. His five children had begun to
marry soon after his settlement in Fairfax County. Gunnell and
his two sons were named on a poll list of 1744. An undocumented
record of the youngest daughter gives her birth as circa 1710 and
her sister’s as circa 1708.%°

William Gunnell the elder died in 1760 and left property to
all his children rather than following the custom of giving the
estate to the eldest son. One tract was to be divided between
his two youngest daughters. They were married to William and
James Saunders, who were likely to have been sons or brothers of
Philip Saunders, a tenant to Thomas Pearson on a tract adjoining
William Gunnell’s grant.

Gunnell’s will, written in 1750, was presented to the court
in 1760. At the time the will was written he said his son,
Henry, was living at a plantation on Difficult Run, his daughter,
Sarah Saunders, was living on a tract of land which he left her
in the will and his son, William Jr., was given the four hundred
acre tract on which William, Sr. lived. The younger William was
to receive most of the elder Gunnell’s personal belongings with
one item each for his daughters, Mary Darne and Elizabeth
Saunders. A trunk and its contents were given to all three
daughters.

He also left half of a tract of land adjoining his daughter
Sarah’s tract to his daughter, Elizabeth, although she had moved
away. Frederick County Maryland Accounts 1769 has a will for

17


---- PAGE 21 ----
William Saunders, who died circa 1768. Travel was so difficult
in that period that her contacts with her family in Virginia were
probably quite limited, except by letter. In his will the elder
Gunnell noted the titles to the lands left his children were not
clear.

Among his household items were pewter dishes and plates.
There was no china indicating his family was of an inferior
social status to the Harrisons and Pearsons. There was a punch
bowl, but no articles for serving tea or coffee. No eating
utensils were listed, but handmade ones of wood were probably
substituted. There were three beds, a looking glass, a small
oval table and three chairs. Twelve hoes and a few pieces of
iron was a sharp contrast to the numerous items of iron listed in
Benjamin Sebastian’s inventory. Still, he owned four slaves,
which marked him as one of the more affluent men in the local
area. Although there were no crops recorded, his possession of a
wheat sieve and cyder (sic) casks indicate he raised some wheat
and had an apple orchard.

In William Jr.’s will made on January 12, 1787, he divided
this plantation between his son, Allen, and grandson, Presley.
Most of his personal property was divided between these two. He
had improved his financial status to the extent that he owned
twenty slaves.

He had adopted the prevailing view of the period of the
Negro as a piece of property. One slave was bequeathed to his
son, William III, for life and then to be divided among William’s

18


---- PAGE 22 ----
children with the exception of Presley. Four slaves were given
to his daughter, Elizabeth, married to James Wren Jr., the son
and namesake of the architect for the Falls Church. His cousins,
William Darne and Thomas Gunnell, were named executors.>? The
Gunnell family continued to be influential in Falls Church and
Fairfax County affairs through the following century.

In 1748 the Reverend Charles Green, vicar at the Falls
Church and a local physician, compiled a listing of tithables for
Truro Parish.®® The tithes levied on white males sixteen years
and older and on black slaves were used to pay for parish
business, which included social needs currently paid for by
government agencies. Tithes were levied in pounds of tobacco and
varied from year to year depending on need. In 1734 when the
upper church was under construction the levy for each tithable
was seventy-two pounds. In 1746 the levy was for twenty-seven
pounds.

Reverend Green made note of the few tithables who were not
members of the Church of England. These persons of other faiths
in the county were Quaker, Presbyterian and papist (Catholic).
Michael Reagan (?-1773) was a papist. Non-conformists were
rarely appointed to act in an parish affairs, but vestry minutes
name Michael Reagan as having orphans bound to him to learn the
trades of carpenter and shoemaker, respectively. Such
appointments indicate he was recognized as well-qualified in
those skills. Otherwise, the first choice for placement of

19


---- PAGE 23 ----
underage orphans would have been to a person who could also
provide the most desirable religious instruction.

Reagan’s land at Falls Church was farmed by a tenant. He
lived further out in the county near Goose Creek.*® He did
business in Alexandria and went regularly enough to maintain an
account in a store there. It can be assumed he had a good
reputation for integrity and as businessman. He was wealthy
enough to own two slaves in 1760 and four slaves at the time of
his death in 1773 as listed on an inventory of his property.

Altogether he owned 607 acres in Fairfax County. The tract
near the Falls Church was 179 acres. (NN Grants #187) His
inventory include over 3,000 pounds of tobacco and forty-five
bushels of wheat. Like most planters his cash crop was tobacco,
but the wheat indicates he was among the earliest wheat growers
in the county as wheat did not become the major cash crop until
the Revolutionary War opened a market for it. He had a pair of
millstones, probably for grinding his own grain.*” Three horses
were on the inventory, but field work was probably done with a
team of oxen as an ox chain and yoke were listed. The oxen were
most likely counted in the sixteen head of cattle. He had forty-
five hogs, far more than the number needed for a single family’s
subsidence. He also had some sheep, but the number was not
listed. None of the household goods were on the inventory, but
in his will he left feather beds to three of his daughters and a
son, so the assumption can be made that the house was well
furnished for that place and time.

20


---- PAGE 24 ----
His will named four daughters and three sons, but he
appeared most concerned as to the welfare of his two unmarried
daughters. He left the plantation at Falls Church to Constant
and Mildred, the plantation where he lived to his son, Nicholas,
and nothing to his namesake, Michael, saying he had already had
more than his share.®® He named several grandchildren and his
wife, Rebekah, leaving various amounts to them.

The plantation which he left to his youngest daughters was
not the original grant from Lord Fairfax, but half the property
granted to George Harrison. Reagan succeeded in having his claim
to half the property validated. It appears Reagan’s son, Peter,
was settled on this property for few years between Harrison’s
death and Peter’s death. The appraisers appointed for Peter’s
estate resided in the vicinity of Falls Church and they would
have been near the estate they were appointed to appraise. When
Constant died childless in 1778, her brother, Nicholas, then
living in Berkeley County, Virginia, sold the Falls Church
property to John Carlyle for three hundred pounds.>

Thomas Harrison, Junior (?-1757) acquired 270 acres near the
Falls Church in 1731. (NN Grant #270) A small portion was in
the present city of Falls Church and the remainder in the Seven
Corners area of Fairfax County. At that time Fairfax and Loudoun
Counties were still a part of Prince William County. When
Harrison’s deed was recorded an adjoining owner was identified as
Quarles. This individual was likely to have been father or
brother to Harrison’s wife, Ann Quarles.*® The Prince William

21


---- PAGE 25 ----
County records which have survived have a number of references to
this Harrison. In 1731 he was appointed to serve as an attorney
for a woman who was conveying her dowry right on a tract of land
at the head of Goose Creek.‘ At least two deeds of 1740 cite
his residence in the parish of Hamilton, now a town in Loudoun
County.** The reference to Goose Creek indicates he was in that
vicinity at the time he applied for a grant near Falls Church.

His appointment as sheriff of Prince William County at a
court for 16 May 1733 is proof he was of the social standing and
educational background to hold such a position. He also had
great financial resources as he owned as much as 663 acres of
land at one time. He was a slave owner as a court record for
1732 lists his purchase of a Negro woman for 6,000 pounds of
tobacco.*® He stood as witness in so many cases that it’s
evident he was considered a man of integrity.

He was not mentioned in Truro Parish records, but a court
record lists him as a witness to Rodham Neale’s bond to Reverend
Lawrence DeButts,** the first preacher called to minister to the
fledgling congregation of the upper church (The Falls Church).
In 1741 a court set a bond of 1,000 pounds sterling for Harrison,
if appointed sheriff.** By 1744 he had been named as a
gentleman justice for the county.

Records for two leases to tenants which required annual
payments of 500 and 530 pounds of tobacco, respectively as well
as the planting of 100 apple trees were recorded. Planting and
maintaining an orchard was an important aspect of plantation

22


---- PAGE 26 ----
life. One lease also required the planting of 100 peach trees in
addition to the apple trees.*® There were two or three tenants
on Harrison’s tract at Falls Church, including David Thomas and
Edmund Butler.

George Harrison (?-Winter, 1748) did not receive a grant for
Falls Church property until 1742 (NN Grant #338). However his
name appeared in Prince William County deed books between 1731
and 1735 as a witness to eight deeds. There is no proof he was
related to Thomas Harrison, Jr., but the identical surname makes
it a likely supposition.

Harrison lived in Falls Church at the time of his death in
1748 and may have done so from the time of his grant in 1742.
This supposition is based on his estate record, which indicates a
residence of some years. His will, which was proved 21 March
1748, named his nephew, John West, as executor and his heir after
the death of his wife, Martha. Although not named in the will
the Harrisons reportedly had four daughters: Margaret, wife of
Edward Blackburn; Sarah, wife of John Monroe; Susanna, wife of
Robert Slaughter and Mary, wife of John Walere. The will had
been written four months prior to Harrison’s death and was quite
short seeming to indicate a serious illness.

A land dispute between Harrison and Michael Reagan over
ownership of the tract granted to Harrison was resolved on August
16, 1748 shortly after Harrison’s death. Reagan was awarded half
the tract (107 acres). A reference to an ordinary in Falls
Church was made in Harrison’s inventory. A payment for sundries

23


---- PAGE 27 ----
at the ordinary by Thomas Wren was also noted.** This is the
earliest record for an ordinary operating in Falls Church.

An expense paid by the executor for Harrison’s estate was
for nine gallons of rum served at Harrison’s funeral.** Rum or
punch containing rum was likely to have been the most common
drink served at the ordinary. Certainly, every man who attended
Harrison’s funeral must have been appreciative of the generosity
implicit in his farewell to the world.

Harrison’s widow was entitled to retain use of the estate
and the articles in the household until her death under terms of
the will. She appears to have been remarried to John Posey about
1752 and residing out of the area. Most of the items on the
inventory taken in 1749 were sold in 1752 and listed on a three
page account for the estate.®® Posey leased the land to George
Thrift until 1761 when John West, Harrison’s heir, sold the
property, which contained 101 acres, to John Hurst. This parcel
was the one sold by Hurst to James Wren in 1787.5 It remained
in the Wren family’s possession for more than fifty years and was
named Winter Hill.

George Harrison’s wealth can be ascertained by his ownership
of twenty-seven negro slaves.® His is the only inventory found
which contained a listing for lumber. This included 230 feet of
walnut plank, 62 feet of better (unidentified) wood and 60 feet
of walnut scantling. He also owned crosscut and whip saws, so it
appears he maintained a saw mill, which provided finished lumber
to residents near Falls Church.

24


---- PAGE 28 ----
His house had six beds and two of them had bed curtains, a
novelty in Falls Church and rare outside the large tidewater
mansions. A set of window curtains, a stair cloth as well as
sheets, napkins, towels and tablecloths were indicative of an
affluent household with many guests.®®> He owned two guns and a
case of pistols and holsters in addition to a spie (sic) glass.
A riding chair and a wig box with three wigs marks him as the
most affluent resident of Falls Church with the highest social
standing.

His livestock consisted of ninety-four pigs, three horses,
and twelve sheep. Selling salt pork to the captains of sailing
vessels for provisions on voyages was the most common way for a
Northern Virginia farmer to raise cash aside from his tobacco
crop. Also on the inventory was a spinning wheel, wool cards and
sheep shears, which would be found on a self-contained
plantation.

A large-looking glass and three smaller ones, tables, a
chest and a desk, a case of knives and folks were indicative of a
comfortable house for the residents and gusts. Harrison’s
superior education can be inferred through ownership of a parcel
of books and a large Bible. His wealth and position was also
emphasized by the sums paid to Dr. John Robertson, who attended
him in his final illness and to Reverend Charles Green, who
conducted the burial service, of 800 and 400 pounds of tobacco,
respectively. George Harrison died and was buried as a highly
respected and honored man. Although no stone marks his resting

25


---- PAGE 29 ----
place, he was probably buried in the churchyard at The Falls
Church.

Holders of large tracts of land often leased a portion or
settled tenants on their tracts, as noted earlier in the case of
Thomas Harrison, Jr. A leaseholder had a more secure position
than a tenant in that he could continue the lease even if there
were a change of ownership. He could also vote in spite of not
actually owning the land and he could designate two others for
whom the lease would remain in effect after his death under the
terms designated. Although there were differences the terms of
leaseholder and tenant were often used interchangeably.

Some of these men appear to have been well-educated for the
time as evidence by the duties which they performed for the
church or county. Walter English, a leaseholder to John
Trammell, was a clerk of the new church (Falls Church) in 1743,
an indication he was educated and a man of good reputation in the
community. That year the clerk received 1,000 pounds of tobacco
for having performed the necessary duties. Each tithable was
required to pay a tithe of 25 pounds of tobacco to the church, so
it appears the clerk was well paid for his services.

However, English appears to have squandered his standing as
his name appeared only the one time in vestry records. In 1749
he was prosecuted for receiving money which he had used without
orders while sheriff. The following year he was indicted as an
Ignoramus. Exactly what this charge meant was not disclosed. A
few months afterward he sued Gerrard Trammell and George Harrison

26


---- PAGE 30 ----
and won a judgment for 210 pounds and costs. In a suit by
Gerrard Alexander against him, William Harle and William
Brewster, he and the other two were ordered to pay Alexander more
than 14,000 pounds of tobacco.

Nothing is known of English’s family members, although he
almost certainly was married and probably had children. He may
have been a tailor in addition to his farming activities as there
was a reference to English the tailor in an estate account for
the young Simon Pearson. After 1760 his name does not appear in
county records. In another suit in 1756 English was awarded 444
pounds of tobacco from Philip Saunders, who also paid court
costs.

’ Philip Saunders was a tenant to Thomas Pearson. However,
the elder Thomas had died in 1744 and his son, Simon, was not of
age, so Saunders was probably paying rents to William Henry
Terrett, Simon’s guardian. Saunders’ name appeared in county
records over a period of years from 1751 until 1765. Nothing is
known of his family. His tract adjoined William Gunnell'’s
plantation and it’s likely to have been his brothers or sons who
married daughters of Gunnell.

Tenant families could rise in social status through marriage
to landowners’ children. An example was Thomas Moxley’s
daughter, Jemima, who married John Minor, Jr.,* a substantial
landholder near Falls Church. As Minor’s widow she could make
leases in her own right, one of which was to John Carlyle of
Alexandria.

27


---- PAGE 31 ----
Edmund Butler was a tenant to Thomas Harrison, Jr. Little
is known of him save that his wife was Jane and he was also
skilled at shoemaking for a young boy was apprenticed to him to
learn that trade.®” His name appeared in county records between
1749 and 1764, although a reference in a deed of 1780 mentions a
common line with the property where Edmund Butler formerly lived.

David Thomas was another tenant of Thomas Harrison until his
death about 1765. His means were very limited as shown by the
inventory of his estate. It was valued at twenty pounds, which
included some "wearing cloaths." Thomas was paid for making two
suits for Simon Pearson, so it appears he was a tailor for local
persons in addition to farming Harrison’s plantation.

The remainder of his possessions included a mare and a colt,
six cattle, fourteen pigs, and old household furniture. There
was no listing of a bed, but some woodenware, two milk pans and a
pewter tankard were recorded. He had some education for there
was a parcel of books. The other two items were a spinning wheel
and shoemaker’s tools.* Most tenants lived more frugally and
owned fewer possessions than a landowner.

Thomas had died by May 20, 1765 when the court directed an
inventory be taken by John Hurst, Sanford Remy and Joseph
Moxley.®® Residences for the latter two are unknown but John
Hurst was prominent in local affairs and leased several tracts of
land, eventually purchasing some of them. He leased a tract of
250 acres from James and William Saunders in 1761.%* This was

28


---- PAGE 32 ----
one of the original grants to William Gunnell. He also leased a
portion of the Pearson Tract, where he appears to have resided.

Hurst seems to have been an energetic man. He served as a
juryman a number of times in spite of an occasional charge of
assault and battery lodged against him. Other county records
show he inventoried several estates, acted as a surveyor in
keeping up the roads and was a plaintiff or defendant in several
court cases. His name appeared more than forty times in county
records beginning in 1749, but he was mentioned in estate
accounts for Simon Pearson, so was in the Falls Church area for
some years prior to 1749.

In 1759 Hurst was fined fifteen shillings for not setting up
a direction post for travelers. Six months later the court
ordered he be paid fifty pounds of tobacco for setting up the
posts. He was also charged with indecent behavior for mating
a mare and a stallion at the Falls Church during a service. He
provided security for George Thrift to keep an ordinary.*®® The
location of the ordinary is unknown, but may have been the
ordinary originally named in George Harrison’s inventory. Thrift
had leased the Harrison property from John Posey, then married to
Harrison’s widow.®

After the death of Martha Posey, Hurst bought the tract from
John West, Jr.®® It adjoined the tract Hurst had leased from
James William Saunders. He leased more than one tract from Simon
Pearson. It appeared he displaced other tenants in that the
document named John Williams, Gerrard Bowling and William

29


---- PAGE 33 ----
Trammell as being in previous possession. Pearson also provided
Hurst with nine slaves to work for Hurst during Pearson’s
lifetime.®s

In 1789 Hurst was ordered to pay John Wren 314 pounds with
interest from 1785. This debt probably explains the sale of the
former George Harrison property to Wren. Hurst’s will was
presented at court on 21 December 1789.” In it he named his
wife, Sybil, two sons, James and William, and five daughters, all
married as follows: Jane Williams, Susanna Fenley, Elizabeth
Thrift, Sarah Dulin and Bathesheba Follin. A granddaughter,
Elizabeth Marshall, was also named, evidently the child of a
daughter who had predeceased him. William Follin, probably the
husband of Bathesheba, was named as exempt from land rent for
seven years.

He left the tract William Gunnell had devised to his
daughters to his son, James. Another tract bought from George
Thrift was left to his son, William. The plantation where his
wife lived was to be sold after her death with the children
dividing the proceeds. A plantation in Loudoun County referred
to as Sugarlands was to be rented and the money divided equally
among his wife and children. Each family member was given a
Negro slave. The amount of land and number of slaves are
evidence John Hurst died a wealthy man.

The property originally granted by Lord Fairfax to Michael
Reagan was later owned by Daniel and Spence Neale. Daniel Neale
had purchased the property from an intervening owner and settled

30


---- PAGE 34 ----
on it as tenant. In June of 1762 Spence Neale received a deed to
the property.®® There are very few instances where his name
appeared in court records and these were usually for jury duty in
1759, 1761, and 1762. He was a defendant in suits brought by
Nicholas Reagan, Kitchen Prim and John Posey.®® An unusual sale
to Robert Douglas in July, 1763 records the sale of his Negroes,
a horse, cow and three yearlings, two sows and their pigs and all
the crops then growing.’ In effect he sold his means of
livelihood, although there wasn’t a corresponding sale of land at
that time.

By 1765 he had died as Charles Broadwater, an adjoining
landowner, was named administrator of his estate by a court order
of March 17.” However, he did not make a will, which would
have indicated that death was expected. There were other Neales
in the county, including Christopher, who witnessed the sale to
Douglas and a second Daniel.

Although Michael Reagan lived on neither of his Falls Church
properties, he maintained an interest, first through his son,
Peter, who resided in the area, and after Peter’s death, when he
leased property to Thomas Grafford. (This surname is spelled
with the final letter a ’d’ or ‘t’ in several documents.)

Grafford was licensed to keep an ordinary at his home in
Alexandria in 1753, but by 1756 seems to have been settled on
Reagan’s land in Falls Church as keeper of an ordinary. His name
appeared in several county records, but he was not active in
church affairs as his profession eliminated him from overseeing

31


---- PAGE 35 ----
those he might influence undesirably. Too, his daughter had been
accused of adultery with Simon Pearson and brought to court for
having a bastard child. No punishment was recorded for her or
the child, which was in contrast to the punishment meted out to a
female indentured servant bound to Benjamin Sebastian. In that
case the servant was punished with a whipping on her bare back
and the binding of her child to Sebastian until it was eighteen.

Grafford lived a long life and was reportedly age seventy-
nine in 1790. His son, Thomas Jr., seems to have had some
education and a reputation for integrity as he served as a
juryman and was appointed a tobacco inspector. Besides his son
the lease from Reagan also listed Grafford’s wife, Martha.”
These two and his daughter, Peletiah, were the only known members
of his family.

The most notable individual to live in Falls Church during
the second half of the 18th century was Charles Broadwater (c.
1721-1806). Although James Wren was the architect of the Falls
Church, Christ Church, and the Fairfax Courthouse, he was not as
active in church and civic affairs as Broadwater.

Broadwater did not hold an original patent for land in the
city of Falls Church, but he held a tract separated from John
Trammell’s land by Four Mile Run. (NN grant #98) His residence
in 1749 shortly after his marriage to Thomas Pearson’s widow
appears to have been in the vicinity of Difficult Run, where he
was directed to list the tithables from Difficult Run to Goose
Creek.” The flowing year he was directed by another court to

32


---- PAGE 36 ----
list tithables from Difficult Run to Cameron Run.’ There was
also a court order to view land as a site for a new grist mill
and place a value on it.” The mill was later known as
Broadwater’s Mill.

About 1763 Broadwater was living near Falls Church on the
portion of the Pearson patent which became known as Broadwater’s
Quarter, a tract of 917 acres, which was nearly three-fourths of
the Pearson patent. When he leased the tract in 1763,7¢ it
triggered a lawsuit in less than a year from his neighbor,
Benjamin Sebastian.” The court declared in favor of
Broadwater, but it seems there was no rancor as two of
Broadwater’s children married children of Benjamin Sebastian.
Broadwater’s son, Charles Lewis, married Bethlehem (Beth)
Sebastian and his daughter, Amelia, married Sebastian’s son, The
Reverend Benjamin Sebastian, Jr.

Broadwater served as an officer in the Virginia Militia
rising to colonel by the time of the Revolutionary War. He was
given a commission in 1749. The following year he was
recommended for sheriff, taking the oath in 1751.7 He also
served a coroner in performing inquests. At first he was paid
for each case, but by 1759 he had been appointed country
coroner.” The same year he served as sheriff and for several
years thereafter.®

Broadwater’s marriage to Thomas Pearson’s widow placed him
in a position of great influence over the property of her son as
he was not of age. As late as 1759 and 1759, he was appointed

33


---- PAGE 37 ----
guardian to Simon and Thomas, respectively.®* Court records for
Broadwater indicated he must have been an exemplary man as only
two of many records provide a glimpse of a legal infraction and
both had to do with his failure to declare all the wheeled
carriages in his possession.®? At the time tax assessments were
made on tithables, horses, and wheeled vehicles in a man’s
possession. Those rare suits to which Broadwater was a party,
were declared in his favor.

Unlike Benjamin Sebastian and James Wren, who became known
as gentlemen, Broadwater had been designated a gentleman by
virtue of his birth. His father, also Charles Broadwater, had
married the widow of an earlier John West. Prior to his marriage
he had been captain of a sailing vessel, Robert and John. He
retired from the sea and became a planter. The cabin boy on his
vessel was Abraham Lay, who also abandoned a seaman’s life to
become an overseer on Broadwater’s plantation.®* By 1760, Lay
was a tenant on the Pearson tract.

Broadwater surveyed roads and at least one bridge over Broad
Run was built under his supervision.** He was appointed to
appraise several estates, among them that of John Harle.®® He
was a vestryman for Truro parish and directed work on the old
wooden church.®® He and John West, Jr. held the deed to Christ
Church in Alexandria, which was conveyed by John Alexander in
1774.*” He was a tobacco inspector at the Falls warehouse and,
when ordered by the court, adjusted the scales there. He served

34


---- PAGE 38 ----
as a justice until 1800 at which time he was about eighty years
old.

His wife had died four years earlier and it appears his
other children had predeceased him, except for Amelia Sebastian,
who was named in his will of 1806. His grandchildren, George,
Kitty (Catharine) and Sally West inherited one hundred acres each
by the terms on his will. Their mother, Sarah, had died about
1768 and it’s possible the children grew up in the Broadwater
household. Two other grandsons, George W. Hunter, the son of
Broadwater’s daughter, Jane, and Charles Guy Broadwater, the son
of Broadwater’s son, Charles Lewis, inherited the major portion
of Broadwater’s Quarter.

Another grandson, James Hunter, received two hundred acres
of a one thousand acre estate in Kentucky. The remainder was
left to his daughter, Amelia Sebastian. This was evidently where
she and her husband lived for his will was filed in Breckenridge
County, Kentucky after his death. The other two grandchildren
named in the will were Ann and William Broadwater.®®

Broadwater had lived long enough to witness the French and
Indian and Revolutionary Wars, wheat replacing tobacco as the
most important cash crop, the rise of a new capital city for
which boundary stones had been placed to mark its limits and the
election of a president in place of swearing allegiance to a
king. It was a new century in a new country and few mourned the
demise of the old order, except possibly a few diehard loyalists

35


---- PAGE 39 ----
to the crown. Of course, there were some unpleasantries with the
English, but the future looked bright.
36


---- PAGE 40 ----
1. Mitchell, Beth. inni at a White Fairfax County
Administrative Services, Fairfax, Virginia, 1977. p. 8.
2. Hale, John S. A Hi i tlas of Coloni irginia. 01d
Dominion Publications, McClure Press, Verona, Virginia, 1978.
n.p.
3. Mitchell (1977). bp. 16.
4. Hening, William Waller. Statut . Richmond,
Virginia, 1823. Reprint: University Press of Virginia,
Charlottesville, Virginia, 1969. p. 639.
5. Mitchell (1977). p. 246.
6. Minutes of the Vestry, Truro Parish, Virginia, 1732-1785.
Pohick Church, Lorton, Virginia, 1974. pp. 39, 63, 72.
7. Record of Surveys, 1742-1856. Fairfax Circuit Court
Archives, Fairfax, Virginia. p. 269.
8. Fairfax County, Virginia, Will Book A 1:261. Fairfax Circuit
Court Archives, Fairfax, Virginia.
9. Pippinger, Wesley E. John Alexander. Gateway Press, Inc.,
Baltimore, Maryland, 1990. p. 372. (Footnote credits Virginia
Northern Neck Land Grants, Book 3:153).
10. Ibid. p. 61.
11. Ibid. p. 373.
12. Fairfax County, Virginia, Will Book A 1:71. Circuit Court
Archives, Fairfax, Virginia.
13. Fairfax County, Virginia, Drawer X. Circuit Court Archives,
Fairfax, Virginia.
14. Fairfax County, Virginia, Deed Book D 1:807. Circuit Court
Archives, Fairfax, Virginia.
15. Ibid. p. 303.
16. Pippenger (1990). p. 375.
17. Fairfax County, Virginia, Deed Book B 1:606.
18. Stafford County, Virginia, Deed Book B 1:210.
19. Fairfax County, Virginia, Will Book A 1:300.
20. Ibid. p. 340.

37


---- PAGE 41 ----
21. Land Records of Long Standing (1742). p. 266. Fairfax
County Court Archives, Fairfax, Virginia.
22. Ibid. p. 251.
23. Ibid. p. 47, (1758) p. 92.
24. Land Records of Long Standing (1749). p. 297. (1756), p.
16. (1751), p. 135. Fairfax County Court Archives, Fairfax,
Virginia.
25. Fairfax County, Virginia, Will Book C 1:216.
26. Fai ty, Virginia, Dee: L 1:81.
27. Fai Virginia i C 1:130.
28. Pippinger, errata. n.p.
29. Armes, Ethel Marie. Stratford Hall. Garrett and Massie,
1936. Dp. 26.
30. Washburn, Karen. "The Gunnell Family of Fairfax County."
Yearbook: The Historical Society of Fairfax County, Virginia,
Vol. 20 (1984-1985). p. 53.
31. Fairfax County, Virginia, Will Book B 1:218.
32. Ibid.
33. (Copy of List of Tithables in Virginia Room, Fairfax County
Library, Fairfax, Virginia.)
34. Minutes of the Vestry. pp. 10, 49.
35. Ibid. p. 23.
36. Virginia Northern Neck Land Grants, E 1:287.
37. Fairfax County, Virginia, Will Book C 1:213.
38. Ibid. p. 187.
39. Ibid. Deed Book B 4:244.
40. Ibid. Deed Book A 1:69.
41. Prince William County, Virginia, Deed Book 1:49. (As copied
by June Whitehurst Johnson, 1982. Fairfax Circuit Court
Archives, Fairfax, Virginia.)
42. Ibid. p. 156.
38


---- PAGE 42 ----
43. Ibid. bp. 235.
44. Ibid. p. 448.
45. Ibid. p. 291.
46. Ibid. p. 457.
47. Fairfax County, Virginia, Will Book A 1:261. Fairfax County
Court Archives, Fairfax, Virginia.
48. Ibid. pp. 532, 534.
49. Ibid. p. 532.
50. Ibid. ’
51. Fairfax County, Virginia, Deed Book Q 1:398. Fairfax County
Circuit Court Archives, Fairfax, Virginia.
52. Fairfax County, Virginia, Will Book A 1:531. Fairfax County
Circuit Court Archives, Fairfax, Virginia.
53. Ibid. p. 280.
54. Fairfax County, Virginia, Court Order Book (1749). pp. 114,
55, 117, 75. Fairfax Circuit Court Archives, Fairfax, Virginia.
55. Ibid. (1754). p. 512.
56. Pippinger (1990). p. 380.
57, Fairfax County, Virginia, Court Order Book (1756). p. 314.
(1749). p. 56. Fairfax Circuit Court Archives, Fairfax,
virginia.

58. Fairfax County, Virginia, Will Book A 1:150. Fairfax
Circuit Court Archives, Fairfax, Virginia.
59. Ibid. B 1:396.
60. Fairfax County, Virginia, Court Order Book (1765). Pe 1s
61. Ibid. (1756). p. 666.
62. Ibid. pp. 368, 423.
63. Ibid. (1754). p. 191.
64. Fairfax County, Virginia, Deed Book D 1:803. Fairfax
Circuit Court Archives, Fairfax, Virginia.

39


---- PAGE 43 ----
65. Fairfax County, Virginia, Court Order Book (1756). p. 634.
Fairfax Circuit Court Archives, Fairfax, Virginia.
66. Fairfax County, Virginia, Deed Book D 1:807.
67. Fairfax County, Virginia, Will Book E 1:349.
68. Fairfax County, Virginia, Court Order Book (1756). p. 725.
69. Ibid. pp. 585, 653, 907.
70. Fairfax County, Virginia, Deed Book E 1:149.
71. Fairfax County, Virginia, Court Order Book (1756). p. 832.
72. Fairfax County, Virginia, Deed Book D 1:303.
73. Fairfax County, Virginia, Court Order Book (1749). p. 1.
74. Ibid. p. 71.
75. Ibid. p. 11.
76. Ibid. (1756). p. 830.
77. Ibid. (1764). p. 83.
78. Ibid. (1749). p. 15.
79. Ibid. pp. 57, 161.
80. Ibid. p. 423.
81. Fairfax County, Virginia, Court Order Book (1756). pp. 409,
423.
82. Ibid. pp. 710, 858.
83. Ibid. (1742). pp. 288, 289.
84. Ibid. (1749). pp. 196, 256. (1754). pp. 85, 89.
85. Ibid. (1749). p. 89.
86. Minutes of the Vestry. pp. 102, 113.
87. Fairfax County, Virginia, Deed Book M 1:35. Fairfax Circuit
Court Archives, Fairfax, Virginia.
88. Fairfax County, Virginia, Will Book I 1:471. Fairfax
Circuit Court Archives, Fairfax, Virginia.
40


